

[OCR]
TRANSPORTATION + INDEPENDENCE + FREEDOM ieee
e e
8 i ay ® 6 ®@
April 2026
Welcome to UPLIFTED!
Welcome to the first issue of UPLIFTED, the new TriMet newsletter for LIFT paratransit
customers, their families, support communities and caregivers!
We're launching UPLIFTED to keep you informed about important LIFT updates, including
service changes, new initiatives and other information, as TriMet works through a significant,
agency-wide budget deficit. If you prefer not to receive future issues, select the “unsubscribe”
link at the bottom of this email.
Thank you for riding with TriMet LIFT—we’re happy to be part of your journey.
TriMet LIFT Service Update:

Working Together During Budget Challenges
TriMet is facing a significant agency-wide difference in helping LIFT continue serving
budget deficit and as part of our response, _ those who need it most:
we are making adjustments to LIFT « Limit unneeded trips when possible,
service. These changes are intended to reserving LIFT for essential travel.
help manage costs while preserving the + Consider local or neighborhood options
sciig, Caren Gellle irebi reel On for appointments, shopping and personal
riders rely on every day. needs whenever possible.

The TriMet team will be working to + Save time, energy and money using our

maintain service quality and provide free Instacart grocery and retail goods

riders with service reliability they can delivery service and have your groceries

count on. Accessibility, safety, and respect delivered to your front door.

for our riders remain at the core of LIFT ¢ Sign up for LIFT+ service, which provides

service, even as we adapt to current the same reliable transportation, with

financial realities. partners like Uber, at a lower cost than our
i main LIFT service.

How Riders Can Help: « Be ready to leave when your vehicle

We ask for your partnership during this arrives, helping keep trips on schedule and

time. Small actions can make a big reducing delays for other riders.

Important Changes to LIFT Service
ee ee ee ee a ee ee i ee Re a ee
To ensure safe and reliable service for all Assistance may include escorting,
riders, the following LIFT service steadying support and help navigating
standards will be in effect as of April 20, obstacles along a safe, ADA-compliant
2026: path. Operators will knock on the door
. upon arrival. In some situations, Door-
1, Standard Service Level: Curb-to- to-Door assistance may not be possible.
Curb : ; When this happens, customers will need
Drivers provide assistance between to meet the vehicle at the curb or travel
the curb or sidewalk adjacent to the with a Personal Care Attendant (PCA).
vehicle and the LIFT vehicle itself (up .
to 10 feet). Operators will not knock Examples include:
on doors or enter private property. « When assisting a customer would
Riders must be ready to meet the require the operator to lose sight of
vehicle at the curb when it arrives. the vehicle
2. Vehicle Arrival Announcements « When the pickup or drop-off location
Drivers will verbally announce their is at a back or side entrance
arrival within 10 feet of the vehicle. + When distance, stairs, or physical
Drivers will wait five minutes after assistance needs exceed service
arrival within the trip pickup window. limits
If the rider does not board within + Safety and Assistance Limits
five minutes of the vehicle arriving, ;
iiseonaiviaaua tho dian For the safety of our riders, operators
and the public, TriMet LIFT operators
Riders are encouraged to sign up for must maintain effective control of their
text or phone notifications to ensure vehicle at all times. This includes:
awareness of vehicle arrival times. . : parieie
TriMet LIFT staff will NOT call tolocate ° Keeping the vehicle within line of
arider. sight
: a ¢ Remaining close enough to intervene
3. Door-to-Door Service For Eligible in the event of a safety concern
Riders Only z Gd ys
For customers who are not physically ° Ensuring the vehicle is secure and
able to reach the curb independently, accessible
Door-to-Door service will be provided « Avoiding situations where the vehicle
on a trip-by-trip basis. This includes could be left unattended, blocked, or
assistance between the outermost unsafe.
exterior door of a building and the (Continued on next page)
LIFT vehicle, up to 100 feet.
Page 2

LIFT Service Changes Book Your LIFT Rides Online
(continued from page 2) i arene rene was es. ee
 ——— __ Now, you can schedule your trips online, anytime,
Because of these requirements: 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, with the LIFT online
+ Operators may assist riders trip booking portal. However, you still need to
travelingup ordownnomorethan ‘reserve your rides by 5 p.m. for next-day rides.
five stairs and only with limited With our online booking tool, you can:
physical support.
« Operators cannot escort « Reserve, view, and cancel rides at your
customers beyond 100 feet from convenience
iheneg el euny Gibemse Une e Track your vehicle live on the day of your trip so
causes them to lose sight of their 5 ze
: i f i you'll know exactly when it’s on the way
vehicle — including back or side
entrances of buildings. « Share feedback about your rides and overall
« Operators cannot carry packages, service
groceries, or personal items, but - ae :
may assist by pushing a grocery Getting started is simple! To book rides or watch a
cart no larger than 30" tall x 18" tutorial, visit: trimet.org/lift
wide x 18" deep.
else For questions, or support with your client ID # or
These guidelines help ensure password, contact LIFT customer service:
operators can provide safe, reliable
service to all riders while keeping Email: LIFT@trimet.org
vehicles secure and trips on schedule. — Call 503-962-8000 Option #2
Stay Informed With My Transit Manager

My Transit Manager is a smartphone app + Get updates on potential delays so you

designed especially for our paratransit riders can plan accordingly.

and caregivers. With this easy-to-use app, you + Caregivers can also use the app to

can track aut rides in real time and stay up to monitor trips remotely knowing the one

date on a vehicle’s location and arrival time. they care for is safely on the move.

With My Transit Manager, you can: Getting started is easy!

« Seea live view of the vehicle’s location ona Just download My Transit Manager from the
map—know exactly where your ride is and App Store or Google Play and sign in using
When Aves your TriMet LIFT customer information.

« Receive custom alerts and notifications Find more information on My Transit
when your vehicle is on the way, when it Manager, online:
arrives, and when your trip is complete. trimet.org/lift/mytransitmanager His

Start Receiving LIFT | TriMet LIFT partners
Rides from Uber with with Instacart!
LIFT+ (LIFT plus) | Trimet offers a way for LIFT riders to access
fresh food, prescriptions, pet food and

LIFT+ is a more flexible and convenient way to | 1 Lear EAETPOR wee peaeat

ride paratransit. It gives TriMet LIFT riders the | ; . f :

opportunity to let our scheduling team send Through this partnership with online :

some of their trips to trusted Transportation _‘etailer Instacart, TriMet LIFT now provides

Network Companies (TNCs) including Uber. a FREE Instacart+ membership for eligible

tai LIFT customers. This program makes it
ee eee en oiour ip isineyes agne | easier than ever to ne ati over 55 local
of our LIFT+ providers, you'll often experience Gaile eem ees ae fh

shorter wait times and faster and more direct ane Sete pe stained a

ipst destination! i

mips es aid eaten local restaurants (through a partnership

How it works: | with Uber eats), all through the Instacart

e You can choose to opt in to the LIFT+ app or website.

Pucca by completing the online Whether you need groceries for the week, a
application here: trimet.org/lift/liftplus quick pharmacy run, or dinner from a local

6 i selected to participate, you will be restaurant, Instacart+ brings that
notified through email | convenience to your fingertips.

e You will then continue to reserve your trips How to Qualify:
through your current preferred option, Vou have interneeenn
either online through the LIFT web page or i Ses tte oe Mine
by calling the TriMet LIFT call center. After. * You have asmart phone, tablet or
booking your rides, our scheduling team | computer connected to the internet
may start assigning your trips to a LIFT+ |e You have an email address
provider when it can get you there more + You havea debit or credit card that can
efficiently. be used to make purchases

« You will receive a text message informing How to get started:
you that your trip is being provided by a :

LIFT+ partner, and as your trip time arrives, | : ear ct beat es Ahi
you will receive text notifications from the | visinng: trimetorg/uri/instacal
provider including the vehicle arrival time, « Riders will be notified via email once
vehicle make, model and color, as well as selected to participate

the license plate number and driver name.

« Wheelchair-accessible vehicles will be Go online to trimet.org/lift for more
available in the program soon for | information, or Contact LIFT Customer
customers who require use ofarampor | _ Service by phone at 503-962-8000 option
lift-equipped vehicle. 2 or by email at LIFT@trimet.org
