t0021264-116


March 26, 2026


Jane Cortez
10043 SE 32nd Avenue
Milwaukie, OR 97222


Dear Jane:

This letter is in response to your request for a reasonable accommodation. The request states that
you would like the housing authority to increase your voucher from a one-bedroom to a two-
bedroom.

Based on the information provided, the Housing Authority of Clackamas County (HACC) is
denying your reasonable accommodation request. HACC cannot accommodate sleeping
arrangements or privacy needs. It is HACC’s policy that units will be occupied by families of the
appropriate size. Your one-bedroom voucher is sufficient to meet your household needs based on
the Housing and Urban Development’s (HUD) suitable dwelling size and HACC’s occupancy
standards (24 CFR 982.402). The voucher size does not dictate the size of the unit the family must
lease, nor does it determine who within a household will share a bedroom/sleeping room (i.e. one
members of the household can use the bedroom, and the second member of the household can use
the living room for sleep). PLEASE NOTE: as an alternative, you can use your one-bedroom
voucher to find a two-bedroom ground floor unit so long as the rent falls within the affordability
range outlined in your tenant rent subsidy worksheet provided to you during orientation.

If you disagree with our decision, you may request an informal hearing by contacting me at
(503) 650-3436 within 10-days of the date of this letter. Your request may also be made in writing
and should include the reason why you do not agree with the decision and what action you think
should be taken. You also have the right to be represented at the hearing. Legal Aid Services can be
reached at (503) 224-4086.

Sincerely,



Kati Tilton
Operations Manager
Housing Authority of Clackamas County

Copy: file
              NOTICE!                      AVISO!                ИЗВЕЩЕНИЕ!


This correspondence contains very important information about your housing! If you need
help understanding what this letter says, please contact your Occupancy Specialist. Not sure
who that is? You can find our general contact information on our website:
www.clackamas.us/housingauthority or you can call 503-655-8267. If you or anyone in your
family is a person with disabilities, and you need a reasonable accommodation to access any
of our programs, please visit our website:
www.clackamas.us/housingauthority/section8.html.

Información importante acerca de su subsidio de vivienda. Para asistencia en español, por
favor comuníquese con su coordinador de servicios o llame al 503-655-8267. Si usted, o un
miembro de su familia, es una persona con discapacidades y necesita de una adaptación
razonable para poder acceder a nuestros programas, por favor visite nuestra página web:
www.clackamas.us/housingauthority/section8.html.

Это приложение содержит очень важную информацию о вашем жилье! Если вам нужна
помощь в понимании того, что написано в этом письме, обратитесь к вашему
ведущему. Не уверен, кто это? Общую контактную информацию можно найти на нашем
веб-сайте: http://www.clackamas.us/housingauthority или по телефону 503-655-8267.
Если вы или кто-либо из членов вашей семьи является инвалидом и вам необходима
услуга для доступа к какой-либо из наших программ, посетите наш веб-сайт:
www.clackamas.us/housingauthority/section8.html.
