AI Glasses Impact Grants                                                 Powered by Submittable


Title               Hallucinate LLC                                                  03/10/2026

                    by benjamin barber in AI Glasses Impact Grants:                id. 53443970
                    Catalyst
                     starworks5@gmail.com



Original Submission                                                                  03/10/2026

                    ORGANIZATIONAL INFORMATION If you are applying as a partnership or
                    consortium, please include the legal details of the Lead Organization that
                    Meta will contract with.
Lead Organization   Hallucinate LLC
Legal Name
Lead Organization   10043 SE 32ND AVE, MILWAUKIE
Address             MILWAUKIE
                    milwaukie
                    OR
                    97222
                    US
About your        We are a small organization, working on decentralized AI infrastructure,
Organization or   specializing in neurosymbolic systems, largely incorporating the primitives
Partnership       from protocol labs e.g. IPFS / Libp2p / Filecoin, in order to create secure
                  and robust multi-agent systems. We are converting the entire legal corpus
                  into domain specific first order logic, using knowledge graphs and theorem
                  provers, so that robots will be able to obey the law, and lawyers will have a
                  hallucination free legal text compiler.
                  The architecture that I developing involves 4 packages which resemble the
                  components of an AI operating system, and uses a modification of the
                  MCP protocol that i call "mcp++", to connect these components together:
                  A decentralized virtual file system that clusters and composes with most
                  internet based file storage systems
                  A decentralized model server that is compatible with every consumer
                  hardware platform (additionally browser webnn + webgpu)
                  A decentralized data manipulation library for the operating system to
                  analyze, synthesize and train on
                  A virtual desktop that composes these components together into the
                  desktop with the MCP++ protocol
                  The difference between the MCP and the MCP++ protocol, is that I use an
                  interface description language inspired by CORBA, using a IPFS content
                  addressed contract and code, based on deontic first order logic, frame
                  logic, and cognitive event calculus, to allow client and server to negotiate
                  the semantic interface, and I use decentralized ids in addition to formal
                  logic and theorem provers, to ensure not just the behaviors are
                  constrained, but that events that are planned do not lead to impermissible
                  behaviors by the agents.
                  As a part of the work that we do with the Linux Foundation infiniedge AI,
                  Tina Tsou is the director of the group and I and Jeff Brower would like to
                  use the meta glasses to orchestrate robots and quadcopters, to be able to
                  direct them to perform tasks on behalf of the humans. As part of the work
                  that we do with Protocol Labs, Dave Grantham who runs the libp2p project,
                  has been wanting to implement a bluetooth implementation of libp2p and
                  MLOPS orchestration.
                  https://github.com/endomorphosis
                  https://github.com/mwni
                  https://github.com/the-ride-never-ends
                  https://huggingface.co/justicedao
                  http://huggingface.co/endomorphosis
                  https://huggingface.co/Publicus
Lead Organization     https://lfedge.org/projects/infiniedge-ai/
Website or Social
Media Page
                      Application Contacts
Primary Contact       Benjamin
Name                  Barber
Primary Contact Title Principal Engineer
Primary Contact       +19712700855
Phone
Primary Contact       starworks5@gmail.com
Email
What is the legal     A for-profit organization, including limited liability corporations, benefit
status of the Lead    corporations, or hybrid organizations
Organization?
Annual Operating      Less than $1 Million
Expenses
Number of             Fewer than 10 Full-time Employees
Employees
Organization          33-2110023
Employer
Identification Number
(EIN)
I confirm that the     checked
Lead Organization
has been in
operation for at least
12 months prior to
January 2026 and is
in good standing
under U.S. laws
                      YOUR TEAM
Why Your Team   I think that my team is strong, because i have a deep understanding of AI /
                ML training, including neurosymbolic architectures and reinforcement
                training. Moreover, i have a long past of building physical robotics, and
                working in embedded systems, and have the ability to integrate the
                hardware with the AI training loops. I also have a lot of experience in legal
                AI, I peer review machine learning papers every weekend with Yannic
                Kilcher the CTO of Deep Judge, and I participate every weekend in the
                Stanford Law Codex and law program, and every month I take part in the
                Protocol Labs engineering + research.
                The current goal is to make an legal text compiler, and legal assistant
                (rigged 3d anime character), and to perhaps put the legal assistant in the
                glasses for police. The goal in the future will be to put the entire
                decentralized neurosymbolic MLops framework, along with the entire legal
                corpus which will be converted into formal logic and knowledge graphs, into
                a reinforcement learning environment so that we can do reinforcement
                learning, using a visual language action model inside of a autoregressive
                diffusion world model, and using the neurosymbolic methods to score the
                rollouts of the robot behaviors to get them to obey laws / rules which are
                put into the context window.
                Biographies of Key Staff Please provide the first and last names of the top
                two project managers, along with the name of their affiliated organization
                and a brief biographical statement of up to 100 words. .
Key Staff #1:   Benjamin
                Barber
Key Staff #1    I am on the Technical Steering committee of the Linux Foundation
Biography:      (Inifiniedge AI), which is where i publish my work, but also work with Intel
                Corporation, LAION AI, Stanford Law School, Protocol Labs, and the
                Centaur AI Institute, and have 20 years of experience in software
                engineering. I have one business partner in germany Manuel Otto, who
                primarily works on XRP blockchain software engineering, and a JR. partner
                who now works for Edgerunner AI, and we typically employ one college
                student worker.
                I have previously been an owner of the original oculus devkit 1, which I
                used in conjunction with the Intel RealSense camera, to work on
                augmented reality for people with low sight, as a side project not connected
                to my former employer Intel, and I found myself continually frustrated with
                the closed source and restrictive apis of the oculus platform. Moreover a
                former junior developer of mine Lucas Nestler, now works for John
                Carmack on artificial general intelligence, and I think this is one of the
                criticisms that he had previously.
Key Staff #2:   Marc-Emanuel
                Otto
Key Staff #2             I am a game developer and blockchain developer, most notably I have
Biography:               worked on the game Stick Run which had 6 million which was in 25, in the
                         facebook games marketplace in 2012. I am currently working on XRP
                         cryptocurrency exchanges, and doing quantitative analysis of stocks, and
                         worked with Benjamin Barber on open source Stable Diffusion image
                         generation in the discord Eleuther AI and LAION AI, and we were the
                         original authors of the "diffusionkit" package, which was a local inference
                         package for the apple ecosystem.
                         QUICK PITCH
Project Title            IPFS / libp2p / MCP++ Decentralized AI
Executive Summary        The architecture that I developing involves 4 packages which resemble the
                         components of an AI operating system, and uses a modification of the
                         MCP protocol that i call "mcp++", to connect these components together,
                         and use the glasses as an interface
Multimedia upload
Gmail_-_Hiring_for_Systems_Engineer_III_-_100_remote.pdf
Stanford-codex-2026-03-09_20-07-42.mp4

                         THE CHALLENGE
Which U.S. States        All States
benefit from your
project? Please
select all that apply.
Challenge Statement This is to create a decentralized AI infrastructure, that uses neural graph
                    reasoning and theorum proving, to both solve hallucination, and create a
                    robust security policy, which is derived from converting the entire legal
                    corpus into formal logic. This can be extended to behavior by individuals
                    and robots, for example while police where body cameras that record their
                    behavior, if the police had meta glasses integrated into a neurosymbolic
                    legal ai infrastructure, they could avoid lawsuits for violating people's civil
                    rights. Moreover if people are piloting robots remotely, we need to make
                    sure that robots are going obey the law, and cannot be commanded to
                    perform unlawful actions.
                       Moreover if the multiple agents are embodied robots, they will not only
                       have to concern themselves with whether what they are doing now
                       complies with a policy, but what event will follow that policy and lead to
                       adverse events in the future. e.g. there is no explicit law that says that
                       robot cannot put soap on the ground, but it is "reasonably foreseeable" that
                       it is negligent to do so when people are walking around, because one might
                       slip and fall on the soap. There are so many innumerous ways that an
                       agent can be negligent, and it is practically impossible to encode every
                       single rule into the context window of a visual language action model, so
                       instead what is needed is robust legal reasoning, in the reinforcement
                       learning pipeline and a neurosymbolic architecture to RAG the rules in a
                       context dependent way more generally, for example with humans much of
                       the rules are implcit often those norms "it goes without saying" and do not
                       appear in training data.
                       The problem with the existing mcp protocol, is that as long as your security
                       model is a trusted client and a trusted server, the model works well. But if
                       you have a peer to peer networking model, often client and server dont
                       agree about what MCP protocol extensions to expose, and whether the
                       mcp server will lead to prompt hijacking of the agent, as we have seen with
                       the "moltbook" experiments. The difference between the MCP and the
                       MCP++ protocol, is that I use an interface description language inspired by
                       CORBA, using a IPFS content addressed contract and code, encoded in
                       deontic first order logic, frame logic, and cognitive event calculus, to allow
                       client and server to negotiate the semantic interface and plan their
                       transactions with each other, and I use decentralized ids in addition to
                       formal logic and theorem provers, to ensure not just the behaviors are
                       constrained by rules, but that events that are planned do not lead to
                       impermissible behaviors by the agents.


                       YOUR SOLUTION
Your use of AI         This is a new idea or approach: we have tried the AI glasses but not in a
glasses                sustained way.
Project Overview   How does your project use AI Glasses to deliver social and/ or
                   economic value?
                   The project is going to create value, because the current
                   implementation of multi-agent systems architectures suffers from
                   problems relating to security, both with regards to prompt injection
                   and data poisoning, and also with regards to unanticipated
                   hallucinations. Moreover by putting the entire legal corpus into a
                   neurosymbolic architecture, we can simutaneously help automate
                   the legal industry, prevent civil rights lawsuits against police
                   officers, and allow for robots that cannot break the laws.
                   What problem do you solve by using AI Glasses?
                   well originally I just wanted to be able to agenticaly write software
                   while I lifted weights, and allow my girlfriend to get advice while
                   working on brain organoids, but more generally people are going to
                   want to have hands free interfaces to interact with robots, and to
                   get legal insights without having to pull out their cellphone, but is
                   more sophisticated than simple LLM calls.
                   How do you plan to increase your impact using AI Glasses?
                   I will be able to give police, attorneys, citizens, and robots instant
                   legal reasoning via a hands free interface with cameras, and
                   thereby reduce the amount of conflict that people have with an
                   objective hallucination free legal reasoning.
                   What are your intended outcomes?
                   The intended outcomes is to have an AI legal assistant, and to get
                   the MCP++ architecture mature enough that we dont have to worry
                   about mutli-agent systems getting prompt hijacked and performing
                   illegal or unintended consequences, a bonus would be to then try
                   to turn that into a reinforcement learning pipeline for robotics so
                   that visual language actions can be trained inside of
                   autoregressive diffusion world models.
                   How will you know that you are making progress?
                   I would know that I am making good progress, if I can convince the
                   Agentic AI section of the linux foundation to adopt mcp++ as a
                   reference standard, and the glasses are fully integrated into the
                   decentralized compute infrastructure. I would know that I am
                   making progress with the legal text compiler if I can convince
                   stanford law school to make this as a standardized legal text
                   calculator for law students to use, just as every accountant uses a
                   numeric calculator, or i can convince police departments to move
                   from Axon cameras to meta glasses because the meta glasses
                   have AI lawyer capabilities built in.
What social and/ or Learning, skills & employment
economic causes
does your project
support? (choose all
that apply)
Which communities      Entrepreneurs
benefit from your      Other
project? (choose all   Local communities
that apply)
Please identify the    Stanford law school
other communities
your project           Protocol labs
supports.
                       Linux Foundation
                       law enforcement
                       public defenders
                       court officials
Timing and Impact      The impact of having a neurosymbolic MCP protocol will make the multi-
                       agent system alot more secure, at the same time as people are
                       complaining that clawdbot and moltbook are insecure, moreover having a
                       on device inference will allow for meta to be able to do federated
                       reinforcement learning from human feedback, and train robotic visual
                       language action models.
                       The impact of legal datasets in formal logic with theorum provers and
                       knowledge graphs, will allow easier access to justice and better ability to
                       predict the results of ones judgements, and will restore faith in the
                       government because people can point to logic rather than worry about
                       arbitrary governmental abuse of discretion, and thus reduce the game
                       theory dynamics of trying to capture power and abuse that discretion.
Innovation             The project lead of the libp2p project from protocol labs, asked me to port
                       the py-libp2p project to the bluetooth driver, and I created a "vibecoding"
                       interface for my gen 1 meta glasses to use the github cli / copilot cli, so
                       that i could manage my pull requests via the meta glasses. Subsequently i
                       have been integrating the MCP++ implementation that I am actively
                       developing into the meta glasses, so that it can integrate into the
                       decentralized mlops architecture. The architecture that I developing
                       involves 4 packages which resemble the components of an AI operating
                       system, and uses a modification of the MCP protocol that i call "mcp++", to
                       connect these components together:
                       A decentralized virtual file system that clusters and composes with most
                       internet based file storage systems
                       A decentralized model server that is compatible with every consumer
                       hardware platform (additionally browser webnn + webgpu)
                       A decentralized data manipulation library for the operating system to
analyze, synthesize and train on
A virtual desktop that composes these components together into the
desktop with the MCP++ protocol
The innovation above the MCP protocol, is that i can use libp2p as the
transport layer for the traffic instead of json-rpc, and that we use the ideas
taken from CORBA, to create an object request broker that defines the
behavior that the mcp server / client contract requires using deontic first
order logic, frame logic, and cognitive event calculus, and use an ipfs
content id (CID) as a immutable source of that contract and code
dependencies. furthermore we use decentralized IDs and formal logic as
the permissioning system, and use IPFS content ids to track and assign
risk and permission delegations, to agents by maintaining an event DAG
that tracks all server execution contexts
https://github.com/endomorphosis/lift_coding ( hands free coding with meta
glasses)
https://github.com/endomorphosis/Mcp-Plus-Plus (mcp ++ protocol
specification (not implementation))
https://github.com/endomorphosis/ipfs_datasets_py ( decentralized dataset
manipulation)
https://github.com/endomorphosis/ipfs_kit_py (decentralized virtual
filesystem)
https://github.com/endomorphosis/ipfs_accelerate_py ( decentralized
huggingface model server and docker runner)
https://github.com/endomorphosis/swissknife ( decentralized virtual
desktop)
https://github.com/navichat/motion ( 3d animated motion training)
https://github.com/USTypology/socionics_research (personality manifold
research)
https://huggingface.co/datasets/justicedao/ipfs_caselaw_access_project
https://huggingface.co/datasets/justicedao/ipfs_state_laws
https://huggingface.co/datasets/justicedao/ipfs_federal_register
https://huggingface.co/datasets/justicedao/ipfs_uscode
https://huggingface.co/datasets/justicedao/ipfs_state_admin_rules
https://huggingface.co/datasets/justicedao/ipfs_court_rules
https://huggingface.co/datasets/justicedao/american_municipal_law
https://youtu.be/HWW3Lga3htI?si=791qXFtCD5eADBEH&t=1129 (stanford
law)
Stakeholder &         Linux Foundation
Community
Engagement            Protocol Labs
                      Stanford Law School
                      Yannic Kilcher
                      Brian Behelendorf
                      Pranay Pasula
Privacy, data         well, the logic submodule of the ipfs_datasets_py package uses zero
controls and user     knowledge proofs, which are both useful for not having to reprove a proof
experience            chain each time for the fundemental theorum provers, but it also allows
                      people to prove facts about individuals based on their decentralized id e.g.
                      a visual model can provide a zero knowledge proof about certain image
                      embeddings, without having to actually produce the image embeddings
                      themselves, to prove a persons identity from a photo without having to
                      expose that photo for example. Moreover the use of the decentralized id +
                      deontic logic policy execution gating, prevents the language models from
                      being prompt hijacked, to exfiltrate data, because even if the language
                      model is jailbroken the actions of the rest of the system are behind a formal
                      logic safety net.
                      PROJECT IMPACT
Affirmation of        What gives me confidence that the project is going to work is that I'm
Approach              already in the middle of implementation and past the prototyping stage, and
                      into the polishing stage, the main issue is whether or not the solution gains
                      adoption, and whether or not there is institutional buy in for the solution.
Ability to Scale      I used to work on the openstack framework, and this is taking inspiration
                      from dataflow paradigms, and given that i am using infrastructure based on
                      ipfs / libp2p which has already been shown to scale on public blockchains,
                      and some experience I have with decentralized training regimes, i dont
                      think the scaling is a matter of technical limitations of the infrastructure.
                      The bigger problem is whether or not the hardware, deployment and the
                      consumer adoption is going to scale, and whether it can amortize the R&D
                      costs of the features that people will want to use.
Timeline and          I would expect to work on this project for the next 6 months, and we have
Milestones            already spent $150k of our own money on this project so far.
Measuring Progress given that this is mostly a R&D project at this stage, i would be using
and Responding     project based milestones, and using test driven development to define
                   whether or not those milestones were being met.
Risk Mitigation       Ironically, Asmiov's books on the laws of robotics, sort of discussed this to
                      some end. How even having a tool based system is not enough for safe AI,
                      and how if the meanings of words can be twisted to make the rules
                      meaningless. The problem with automated decision making is that you are
                      liable for the outcomes, unless there are a knowing and intentional waiver,
                      and even then that might not hold up in court. For any sort of critical
                      decision making in regulated fields there has to be an insurance provider,
                      in the state of oregon I talked to the supreme court, and they were
                      desperate for having a solution, provided that there is symbolic guardrails,
                      supervised by a licensed attorney.
                      RESOURCE REQUIREMENTS
Budget Narrative      the grant money would be spent over the next 6 months on 3 FTE
                      equivalents, a robot, a DGX spark, and some claude subscriptions, and 3
                      meta ai glasses.
Budget detail
Budget spreadsheet AI Glasses Impact.xlsx

Total Projected       186300
Costs [Up to
$200,000]
Other Considerations I realize that this is an ambitious project and I turned down a job offer at
                     meta from a recruiter for $140k a year 2 years ago, because i wanted to
                     work on open source decentralized AI infrastructure, and so just realize that
                     the mission is more important to me than the money, but if you want the
                     work to go faster you should give me money to accelerate the rate of work.
                      Legal Terms and Conditions
I accept the Meta AI checked
Glasses Impact
Grants Terms and
Conditions
