Claim your nonprofit profile | Candid
Skip to main content Donate
Log in/Register
Search 1.9 million organizations Log in/Register
Comprehensive nonprofit and foundation information is a search away
Search 1.9 million organizations by name, EIN, or keyword Search
By registering or logging in, you get access to detailed profiles and a personalized dashboard.
Login Register for free
Products Candid search Look up nonprofits
Verify nonprofits
Find nonprofit funding
Pricing
Data solutions Candid APIs
Custom datasets
Claim your nonprofit profile
Nonprofit Compensation Report
Foundation Maps
Who we serve Nonprofits
Funders & donors
Business & financial services
Technical solution providers
Impact & insights Research
Candid insights
Strengthening the nonprofit sector
U.S. Social Sector Dashboard
Resources Help center
Candid near you
Candid Learning
Email signup
Issue Lab
Philanthropy News Digest
Nonprofit glossary
About About us
Board of trustees
Financials
Our data
Our team
Press room
Donate
Search 1.9 million organizations Log in/Register
Comprehensive nonprofit and foundation information is a search away
Search 1.9 million organizations by name, EIN, or keyword Search
By registering or logging in, you get access to detailed profiles and a personalized dashboard.
Login Register for free
Home
Claim your nonprofit profile
Claim your nonprofit profile
Reach millions of donors with your free profile
Register/Log in
Three fast, free steps to boost your fundraising
Earn a Candid Seal of Transparency for your organization’s nonprofit profile to showcase your impact and unlock benefits. Give millions of potential funders and donors the information they need to support your nonprofit.
Step 1
Claim your nonprofit profile to earn your Seal of Transparency. Start by requesting access to your organization’s profile.
Request access
Step 2
Tell your story by updating your nonprofit profile to showcase your organization's programs and impact.
Step 3
Show off your Seal of Transparency to fast-track donations. Display your Seal on your website and in fundraising appeals.
Seal holders see 62% more in contributions
Earning Seals does more than unlock benefits. Our research found that Seal holders earn an average of 62% more in contributions the year after they earn a Seal.
Earn a Seal
How Seals of Transparency help you fundraise
One profile displayed on 200+ charitable sites
Unique link to give donors unlimited access to your profile
Eligible for donations with Apple Pay
Credibility with funders
Seal holders attract on average 62% more in contributions
Earn a Seal
Candid shares your nonprofit profile with 200+ charitable sites, such as:
Special offer for small nonprofits
Earn a 2025 Gold Seal and get free access to Foundation Directory Professional, a resource that helps you find grant funding.
Offer details
What nonprofits say
New donors choose us because we have earned Candid's Platinum Seal of Transparency! Shoes and Clothes for Kids
We are grateful for the recognition and use the Seal on our website, print magazine, and email newsletter. Fisher House Foundation
The process helped me get info together for grant writing and gave me ideas on how to present information. Inland Equity Community Land Trust
It’s something to share with our donors that makes them feel good about their investment in our mission. The Tennessee Medical Foundation
Gives our organization deeper credibility with our donors. Music Health International
Businesses and foundations we solicit for support are impressed.
Music education nonprofit
A funder used our Candid profile to assess our eligibility for a grant, which we were awarded. I think the Seal helps us in that regard with prospective funders. Youth advocacy nonprofit
How to earn a Candid Seal of Transparency
Follow our simple step-by-step guide to update your nonprofit profile and earn a Seal
Get started
Download full Seal level requirements and visit our help center to answer any further questions. By claiming and updating your organization’s nonprofit profile, you are agreeing to our Terms of Use.
Bronze Seal
Make sure donors can find you
15-minute update
Organization mission and contact details
Donation information
Leadership information
Apple Pay for donations
Simply earn a 2025 Bronze Seal to be eligible for donations with Apple Pay.
Silver Seal
Make the case for support
5-minute update
Program(s) information
Geographic area served
Plus Bronze info
Gold Seal
Gain trust and support
10-minute update
Audited financial report or Form 990
Leadership demographics
Plus Silver info
Special offer
Small nonprofits are  eligible  for free Foundation Directory Professional for a year.
Platinum Seal
Highlight your impact and boost funding
10-minute update
Organization goals and strategies
Board demographics
At least one quantitative 2024 metric demonstrating your progress and results
Plus gold info
Stay up to date
Join our email list to get the latest insights, trends, product updates, and research from Candid, delivered straight to your inbox.
Email Enter your email to sign up Sign up
EIN 13-1837418
Learn more about Seals of Transparency
Careers
For developers
Contact
Candid labs
About
AI notice
Careers
Contact
About
For developers
Candid labs
AI notice
Search Candid.org Submit
©2025 Candid. All rights reserved.
Privacy policy Terms of service