Health Information Management Director/Privacy Officer Job Opening in Colorado - Association for Intelligent Information Management (AIIM)
Employers
Home
Products
Post a Job
My Account
My Jobs
My Clients
Resume Bank
My Candidates
My Company
My Templates
Help
Job Seekers
Home
My Account
Job Search
Products
Career Planning
Advice
Insights
Coaching
Manage Resumes
Job Alerts
Company Directory
Help
Sign-in or Create Account
Employer
Job Seeker
Post a Job
We detected that Javascript is deactivated. Some functionality within the site may not work as expected.
Career Center Home
Search Jobs
Health Information Management Director/Privacy Officer
5 mi/8 km
10 mi/15 km
25 mi/40 km
50 mi/80 km
100 mi/160 km
200 mi/320 km
Search
Results
Job Details
Explore Location
Health Information Management Director/Privacy Officer
Share
Print
H&H Leadership Solutions
Colorado, United States
(on-site)
Spotlight
Preferred
APPLY
Posted
22 days ago
Health Information Management Director/Privacy Officer
Share
Print
H&H Leadership Solutions
Colorado, United States
(on-site)
APPLY
Salary
$83,700.00 - $127,500.00
Industry
Hospital
Salary - Type
Yearly Salary
Job Function
Privacy Officer
AI Summary & Insights
Summary
Insights
Health Information Management Director/Privacy Officer
The insights provided are generated by AI and may contain inaccuracies. Please independently verify any critical information before relying on it.
Health Information Management Director/Privacy Officer
The insights provided are generated by AI and may contain inaccuracies. Please independently verify any critical information before relying on it.
Description
H&H Leadership Solutions invites you to explore an outstanding opportunity for a Health Information Management Director/Privacy Officer position at Wray Community District Hospital, a critical access hospital focused on providing a personal and compassionate healthcare experience for the residents and visitors of Wray, Colorado. Wray Community District Hospital is an independent public hospital district with a full array of hospital services as well as primary and specialty care clinics.
Ranked among the top 100 Critical Access Hospitals by the Chartis Group, WCDH is an independent 15-bed Special District Critical Access Hospital established in 1955. It was established to provide accessible and quality healthcare services to the residents of Wray, Colorado, and the surrounding areas. WCDH places a strong emphasis on community involvement and support. They collaborate with local organizations and participate in health initiatives to promote wellness and preventive care.
Position Type : Full Time, 40 hours per week, 2080 hours per year
Position Shift : Day
Job Description
Responsible for successful maintenance of patient records and organizational and administrative operation of the Health Information Management Department. Oversight responsibility for operational aspects of department and compliance of applicable regulations. Serves as resource for facility regarding medical record content and regulatory requirements. Assures availability of the medical records at all times. Also oversees ongoing activities related to the development, implementation, maintenance of and adherence to the organization’s policies and procedures covering the privacy of and access to patient health information in compliance with federal and state laws and the healthcare facility’s information privacy practices.
Essential Duties include but not limited to
Establishes, reviews and updates short-term and long-term goals for HIM Department in order to be consistent with hospital wide plans
Executes problem identification, data gathering and implementation of strategy actions that are in the best interest of the department and its mission, values and philosophy
Develops comprehensive realistic annual budget that reflects departmental needs based on external and internal environments and the application of cost-effective management.   Operates within this approved budget
Establishes policies and procedures necessary for effective and efficient systems and management of human resources.   Assures compliance with all HIM policies and procedures.
Maintains knowledge and experience in information privacy laws, access, release of information and release control technologies.
In coordination with facility management, administration and legal counsel, provides development guidance and assists in the identification, implementation and maintenance of corporate and facility information privacy policies and procedures.
Coordinates with practitioners in overseeing patients’ rights to inspect, amend, restrict access and obtain an accounting of disclosure of PHI when applicable.
In collaboration with Human Resources, the Information Security Officer, administration and legal counsel, ensures compliance with privacy practices and consistent application of sanctions for failure to comply with facility privacy practices for all individuals in the facility’s workforce, extended workforce and business associates.
Monitors advancements in information privacy technologies to ensure facility compliance.
Cooperates with applicable federal agencies or other legal entities and facility officers in compliance reviews or investigations
Works with all organizational areas involved with any aspect of release of protected health information to ensure coordination and cooperation with the facility’s policies, procedures and legal requirements.
Reviews all system-related information security plans to ensure alignment between security and privacy practices and acts as a liaison to the Information Systems Department.
Monitors documentation relative to Health Information Management functions and legal/regulatory requirements
Manages the department in a cost-effective manner by utilizing current materials management techniques, maximizing human resources and continuously reevaluating the manner in which services are delivered.
Plans and coordinates staff development and continuing education.
Analyzes, selects and implements programs necessary to achieve the goals and strategic plans of the hospital.
Qualifications:
Registered Record Administrator Degree.
Minimum 4 years of previous Health Information Management experience in hospital.
Knowledge of accrediting organization, HIPAA, federal and state regulations for healthcare facilities
Compensation & Benefits:
$83,700–$127,500, commensurate to experience
$5,000 relocation assistance and $5,000 sign-on bonus (paid over the first year of employment)
Housing assistance: Up to 6 months of complimentary housing (subject to availability; taxable benefit)
Comprehensive benefits package including:
o    Multiple medical plan options with fully paid employee-only coverage, GAP insurance, and $1,650 HSA contribution
o    Dental, vision, and employer-paid life insurance
o    3.5% employer-matched retirement plan
o    Flexible Spending Accounts (health & dependent care)
o    Education assistance and continuing education reimbursement
o    PTO, paid holidays, and illness leave
o    $200 annual service awards and wellness incentives
o    Voluntary benefits and discounted WRAC membership
Wray Community Hospital District is an Equal Opportunity Employer. all qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to basis of age, race, sex, pregnancy (including pregnancy, childbirth, pregnancy-related conditions, breastfeeding, or medical conditions related to breastfeeding), color, genetic information, religion, national origin, disability, military status, sexual orientation, gender identity, creed, ancestry, marital status, or any other status protected by federal, state, or local law.
Wray is an amazing small town in the northeastern plains of Colorado. This family-friendly community offers a work-life balance not found in most healthcare organizations. The location is only a few short hours from Denver and the Rocky Mountains, with world-class skiing. The community of Wray, located in Yuma County, offers a variety of outdoor activities, including fishing, hiking, camping, and bird-watching.
Job ID: 81532550
H&H Leadership Solutions
H&H Leadership Solutions is a premier retained Executive Search and consulting firm. H&H’s experienced and diverse team is known for delivering results, unmatched customer service, and the ability to understand our client’s needs and culture to create tailored solutions that address their unique challenges in an evolving healthcare environment.
As a national firm, we offer a concierge level of personal service to both our clients and candidates. Let us ease your transition in leadership or to a new position. We have been ...
View Full Profile
Jobs You May Like
CH
Senior Manager, Information Governance and Privacy
CVS Health
Irving,
TX,
United States
(on-site)
CH
Senior Manager, Information Governance and Privacy
CVS Health
Hartford,
CT,
United States
(on-site)
CH
Senior Manager, Information Governance and Privacy
CVS Health
Scottsdale,
AZ,
United States
(on-site)
CH
Senior Manager, Information Governance and Privacy
CVS Health
Northbrook,
IL,
United States
(on-site)
Apply
Site Map
Terms of Use
Privacy Policy
© 2025 AIIM – Association for Intelligent Information Management.
All Rights Reserved.
8403 Colesville Road, Suite 1100
Silver Spring,
Maryland 20910-5616
(301) 587-8202
Job Location
Colorado, United States
Showing data for the city of Denver, Colorado, United States.
Median Salary
Net Salary per month
$5,036
Cost of Living Index
76 /100
76
Median Apartment Rent in City Center
(1-3 Bedroom)
$2,116
-
$3,601
$2,859
Safety Index
52 /100
52
Utilities
Basic
(Electricity, heating, cooling, water, garbage for 915 sq ft apartment)
$125
-
$300
$166
High-Speed Internet
$45
-
$99
$68
Transportation
Gasoline
(1 gallon)
$3.33
Taxi Ride
(1 mile)
$2.82
Data is collected and updated regularly using reputable sources, including corporate websites and governmental reporting institutions.
Loading...
No content
No content
{Error Message Title}
{Warning Message Title}
{Success Message Title}
-->
×
Insert additional messaging here.
-->
We use cookies on this site to enhance your experience. By using our website you accept our use of cookies.
Yes, I agree
More Information
Cookies YourMembership uses cookies for your convenience and security. Cookies are text files stored on the browser of your computer and are used to make your experience on web sites more personal and less cumbersome. You may choose to decline cookies if your browser permits, but doing so may affect your ability to access or use certain features of this site. Please refer to your web browser's help function for assistance on how to change your preferences.
View complete Cookie Policy
Close