AIIM - The Association for Intelligent Information Management
Member Login
Education
Certification
Training Courses
Virtual Training Workshops
Events
AI+IM Global Summit
AI+IM Regional Events
Upcoming Events
Resources
AIIM OnAir Podcast
AIIM Swag Shop
Blog
Buyers' Guide
Job Center
Partners
Resource Center
Join AIIM
Become a Member
Subscribe to AIIM's Blog
Solution Provider Programs
Become a Sponsor
Trade Memberships
Menu
×
Ready to Transform Your Career?
Join AIIM+ Pro today and become part of a community that's leading the way in information management. Equip yourself with the skills, knowledge, and certifications to excel in your role.
Join AIIM+ Pro Now
Share
Welcome to AIIM!
We believe great information powers great organizations. Find value in your unstructured data and get ready for AI and automation with intelligent information management. Through practical resources, expert training, and peer-to-peer support, AIIM helps you streamline processes, ensure compliance, and leverage the latest technologies to bring your “dark data” into the light.
Expert Training
Access a comprehensive library of courses and certifications designed to enhance your skills and keep you ahead in the ever-evolving field of information management.
Browse Courses
Community Support
Join a vibrant community of practitioners and experts who share your passion for information management. Network, collaborate, and grow together.
Start Networking
Cutting-Edge Resources
Stay updated with the latest trends, best practices, and insights from industry leaders. Our resources are tailored to help you navigate the complexities of modern information management.
Discover Resources
Certification Program
Earn the Certified Information Professional (CIP) certification, a recognized credential that validates your expertise in unstructured data management and enhances your career prospects.
Get Certified
Intelligent information management is a practice that integrates people, processes, information, and technology to achieve better business outcomes.
We help you solve your information-driven business challenges.
These are disruptive times. The volume, velocity and variety of our business information is creating chaos. Our extensive library of resources is focused on these business objectives:
Artificial Intelligence (AI+IM)
How can I leverage AI to improve information management, enhance decision-making, and increase efficiency within my organization?
View Resources
Business Process Automation
How  can I automate my business processes to save time and resources and drive productivity?
View Resources
Information Management & Governance
How do I manage and protect my organization’s information assets effectively, using technology and cutting-edge practices?
View Resources
Who Should Join?
We welcome all information and data management practitioners and leaders to AIIM! Serving members in 67+ countries and across 87 industries, our community includes professionals at all levels in information governance, records management, IT, data management, finance, legal, and more, with a significant presence in the finance, government, legal, and utilities sectors. We would love to have you join us!
New and Newsworthy
New E-Book: Demystifying Document Management, Content Management, Information Management, and Content Services
Download the E-Book
New Report: 2025 State of the Intelligent Information Management Industry
Download The Report
New Report: Market Momentum Index: Intelligent Document Processing (IDP) Survey 2025
Download the Report
Press Release
AIIM Announces Keynote Speakers for the AI+IM Global Summit 2026
The Association for Intelligent Information Management announced he keynote speakers for the AI+IM Global Summit 2026, being held April 28-30 in Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
Oliver Patel,  Head of Enterprise AI Governance at AstraZeneca, will deliver the opening keynote, while  Eryn Peters , future of work evangelist and AI transformation strategist, will close the summit.
Read More
New AI Courses
Announcing Four New AI Courses on AIIM+ Pro—Your Path to Mastering AI Starts Here!
Take your AI knowledge to the next level with AIIM+ Pro’s exclusive new courses: AI Readiness , Generative AI: ChatGPT and Beyond , Artificial Intelligence 101 , and Developing an Artificial Intelligence Roadmap . Whether you're preparing your organization for AI adoption or looking to understand how AI can transform your operations, these courses provide the insights and tools you need to lead your organization's AI journey.
View Courses
New CIP Learning Pathways
New CIP Learning Pathways Now on AIIM+ Pro!
Studying for your CIP certification just got easier. Our new guided learning pathways on AIIM+ Pro help you tackle the CIP exam with structure, confidence, and expert-backed lessons. Whether you're starting from scratch or need to reinforce key concepts, these pathways are your go-to study companion.
Learn More
Featured Event
Elevate Your Expertise with Virtual Training Workshops
Take your skills to the next level with   AIIM’s Virtual Training Workshops —designed for information management professionals looking to gain hands-on expertise in Microsoft 365, governance, AI, and more. Led by industry experts, these interactive workshops provide practical knowledge and real-world applications to help you stay ahead in the evolving digital landscape.
Learn More
Upcoming Events
Jan
13
AIIM Community Conversation - Reclaiming the Code – Women in Tech and the Future of AI
Jan 13, 2026
Feb
18
Demo Days: IDP and Automation Excellence
Feb 18, 2026
View All
Recent Blog Posts
One of my favorite things about AIIM is how it can bring end users (like us), vendors, and consultants together to share ideas that make a better world for all of us. Smarter customers, vendors, and consultants keep us all from wasting time and money. A very big deal in my book.
— Mark Patrick, CIP
AIIM is special - we have an atypical community. Everyone is lovely. You ask a question, and you get lots of answers. Invaluable for someone new to the industry. AIIM is a living workshop with experienced players in field. We have depth and breadth of subject matter experts.
— Julia Sweeney
AIIM gave me exposure to how to use these tools and processes. One success begets another, and I was given the opportunity to take learnings to different departments and growmy career.
— Shawn Acheampong
Questions?
Contact Us
Education
Training Courses
Certification
Virtual Training Workshops
Events
Upcoming Events
AI+IM Global Summit
Resources
Resource Center
Job Center
Buyers' Guide
Community
Online Community
Chapters and SIGs
Awards
About
About Us
Contact Us
Join AIIM
Subscribe to AIIM's Blog
Become a Member
Solution Provider Programs
Trade Memberships
Become a Sponsor
Copyright © 2025 Association for Intelligent Information Management. All rights reserved.
Privacy Policy