About - HUD Exchange
To access the full functionality of this website, please enable JavaScript in your web browser.
View instructions to enable JavaScript .
Skip to main content
NEED HOUSING ASSISTANCE?
Email Updates
Log In
HUD Exchange
Search
Toggle navigation
Search
Form title
Search
Log In
Programs
Programs & Related Topics
CDBG Program
Continuum of Care Program
Community Project Funding
Emergency Solutions Grants Program
Environmental Review
Fair Housing and Civil Rights
HOME Program
HOPWA Program
Housing Counseling Program
Public Housing and Voucher Programs
DRGR Log In
e-snap s Log In
Housing Counseling System Log In
IDIS Log In
Sage Log In
View All Programs & Related Topics
Resources
Resource Library
Explore featured publications and browse regulations, policy guidance, toolkits, and other resources.
FAQ Collections
Find answers to frequently asked questions.
Trainings
Upcoming Training
Register for upcoming training, webinars, conferences, and more.
Learning Pathways
Explore collections of guided learning opportunities on a variety of topics.
On-Demand Training
Learn through self-paced online trainings, recorded webinars, and more.
View All Trainings
Program Support
Ask a Question
Ask a basic policy or reporting system question.
Request In-Depth Assistance
Request in-depth assistance with implementing a HUD-funded program.
View All Program Support
Grantees
Find a Grantee Page
Search for a specific grantee and view its awards, contact information, and reports, and more.
Awards & Allocations
Find award and allocation amounts for grantees by year, program, and state.
Contact Information
Find point of contact information for HUD's grantees.
Reports & Plans
Browse the library of grantee reports and plans, organized by program.
Project Descriptions
Learn about what HUD grantees are doing across the nation.
Find Information About HUD Grantees
News
Home
Log-in
Programs
Resources
Resource Library
FAQ Collections
Trainings
Upcoming Training
Learning Pathways
On-Demand Training
Program Support
Ask a Question
Request In-Depth Assistance
Grantees
Find a Grantee
Awards and Allocations
Contact Information
Reports & Plans
Project Descriptions
News
Email Updates
Need Housing Assistance?
Home
About
About
Learn more about how the HUD Exchange provides resources and assistance to support HUD's community partners
What is the HUD Exchange?
The HUD Exchange is an online platform for providing program information, guidance, services, and tools to HUD's community partners, including state and local governments, nonprofit organizations, Continuums of Care (CoCs), Public Housing Authorities (PHAs), tribes, and partners of these organizations.
The HUD Exchange provides resources and assistance to support HUD's community partners including:
Programs and Related Topics
Program and Related Topic pages | Find home pages for HUD programs, systems, and related topics to help communities administer their programs.
Policy Areas | Learn more about what HUD is doing to support selected policy areas. Featured policy areas include affordable housing development and preservation, community and economic development, environment and energy, fair housing, ending homelessness, homeownership, rental assistance, and supportive housing and services.
Resources
Resource Library | Explore featured publications and browse regulations, policy guidance, toolkits, and other resources.
Frequently Asked Questions | Find answers to frequently asked questions grouped by program, system, and topics.
Trainings
Trainings | Find and register for upcoming and online trainings, and view and download materials from previously held trainings.
Program Support
Ask A Question | Ask policy and reporting system questions and receive answers from HUD and Technical Assistance (TA) providers.
Request Program Assistance | Request in-depth assistance with implementing a HUD-funded program.
Grantee Data and Profiles
Grantee Profiles | Find contact information, reports, and award information for organizations that receive HUD funding.
Awards and Allocations | View award data for CDBG, CoC, ESG, HOME, HOPWA, HTF, NSP, and RHP.
News
Email Updates | Subscribe to the mailing list for updates on new resources, training opportunities, HUD policies, and more, delivered straight to your inbox.
News | Browse or search the latest news related to new resources, training opportunities, HUD policies, and more.
Value of the HUD Exchange
The HUD Exchange provides value to HUD's grantees and their partners by centralizing resources and services and making information transparent and accessible, enabling grantees to increase their capacity, build skills, streamline processes, reduce errors, and enhance data collection.
Who should use the HUD Exchange?
The HUD Exchange is intended for recipients of HUD funding, such as state and local governments, nonprofit organizations, CoCs, PHAs, tribes, and their partners.
Are you an individual looking for housing or homeless assistance?
Visit our ‘Need Housing Assistance?’ page to find local agencies that provide a range of services including food, housing, health, and safety.
Awards
The HUD Exchange is the winner of a 2017 Center for Digital Government Project Experience Award which honors U.S. governments that have gone to the web and beyond to radically improve the experience of government and push the boundaries of how citizen services are delivered.
Other HUD Websites
HUD.gov is intended for the general public and provides departmental press releases, organizational information, and information about services for individuals seeking housing assistance.
HUDuser.gov is intended for the research community and provides a vast array of housing research, data, and policy analysis published by HUD’s Office of Policy Development and Research (PD&R).
About Community Compass and the HUD Exchange
The HUD Exchange is supported through Community Compass, HUD’s Technical Assistance Initiative.
What is Community Compass?
Community Compass helps HUD’s customers navigate complex housing and community development challenges by equipping them with the knowledge, skills, tools, capacity, and systems to implement HUD programs and policies successfully. The goal of Community Compass is to empower communities to implement successful programs by providing effective technical assistance and capacity building services.
Community Compass brings together technical assistance investments from across HUD program offices, including Office of Community Planning and Development, Office of Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity, Office of Housing, Office of Policy Development and Research, and Office of Public and Indian Housing.
Questions?
We'd love to hear from you. Whether you have a comment, a question, or need help finding information on the website, we are here to help! Contact Us
Note
This material is based upon work supported by funding under an award with the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. The substance and findings of the work are dedicated to the public. Neither the United States Government, nor any of its employees, makes any warranty, express or implied, or assumes any legal liability or responsibility for the accuracy, completeness, or usefulness of any information, apparatus, product, or process disclosed, or represents that its use would not infringe privately-owned rights. Reference herein to any specific commercial product, process, or service by trade name, trademark, manufacturer, or otherwise does not necessarily constitute or imply its endorsement, recommendation, or favoring by the U.S. Government or any agency thereof. Opinions expressed on HUD Exchange are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the official position of, or a position that is endorsed by, HUD or by any HUD program.
HUD EXCHANGE
Program delivery support for HUD's local partners
Connect with Us
HUD.gov
No Fear Act
FOIA
Privacy
Accessibility
Web Policies
Contact Us
© 2025 U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. All Rights Reserved.
Website Disclaimer
Note: This material is based upon work supported by funding under an award with the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. The substance and findings of the work are dedicated to the public. Neither the United States Government, nor any of its employees, makes any warranty, express or implied, or assumes any legal liability or responsibility for the accuracy, completeness, or usefulness of any information, apparatus, product, or process disclosed, or represents that its use would not infringe privately-owned rights. Reference herein to any specific commercial product, process, or service by trade name, trademark, manufacturer, or otherwise does not necessarily constitute or imply its endorsement, recommendation, or favoring by the U.S. Government or any agency thereof. Opinions expressed on the HUD Exchange are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the official position of, or a position that is endorsed by, HUD or by any HUD program.
Login