Dublin Core - Wikipedia
Jump to content
Main menu
Main menu
move to sidebar
hide
Navigation
Main page
Contents
Current events
Random article
About Wikipedia
Contact us
Contribute
Help
Learn to edit
Community portal
Recent changes
Upload file
Special pages
Search
Search
Appearance
Donate
Create account
Log in
Personal tools
Donate
Create account
Log in
Contents
move to sidebar
hide
(Top)
1
Milestones
2
Evolution of vocabulary
Toggle Evolution of vocabulary subsection
2.1
Core elements
2.2
Qualified Dublin Core
2.3
DCMI Metadata Terms
3
Standardization
Toggle Standardization subsection
3.1
Maintenance
4
Syntax
5
Applications
6
See also
7
References
8
External links
Toggle the table of contents
Dublin Core
30 languages
العربية
Azərbaycanca
Башҡортса
Bosanski
Català
Čeština
Deutsch
Ελληνικά
Español
Euskara
فارسی
Français
한국어
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
Nederlands
日本語
Norsk bokmål
Polski
Português
Русский
Slovenščina
Suomi
Svenska
தமிழ்
ไทย
Türkçe
Українська
中文
Edit links
Article
Talk
English
Read
Edit
View history
Tools
Tools
move to sidebar
hide
Actions
Read
Edit
View history
General
What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Permanent link
Page information
Cite this page
Get shortened URL
Download QR code
Print/export
Download as PDF
Printable version
In other projects
Wikimedia Commons
Wikidata item
Appearance
move to sidebar
hide
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Standardized set of metadata elements
Logo of DCMI, maintenance agency for Dublin Core Terms
The Dublin Core vocabulary , also known as the Dublin Core Metadata Terms ( DCMT ), is a general purpose metadata vocabulary for describing resources of any type. It was first developed for describing web content in the early days of the World Wide Web . The Dublin Core Metadata Initiative ( DCMI ) is responsible for maintaining the Dublin
Core vocabulary.
Initially developed as fifteen terms in 1998 the set of elements has grown over time and in 2008 was redefined as a Resource Description Framework (RDF) vocabulary. [ 1 ]
Designed with minimal constraints, each Dublin Core element is optional and may be repeated. There is no prescribed order in Dublin Core for presenting or using the elements.
Milestones
[ edit ]
1995 - In 1995 an invitational meeting hosted by the OCLC Online Computer Library Center and the National Center for Supercomputing Applications (NCSA) takes place at Dublin, Ohio , the headquarters of OCLC. [ 2 ]
1998, September - RFC 2413 "Dublin Core Metadata for Resource Discovery" details the original 15-element vocabulary. [ 3 ]
2000 - Issuance of Qualified Dublin Core.
2001 - Publication of the Dublin Core Metadata Element Set as ANSI/NISO Z39.85. [ 4 ]
2008 - Publication of Dublin Core Metadata Initiative Terms in RDF . [ 5 ] [ 6 ]
Evolution of vocabulary
[ edit ]
The Dublin Core Element Set was a response to concern about accurate finding of resources on the Web, with some early assumptions that this would be a library function. In particular it anticipated a future in which scholarly materials would be searchable on the World Wide Web. Whereas HTML was being used to mark-up the structure of documents, metadata was needed to mark-up the contents of documents. Given the great number of documents on the World Wide Web and those soon to be added to it, it was proposed that "self-identifying" documents would be necessary. [ 7 ] [ 8 ]
To this end, the Dublin Core Metadata Workshop met beginning in 1995 to develop a vocabulary that could be used to insert consistent metadata into Web documents. [ 9 ] Originally defined as 15 metadata elements, the Dublin Core Element Set allowed authors of web pages a vocabulary and method for creating simple metadata for their works. [ 10 ] It provided a simple, flat element set that could be used
Qualified Dublin Core was developed in the late 1990s to provide an extension mechanism to the vocabulary of 15 elements. This was a response to communities whose metadata needs required additional detail. [ 11 ]
In 2012, the DCMI Metadata Terms was created using a RDF data model. [ 12 ] This expanded element set incorporates the original 15 elements and many of the qualifiers of the qualified Dublin Core as RDF properties. [ citation needed ] The full set of elements is found under the namespace http://purl.org/dc/terms/ . There is a separate namespace for the original 15 elements as previously defined: http://purl.org/dc/elements/1.1/ . [ 13 ]
Core elements
[ edit ]
The Dublin Core vocabulary that was published in 1999 consisted of 15 terms:
contributor
coverage
creator
date
description
format
identifier
language
publisher
relation
rights
source
subject
title
type
The vocabulary was commonly expressed in HTML 'meta' tagging in the " " section of an HTML-encoded page. [ 14 ]
The vocabulary could be used in any metadata serialization including key/value pairs and XML. [ 15 ]
Qualified Dublin Core
[ edit ]
Subsequent to the specification of the original 15 elements, Qualified Dublin Core was developed to provide an extension mechanism to be used when the primary 15 terms were not sufficient. A set of common refinements was provided in the documentation. These schemes include controlled vocabularies and formal notations or parsing rules. [ 16 ] Qualified Dublin Core was not limited to these specific refinements, allowing communities to create extended metadata terms to meet their needs. [ 11 ]
The guiding principle for the qualification of Dublin Core elements, colloquially known as the Dumb-Down Principle , [ 17 ] states that an application that does not understand a specific element refinement term should be able to ignore the qualifier and treat the metadata value as if it were an unqualified (broader) element. While this may result in some loss of specificity, the remaining element value (without the qualifier) should continue to be generally correct and useful for discovery. [ 18 ]
Qualified Dublin Core added qualifiers to these elements:
Qualified Dublin Core Elements
Element
Qualifier
Title
Alternative
Description
Table Of Contents
"
Abstract
DateCreated
Valid
"
Available
"
Issued
"
Modified
FormatExtent
Medium
Relation
Is Version Of
"
Has Version
"
Is Replaced By
"
Replaces
"
Is Required By
"
Requires
"
Is Part Of
"
Has Part
"
Is Referenced By
"
References
"
Is Format Of
"
Has Format
Coverage
Spatial
"
Temporal
And added three elements not in the base 15:
Audience
Provenance
RightsHolder
Qualified Dublin Core is often used with a "dot syntax", with a period separating the element and the qualifier(s). This is shown in this excerpted example provided by Chan and Hodges: [ 11 ]
Title: D-Lib Magazine
Title.alternative: Digital Library Magazine
Identifier.ISSN: 1082-9873
Publisher: Corporation for National Research Initiatives
Publisher.place: Reston, VA.
Subject.topical.LCSH: Digital libraries - Periodicals
DCMI Metadata Terms
[ edit ]
The DCMI Metadata Terms lists the current set of the Dublin Core vocabulary. [ 12 ] This set includes the fifteen terms of the DCMES (in italic ), as well as many of the qualified terms. Each term has a unique URI in the namespace http://purl.org/dc/terms , and all are defined as RDF properties.
abstract
accessRights
accrualMethod
accrualPeriodicity
accrualPolicy
alternative
audience
available
bibliographicCitation
conformsTo
contributor
coverage
created
creator
date
dateAccepted
dateCopyrighted
dateSubmitted
description
educationLevel
extent
format
hasFormat
hasPart
hasVersion
identifier
instructionalMethod
isFormatOf
isPartOf
isReferencedBy
isReplacedBy
isRequiredBy
issued
isVersionOf
language
license
mediator
medium
modified
provenance
publisher
references
relation
replaces
requires
rights
rightsHolder
source
spatial
subject
tableOfContents
temporal
title
type
valid
It also includes these RDF classes which are used as domains and ranges of some properties:
Agent
AgentClass
BibliographicResource
FileFormat
Frequency
Jurisdiction
LicenseDocument
LinguisticSystem
Location
LocationPeriod/OrJurisdiction
MediaType
MediaTypeOrExtent
MethodOfAccrual
MethodOfInstruction
PeriodOfTime
PhysicalMedium
PhysicalResource
Policy
ProvenanceStatement
RightsStatement
SizeOrDuration
Standard
Standardization
[ edit ]
The Dublin Core Metadata Terms vocabulary has been formally standardized internationally as ISO 15836 by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) [ 19 ] and as IETF RFC 5013 by the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), [ 20 ]
as well as in the U.S. as ANSI/NISO Z39.85 by the National Information Standards Organization (NISO). [ 21 ]
Maintenance
[ edit ]
Changes that are made to the Dublin Core standard are reviewed by a DCMI Usage Board within the context of a DCMI Namespace Policy. [ 22 ] This policy describes how terms are assigned and also sets limits on the amount of editorial changes allowed to the labels, definitions, and usage comments. [ 23 ]
Syntax
[ edit ]
Syntax choices for metadata expressed with the Dublin Core elements depend on context. Dublin Core concepts and semantics are designed to be syntax independent [ clarification needed ] and apply to a variety of contexts, as long as the metadata is in a form suitable for interpretation by both machines and people.
Applications
[ edit ]
Despite its limitations, Dublin Core is widely used due to simplicity, maturity and interoperability. [ 24 ]
One Document Type Definition based on Dublin Core is the Open Source Metadata Framework (OMF) specification. [ 25 ] OMF is in turn used by Rarian (superseding ScrollKeeper ), which is used by the GNOME desktop and KDE help browsers and the ScrollServer documentation server.
PBCore is also based on Dublin Core. [ 26 ] The Zope CMF's Metadata products, used by the Plone , ERP5 , the Nuxeo CPS Content management systems , SimpleDL , and Fedora Commons also implement Dublin Core. The EPUB e-book format uses Dublin Core metadata in the OPF file . [ 27 ] Qualified Dublin Core is used in the DSpace archival management software. [ 28 ]
The Australian Government Locator Service (AGLS) metadata standard is an application profile of Dublin Core. [ 29 ] : 5
See also
[ edit ]
Metadata registry
Metadata Object Description Schema
Ontology (information science)
Open Archives Initiative (OAI)
Controlled vocabulary
Interoperability
Darwin Core , a Dublin Core extension for biodiversity informatics
References
[ edit ]
^ "Dublin Core" . Dublin Core Metadata Initiative . 22 December 2011.
^ "DCMI: The OCLC/NCSA Metadata Workshop: The Essential Elements of Network Object Description" . dublincore.org . March 1995 . Retrieved 13 October 2019 .
^ Weibel, S.; Kunze, J.; Lagoze, C.; Wolf, M. (September 1998). "Dublin Core Metadata for Resource Discovery" . RFC Editor . Retrieved 3 June 2024 .
^ "ANSI/NISO Z39.85-2001" (PDF) . ANSI/NISO. 2001.
^ Baker, Tom (2012). "Libraries, languages of description, and linked data: a Dublin Core perspective". Library Hi Tech . 30 (1): 116– 133. doi : 10.1108/07378831211213256 . ISSN   0737-8831 .
^ "Expressing Dublin Core Metadata Using RDF" . Dublin Core Metadata Initiative . 14 June 2012.
^ Weibel, S.L. (1995). "The World Wide Web and emerging Internet resource discovery standards for scholarly literature". Library Trends . -43 (4): 627– 44.
^ Weibel, S. (1995). "Metadata: the foundations of resource description" . D-Lib Magazine . doi : 10.1045/july95-weibel .
^ Weibel, S.; Lagoze, C. (1997). "An element set to support resource discovery". International Journal of Digital Libraries . 1 (2): 176– 186. doi : 10.1007/s007990050013 .
^ Greenberg, Jane; Pattuelli, Maria Cristina; Parsia, Bijan; Davenport Robertson, W. (2001). "Author-generated Dublin Core metadata for web resources: a baseline study in an organization In". Proceedings of the International Conference on Dublin Core and Metadata Applications .
^ a b c Chan, Lois Mai; Hodges, Theodora (2007). Cataloging and classification : an introduction (Third ed.). Scarecrow Press.
^ a b "DCMI Metadata Terms" . Dublincore.org . Retrieved 4 December 2015 .
^ "DCMI: Dublin Core Metadata Element Set, Version 1.1: Reference Description" . dublincore.org . Retrieved 3 April 2018 .
^ Kunze, John A. (December 1999). "Encoding Dublin Core Metadata in HTML" . IETF.org . Retrieved 17 June 2021 .
^ Johnston, Pete; Powell, Andy (30 May 2006). "Expressing Dublin Core™ metadata using XML" .
^ "Using Dublin Core™ - Dublin Core™ Qualifiers" . 2005.
^ "DCMI: DCMI Grammatical Principles" . dublincore.org . Retrieved 3 April 2018 .
^ "Dumb-Down Principle" . 20 November 2012.
^ "ISO 15836-1:2017 – Information and documentation – The Dublin Core metadata element set – Part 1: Core elements" . International Organization for Standardization. May 2017 . Retrieved 2 October 2018 .
^ The Dublin Core Metadata Element Set , Dublin Core Metadata Initiative, August 2007
^ "NISO Standards – National Information Standards Organization" . Niso.org. 22 May 2007. Archived from the original on 16 November 2011 . Retrieved 5 April 2013 .
^ Powell, Andy; Wagner, Harry (2 July 2007). "Namespace Policy for Dublin Core Metadata Initiative" .
^ "Dublin Core Metadata Element Set, Version 1.1" . Dublincore.org . Retrieved 4 December 2015 .
^ da Silva, João Rocha; Ribeiro, Cristina; Lopes, João Correia (June 2019). "Ranking Dublin Core descriptor lists from user interactions: a case study with Dublin Core Terms using the Dendro platform" . International Journal on Digital Libraries . 20 (2): 185– 204. doi : 10.1007/s00799-018-0238-x . ISSN   1432-5012 .
^ "m e t a l a b open source metadata framework" . ibiblio.org . Retrieved 3 April 2018 .
^ "PBCore Schema – PBCore" . pbcore.org . Archived from the original on 19 January 2018 . Retrieved 19 January 2018 . PBCore is built on the foundation of the Dublin Core (ISO 15836), an international standard for resource discovery.
^ "Open Packaging Format (OPF) § Publication Metadata" . International Digital Publishing Forum . Retrieved 11 November 2017 .
^ "Dspace metadata and bitstream format registries" . Dspace Wiki .
^ "AGLS Metadata Standard Part 1 – Reference Description" (PDF) . National Archives of Australia. 30 June 2010. Archived from the original (PDF) on 27 November 2019 . Retrieved 28 November 2019 .
External links
[ edit ]
Wikiversity has learning resources about Digital Libraries/Metadata
Official website
Dublin Core Metadata Initiative Publishes DCMI Abstract Model ( Cover Pages , March 2005)
Dublin Core Generator A JavaScript/JQuery tool for working with Dublin core metadata code
Metadata Object Description Schema (MODS)
v
t
e
Semantic Web
Background
Databases
Hypertext
Internet
Ontologies
Semantics
Semantic networks
World Wide Web
Sub-topics
Dataspaces
Hyperdata
Linked data
Rule-based systems
Applications
Semantic analytics
Semantic computing
Semantic mapper
Semantic matching
Semantic publishing
Semantic reasoner
Semantic search
Semantic service-oriented architecture
Semantic wiki
Solid
Related topics
Collective intelligence
Description logic
Folksonomy
Geotagging
Information architecture
iXBRL
Knowledge extraction
Knowledge management
Knowledge representation and reasoning
Library 2.0
Digital library
Digital humanities
Metadata
References
Topic map
Web 2.0
Web engineering
Web Science Trust
Standards
Syntax and supporting technologies
HTTP
IRI
URI
RDF
triples
RDF/XML
JSON-LD
Turtle
TriG
Notation3
N-Triples
TriX (no W3C standard)
RRID
SPARQL
XML
Semantic HTML
Schemas, ontologies and rules
Common Logic
OWL
RDFS
Rule Interchange Format
Semantic Web Rule Language
SHACL
Semantic annotation
COinS
GRDDL
Microdata
Microformats
RDFa
SAWSDL
Facebook Platform
Common vocabularies
BIBFRAME
BIBO
DOAP
Dublin Core
MODS / MADS
FOAF
Schema.org
SIOC
SKOS
Microformat vocabularies
hAtom
hCalendar
hCard
hProduct
hRecipe
hReview
Authority control databases
International GND
National Czech Republic
Latvia
Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Dublin_Core&oldid=1328412729 "
Categories : Archival science
Bibliography file formats
Information management
Interoperability
ISO standards
Knowledge representation
Library cataloging and classification
Metadata standards
Museology
Records management
Reference models
Semantic Web
Hidden categories: Articles with short description
Short description matches Wikidata
Use dmy dates from June 2021
All articles with unsourced statements
Articles with unsourced statements from June 2024
Wikipedia articles needing clarification from May 2019
Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia
This page was last edited on 19 December 2025, at 18:33  (UTC) .
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Legal & safety contacts
Code of Conduct
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
Mobile view
Search
Search
Toggle the table of contents
Dublin Core
30 languages
Add topic