Explainers | Colorlines
Skip to main content
Search
Donate
Search
Main menu
About Us
Our History
Community Conversations
Explainers
Organizing Stories
Published By Race Forward
Archive
Check out the Colorlines archives with thousands of articles spanning our 25 year history
Colorlines Community
Join the Colorlines community and stay up to date on events, actions, and news
Follow Us
Explainers
What is Healing Justice? An Explainer with Cara Page and Erica Woodland
Cara Page and Erica Woodard establish foundational contexts and principles for understanding Healing Justice as a political framework for collective liberation. Watch now.
Education: Democracy’s Battleground?
James E. Ford, PhD, Executive Director of The Center for Racial Equity in Education (CREED), offers a framework to understand schools and education as historically contested sites to determine the viabilities of true multiracial democracy in the United States. Watch now.
Should Racial Justice Movements Give up on Government? An Explainer with Eric K. Ward
Race Forward Executive Vice President Eric K. Ward argues for the importance of incubating governance through formal institutions of government, as spaces that must be directly contested in order to achieve a truly inclusive, multiracial society. Watch now .
What is Collective Power and How Do We Build it? An Explainer with Maurice Mitchell
Working Families Party National Director Maurice Mitchell explains the vitality of collective power. Watch now .
Supreme Court Case on Affirmative Action, Explained
We asked our friends at the Advancement Project to help us understand what this case means for the future of affirmative action, what is at stake and what we can do. Watch as Carmen Daugherty, Deputy Executive Director, Advancement Project helps us place the case and the subsequent decision of the Court in historical and contemporary context. Watch now
Colorlines is the leading source for accessible media on race, power and democracy. We offer analysis, collective meaning-making, and opportunities to engage in power-building moments and movements.
Footer
About Us
Archives
Community Conversations
Explainers
Organizing Stories
Additional Links
Donate
Contact
Privacy
Terms of Use
Join Colorlines
© COLORLINES 2025 Site Credits Madeo