GARE Public Resources - GARE Online Community
Skip main navigation (Press Enter).
Log in
Toggle navigation
Who We Are About Us
Our Approach
Our Impact
Careers at GARE
Join Us Membership
Connecting to Your Membership
Strategic Partnerships
Resources GARE Resources
Topic Guides
State of the Field
GARE Online Community
GARE Learning Center
Newsletter
Blogs
Events Upcoming Events
FAQs
Log in
Newsletter Signup
GARE Public Resources
×
Back to Library
New Southern Strategies Playbook: Innovation for Racial Equity in Government [2025]
Like
05-01-2025 03:47 PM
GARE Team
The New Southern Strategies Playbook is a bold, hands-on guide for government practitioners committed to advancing racial equity in the South and anywhere injustice shows up in systems and structures. Developed by and for racial equity practitioners in government, it offers adaptive tools, strategies, case studies, and reflection prompts to help practitioners embed racial equity in policy, practice, and culture.
R ooted in the Southern experience, the New Southern Strategies P laybook’s lessons resonate far beyond state lines - because the legacies of racism, and the opportunities for transformation , stretch across this entire country. We encourage you to use the Playbook as a starting point to act, innovate, and reimagine what is possible.
The version of the Playbook that is shared here is for the general public. GARE network practitioners are invited to view the FULL PLAYBOOK HERE . The full version contains the complete case studies and detailed information about how to apply the lessons learned and shared by participants in GARE's 2023 Southern Innovation Community.
#Resource-Guides
Statistics
0
Favorited
1597
Views
2
Files
0
Shares
107
Downloads
Attachment(s)
Download All
New-Southern-Strategies-Playbook PUBLIC v5.pdf
1.04 MB
1 version
Uploaded - 05-19-2025
Download
APPENDIX - New Southern Strategies Playbook
2.31 MB
1 version
Uploaded - 05-03-2025
Download
Download Document
Please accept the terms of the copyright associated with this attachment before downloading it. Click the link below to read the terms.
Accept
Related Entries and Links
05-03-2025 04:14 PM
Sarah Lawton
FULL VERSION New Southern Strategies Playbook FOR GARE MEMBERS ONLY
Interested in becoming a member?
Learn More
Like what you see?
Don't miss out on the newsletter!
Subscribe
Join our newsletter to stay up to date on news from the GARE network, upcoming events, and more.
Government Alliance on Race and Equity
Quick Links
GARE Learning Center
Membership
Contact Us
Online Community Log In
© COPYRIGHT YEAR PLACEHOLDER GARE. All rights reserved.
Privacy Policy
Terms of Use
Copyright 2024. All rights reserved.
Powered by Higher Logic