HUD Home | HUD.gov / U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD)
Skip to main content
An official website of the United States Government   Here’s how you know
Official websites use .gov
A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A lock ( A locked padlock ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
Helping Americans
Help with Homeownership
Find Affordable Places to Live
Find a HUD-certified counselor
Housing Choice Voucher
Experiencing Homelessness
Report an Issue
Current HUD Residents
Experiencing a Natural Disaster
Find State Resources
HUD Partners
FHA/Housing Resources
Public and Indian Housing Resources
Policies, Guidance, & Forms
IT Systems
Grants
Native American Programs
Affordable Places to Live
Inspections for HUD Housing
Housing Financing & Counseling
Opportunity Zones & Community Development
Healthy Homes
Fair Housing
Small Business
HUDExchange
Center for Faith
Data & Research
HUDuser.gov
Data.hud.gov
Reports
News About Contact
Search
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
Helping Americans
HUD Partners
Data & Research
News
About
Contact
Home
HUD Home
Submitted by
C53399
on
Tue, 03/11/2025 - 14:18
Learn More About HUD
HUD is Implementing President Trump’s Agenda:
11 Wins in 11 Months
1. Making Housing Affordable Again
On Day 1, President Trump signed an Executive Order to lower the cost and expand the supply of housing. Since then, HUD has helped make housing more affordable for more than one million Americans, including more than half a million first homebuyers.
2. Prioritizing Americans First
HUD acted swiftly to ban illegal aliens from public housing and HUD-funded shelters, and to ensure that FHA loans backed by American taxpayers are going to Americans ONLY. The American people no longer take a back seat to illegal aliens in any HUD-funded program.
3. Cutting Red Tape and Restoring Local Control
HUD cut red tape and restored local control—ending the unaffordability of American homes under the Biden administration. This was achieved by slashing the Obama-Biden Affirmatively Furthering Fair Housing zoning tax, along with rescinding 12 additional sub-regulatory policies. Less red tape = more affordable homeownership for American families.
Watch the Video
4. Championing Opportunity Zones
Secretary Turner and HUD leadership visited 13 Opportunity Zones and heard stories of community revitalization and economic development from American workers, business owners, and local leaders.
5. Enhancing Safety in Public Housing
HUD launched a national crime hotline for Americans living in HUD-funded housing to report gangs, drug activity, illegal aliens, sex offenders, human traffickers, fraud, and threats. Public housing is safe housing.
Watch the Video
6. Supporting Foster Youth
HUD worked with First Lady Melania Trump to secure $25 million in funding for HUD's Foster Youth to Independence program and partnered with the White House to execute the First Lady's initiative, Fostering the Future for American Children and Families.
7. Eradicating Anti-Christian Bias
HUD eradicated anti-Christian bias throughout the agency and welcomed more than 350,000 faith-based organizations across the country back to the table as partners in combating homelessness and increasing self-sufficiency.
8. Restoring Biological Truth
HUD restored biological truth to housing policy by recognizing all Americans by their sex at birth—MALE or FEMALE.
9. Responding to Natural Disasters
Secretary Turner visited Californians impacted by wildfires, North Carolinians devastated by Hurricane Helene, and Texans affected by catastrophic floods. HUD has provided $12 billion in disaster recovery to communities across the country.
10. Ending DEI at HUD
DEI is dead at HUD, putting all Americans back on a level playing field. HUD disbanded the woke PAVE task force and held local leaders accountable for illegal race-based housing plans.
11. Uncovering Waste and Fraud
Immediately upon President Trump taking office, HUD uncovered $1.9 billion in misplaced funds and cut $250 million in wasteful contracts, stewarding taxpayer dollars as promised.
Learn More About HUD
Opportunity Zones
-->
Helping Americans
HUD Partners
Researchers
News
About
Contact
U.S. Department of
Housing and Urban Development
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
451 7th Street, S.W., Washington, DC 20410
T: (202) 402-3815
Find a HUD office near you
Office of Inspector General   |    No Fear Act   |    FOIA   |    Privacy   |    Accessibility   |    Web Policies   |    Sitemap
Website Feedback