Colorlines
Skip to main content
Search
Donate
Search
Main menu
About Us
Our History
Community Conversations
Explainers
Organizing Stories
Published By Race Forward
Archive
Check out the Colorlines archives with thousands of articles spanning our 25 year history
Colorlines Community
Join the Colorlines community and stay up to date on events, actions, and news
Follow Us
Housing Justice is Racial Justice
A video to help you start a conversation with your neighbors and colleagues about how important it is to use a racial justice frame to achieve real wins for housing. Credit: Doug Miles (Instagram @steezyapache)
Watch Video
Momentum Podcast
Launched in 2019, Momentum: A Race Forward Podcast features movement voices, narratives, and strategies for racial justice. Momentum uplifts stories of hope, struggle, and joy as we continue to build the momentum needed to advance racial justice in our policies, institutions, and culture.
Listen on:
Dangerous Memories: Dorothy Cotton and Juneteenth Teach-Ins For Action
Emancipation Day Celebration band, June 19, 1900.
Watch Video
In what ways can memory, history, and collective vision inform the necessary pathways that we must create in order to build multiracial democratic power? In “The Long History of Juneteenth,” we ground ourselves within analyses of the historical origins and impacts of Juneteenth and its enduring applications for today.
Hosts:
Dr. Charlene Sinclair (Former Editor, Colorlines)
Dr. Terry Anne Scott (Director, The Institute for Common Power)
Presenters:
Dr. Terry Anne Scott (Director, The Institute for Common Power)
Brianna Brown (Co-Executive Director, Texas Organizing Project)
Watch
Attacks on Public Education Threaten the Legacy of Brown
By Avis Weathersbee
Read More
Brown turns 70 on May 17, but the vision of a robust and equitable public education system may yet be a dream deferred. Many education experts said the current wave of politicized offensives against a system already under stress pushes public schools toward a tipping point.
Read More
Women Transcend
Formerly Incarcerated Women Stand Tall
and Show the Way to Collective Power-building
Find out more
Untold stories of resilience, impact and transformation are illuminated in Women Transcend, Colorlines’ multimedia and storytelling initiative that disrupts deeply ingrained ideas and value systems around crime and punishment. The Women Transcend film and companion pieces reject harmful narratives that service systems of perpetual punishment, and challenge all of us to see those who are deemed “unredeemable” as guiding lights to systemic change and reform. The film was produced in collaboration with formerly incarcerated Black women activists and leaders.
WOMEN TRANSCEND
Let's Journey Together
A community that deepens your analysis on race, power, and democracy.
And makes space for your joyful imaginations
JOIN COLORLINES
Explainers
Breaking down big ideas about race, power, and democracy. View all explainers
Supreme Court Case on Affirmative Action, Explained
We asked our friends at the Advancement Project to help us understand what this case means for the future of affirmative action, what is at stake and what we can do. Watch as Carmen Daugherty, Deputy Executive Director, Advancement Project helps us place the case and the subsequent decision of the Court in historical and contemporary context. Watch now
What is Collective Power and How Do We Build It? An Explainer with Maurice Mitchell
Working Families Party National Director Maurice Mitchell explains the vitality of collective power. Watch now .
What is Healing Justice? An Explainer with Cara Page and Erica Woodland
Cara Page and Erica Woodard establish foundational contexts and principles for understanding Healing Justice as a political framework for collective liberation. Watch now.
Should Racial Justice Movements Give up on Government? An Explainer with Eric K. Ward
Race Forward Executive Vice President Eric K. Ward argues for the importance of incubating governance through formal institutions of government, as spaces that must be directly contested in order to achieve a truly inclusive, multiracial society. Watch now .
Organizing Stories
Stories of our journeys through life and organizing. View all stories.
Finding Purpose and Power Where Darkness Lives: Cheryl Wilkins' Journey Through Incarceration
Cheryl Wilkins, co-founder and co-director at Columbia University’s Center for Justice, talks about her experience as a queer woman inside prison and "walking up" to the systemic reasons for incarceration. Watch now.
Courage is Contagious: Alejandra Gomez’s Organizing Journey
Alejandra Gomez, Executive Director of Living United for Change in Arizona (LUCHA), speaks about how the courage to exercise one’s voice against injustice can encourage others to enact theirs around a shared purpose, which over time can catalyze movement-building momentum that sustains for the long run. Watch now.
Something Miraculous: Sulma Arias Migration Journey
People’s Action Executive Director Sulma Arias shares her immigration story to illustrate how the powers of connection and compassion can create moments of transformation and belonging. Watch now .
How Georgia Youth Organize for Education Justice
Get inspired by the brilliance and power of members of the Georgia Youth Justice Coalition share their testimonies about how and why they organize. Watch now .
Community Conversations
A variety of voices gathered in conversation in living rooms and around the kitchen table. View all community conversations
Belonging and Radical Love in the Ballroom Community
Members of the Ballroom community convey stories of security and belonging. Watch now .
Community Conversations: Beyond the Vote
We gathered a group of brilliant seasoned organizers for a heartfelt conversation on what midterm election results could mean for our communities, and what gives us hope as we continue our fight for a just, multiracial democracy beyond the vote. Watch no w.
How Government Can Deliver Lasting Racial Justice Wins
Members of Race Forward’s Government Alliance on Race and Equity (G.A.R.E.) discuss participatory democracy and co-governance: how structures of government are strategically necessary for translating power-building momentums into public policies. Watch now.
From our Partners
Colorlines is part of a broader vibrant racial justice community. We are excited to highlight this work from our partners.
Pushing Back Against The Rise of Christian Nationalism Through Faith with Obery Hendricks, Ph.D
On this episode of Momentum: A Race Forward Podcast, Obery Hendricks, Ph.D., one of the most influential Black biblical scholars writing today, and Race Forward’s Chief of Staff Charlene Sinclair, Ph.D.,  who herself fashions strategies that embrace a liberationist approach to faith and spirituality for racial and economic justice, discuss the immediacy of pushing back against the spread of Christian Nationalism and the urgency of creating narratives based on the gospel’s “true teachings” to reflect the ongoing political moment and fight for progressive policies that stay true to the bible’s "liberationist ideals".
Colorlines is the leading source for accessible media on race, power and democracy. We offer analysis, collective meaning-making, and opportunities to engage in power-building moments and movements.
Footer
About Us
Archives
Community Conversations
Explainers
Organizing Stories
Additional Links
Donate
Contact
Privacy
Terms of Use
Join Colorlines
© COLORLINES 2025 Site Credits Madeo