GARE Public Resources - GARE Online Community
Skip main navigation (Press Enter).
Log in
Toggle navigation
Who We Are About Us
Our Approach
Our Impact
Careers at GARE
Join Us Membership
Connecting to Your Membership
Strategic Partnerships
Resources GARE Resources
Topic Guides
State of the Field
GARE Online Community
GARE Learning Center
Newsletter
Blogs
Events Upcoming Events
FAQs
Log in
Newsletter Signup
GARE Public Resources
×
Back to Library
Democracy Resilience Toolkit: Prompts and Actions Pocket Guide
Like
02-10-2025 12:49 PM
GARE Team
As a network of racial justice advocates, builders and believers, we know that equitable systems benefit everyone. Democratic values safeguard the rights and governing power of marginalized communities. We have come a long way in this work, and our hope is that the Democracy Resilience Toolkit will aid practitioners in sustaining systems that prioritize racial equity, bolster democracy, and secure progress for future generations.
Divided into two parts, the Democracy Resilience Toolkit is designed to prompt discussion and action on protecting racial equity in the face of political disruption.
Gather with trusted colleagues to review the Prompts and Actions Pocket Guide  - A practical guide to help you identify and implement strategies that support resilience in your work.
Explore and contribute to the interactive GARE Online Community Democracy Resilience Toolkit   (member-only) - A space   for collaboration and ongoing learning with additional resources, opportunities for discussion, and updates on upcoming events designed to provide support and foster sense-making.  Your contributions and reflections will help to build a cornerstone repository for advancing the movement of racial equity with resilient processes leading the way.
#CommunicationsandNarrative
#CommunityandPublicEngagement
#DemocracyResilience
#OrganizingStrategy
#RacialEquityToolsActionPlansandReports
#Toolkits
#Transforming
Statistics
0
Favorited
2942
Views
1
Files
0
Shares
568
Downloads
Attachment(s)
Democracy Resilience Toolkit Final.pdf
1.89 MB
1 version
Uploaded - 02-10-2025
Download
Download Document
Please accept the terms of the copyright associated with this attachment before downloading it. Click the link below to read the terms.
Accept
Related Entries and Links
No Related Resource entered.
Interested in becoming a member?
Learn More
Like what you see?
Don't miss out on the newsletter!
Subscribe
Join our newsletter to stay up to date on news from the GARE network, upcoming events, and more.
Government Alliance on Race and Equity
Quick Links
GARE Learning Center
Membership
Contact Us
Online Community Log In
© COPYRIGHT YEAR PLACEHOLDER GARE. All rights reserved.
Privacy Policy
Terms of Use
Copyright 2024. All rights reserved.
Powered by Higher Logic