Umatilla Superintendent Heidi Sipe Selected for COSA Colt Gill Leadership Award | Umatilla School District
Skip to content
Umatilla School District
Building Bridges to Successful Futures
Menu
Schools
Translate
Search Site Sign in
Umatilla School District
News
Umatilla Superintendent Heidi Sipe Selected for COSA Colt Gill Leadership Award
Umatilla Superintendent Heidi Sipe Selected for COSA Colt Gill Leadership Award
Elizebeth Burres
December 5, 2025
The Umatilla School District is proud to announce that Superintendent Heidi Sipe has been selected as the recipient of the Colt Gill Leadership Award, presented annually by the Coalition of Oregon Administrators (COSA). Superintendent Sipe was presented with the award on December 4th in Eugene at the Oregon School Law Conference.
The award honors leaders who demonstrate extraordinary impact in K-12 education, tireless work ethic, strong advocacy for public schools, and continuous, steady leadership through challenging circumstances.
Umatilla school board chair Lesly Claustro-Sanguino shared her appreciation for Sipe’s leadership stating, “Not only is Heidi an exceptional leader in our district but in our state, and nationwide. This award is just further proof that the work Heidi does for the field of education does not go unnoticed by folks around the state. The Umatilla school board could not be more proud to have her on our team.”
Sipe was nominated by 18 superintendents across the Intermountain ESD region, who submitted a letter detailing her long-standing leadership and contributions at the local, regional, state, and national levels. Their nomination emphasized her work expanding opportunities for students, through innovative after-school programs, STEAM initiatives, and robotics programs, as well as her strong commitment to strengthening educational opportunities in rural communities.
The nomination letter also highlighted her efforts to support underserved students, including her work in Washington, D.C., and her role in strengthening regional partnerships that help neighboring districts access vital resources and support. They described her as a collaborative leader whose work has improved educational opportunities across the region and fostered a culture of shared success.
During the award presentation, COSA Executive Director Dr. Krista Parent shared, “Heidi Sipe, you are a champion for kids, educators, and communities across Oregon. You are our go-to superintendent and often simply our go-to human when we need wisdom, problem solving, inspiration, or one of your unforgettable stories that keep us smiling. Today we are proud to honor you with the 2025 Colt Gill Leadership Award. Heidi Sipe, you inspire us all.”
The Umatilla School District congratulates Superintendent Sipe on this well-deserved honor and thanks COSA for recognizing her leadership and dedication to students, staff, and the wider community.
Photo caption: Superintendent Heidi Sipe (right) is presented with the 2025 COSA Colt Gill Champion of Education Award by COSA Executive Director Dr. Krista Parent (left).
Find Us
Umatilla School District 1001 6th St Umatilla, OR 97882 Phone: 541-922-6500 Fax: 541-922-6507
Schools
Umatilla School District
Umatilla High School
Clara Brownell Middle School
Columbia Vista Intermediate
McNary Heights Elementary School
Athletics & Activities
Stay Connected
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Umatilla School District does not discriminate on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, disability, or age in its programs and activities and provides equal access to the Boy Scouts and other designated youth groups. The following person has been designated to handle inquiries regarding the non-discrimination policies and Title IX:
Heidi Sipe, Superintendent
1001 6th Street, Umatilla, OR 97882
541-922-6500
Discrimination Complaint Link
Public Complaint Resolution Process
Do you have a question or concern that's not a complaint but something you'd like addressed? Please take this survey.
Copyright © 2025 Umatilla School District. All rights reserved. Powered By Apptegy Visit us to learn more