2026 Knowledge Management QC Onboarding Co-op (Jun- Dec) Job Opening in Worcester, Massachusetts - Association for Intelligent Information Management (AIIM)
Employers
Home
Products
Post a Job
My Account
My Jobs
My Clients
Resume Bank
My Candidates
My Company
My Templates
Help
Job Seekers
Home
My Account
Job Search
Products
Career Planning
Advice
Insights
Coaching
Manage Resumes
Job Alerts
Company Directory
Help
Sign-in or Create Account
Employer
Job Seeker
Post a Job
We detected that Javascript is deactivated. Some functionality within the site may not work as expected.
Career Center Home
Search Jobs
2026 Knowledge Management QC Onboarding Co-op (Jun- Dec)
5 mi/8 km
10 mi/15 km
25 mi/40 km
50 mi/80 km
100 mi/160 km
200 mi/320 km
Search
Results
Job Details
Explore Location
2026 Knowledge Management QC Onboarding Co-op (Jun- Dec)
Share
Print
AbbVie
Worcester, Massachusetts, United States
(on-site)
APPLY
Posted
1 day ago
2026 Knowledge Management QC Onboarding Co-op (Jun- Dec)
Share
Print
AbbVie
Worcester, Massachusetts, United States
(on-site)
APPLY
Job Type
Internship
Industry
Other
Job Function
Other
AI Summary & Insights
Summary
Insights
2026 Knowledge Management QC Onboarding Co-op (Jun- Dec)
The insights provided are generated by AI and may contain inaccuracies. Please independently verify any critical information before relying on it.
2026 Knowledge Management QC Onboarding Co-op (Jun- Dec)
The insights provided are generated by AI and may contain inaccuracies. Please independently verify any critical information before relying on it.
Description
ICompany Description
AbbVie's mission is to discover and deliver innovative medicines and solutions that solve serious health issues today and address the medical challenges of tomorrow. We strive to have a remarkable impact on people's lives across several key therapeutic areas - immunology, oncology, neuroscience, and eye care - and products and services in our Allergan Aesthetics portfolio. For more information about AbbVie, please visit us at www.abbvie.com. Follow @abbvie on X, Facebook, Instagram, YouTube, LinkedIn and Tik Tok.
Job Description
Envision spending your summer working with energetic colleagues and inspirational leaders, all while gaining world-class experience in one of the most dynamic organizations in the pharmaceutical industry. This is a reality for AbbVie AbbVie Co-Ops.
As a Training and Qualification Co-Op, you will have the opportunity to support key training initiatives within the Quality Control Analysis (QCA) and Quality Control Management (QCM) departments. This position will involve developing Job-Specific Training Manuals (JSTMs), qualifying and re-qualifying QCA/QCM personnel, and coordinating training sessions to ensure compliance and skill advancement.
Key Responsibilities Include:
Conduct training sessions for QCA/QCM personnel
Develop and update Job-Specific Training Manuals (JSTMs)
Qualify new QCA/QCM personnel and oversee their progression
Manage the re-qualification program for existing personnel
Schedule and coordinate training sessions and re-qualification activities
Interact with various teams to ensure training programs meet departmental needs
Present information effectively to groups and adapt teaching styles to suit diverse audiences
Qualifications
Minimum Qualifications
Currently enrolled in university, pursuing a bachelor's degree in chemistry, Biology, adult learning / education or other related field
Must be enrolled in university for at least one semester following the co-op
Expected graduation date between December 2026 - June 2027
Preferred Qualifications
Exposure to chemistry, biology, or education-focused curriculum
Strong communication and interpersonal skills
Comfort with public speaking
Time management
Project management
Additional Information
Applicable only to applicants applying to a position in any location with pay disclosure requirements under state or local law:
Benefits and Amenities:
Competitive pay
Relocation support for eligible students
Select wellness benefits and paid holiday / sick time
The compensation range described below is the range of possible base pay compensation that the Company believes in good faith it will pay for this role at the timeof this posting based on the job grade for this position. Individual compensation paid within this range will depend on many factors including geographic location, andwe may ultimately pay more or less than the posted range. This range may be modified in the future.
Note: No amount of pay is considered to be wages or compensation until such amount is earned, vested, and determinable. The amount and availability of any bonus,commission, incentive, benefits, or any other form of compensation and benefits that are allocable to a particular employee remains in the Company's sole and absolutediscretion unless and until paid and may be modified at the Company's sole and absolute discretion, consistent with applicable law.
AbbVie is an equal opportunity employer and is committed to operating with integrity, driving innovation, transforming lives and serving our community. Equal Opportunity Employer/Veterans/Disabled.
US & Puerto Rico only - to learn more, visit https://www.abbvie.com/join-us/equal-employment-opportunity-employer.html
US & Puerto Rico applicants seeking a reasonable accommodation, click here to learn more:
https://www.abbvie.com/join-us/reasonable-accommodations.htmlI
Job ID: 81803011
Jobs You May Like
HU
Impact Assessment & Knowledge Management...
Harvard University
Cambridge,
MA,
United States
(on-site)
CH
Senior Manager, Information Governance and Privacy
CVS Health
Providence,
RI,
United States
(on-site)
Project Manager/ Business Process Analyst Global...
Marsh & McLennan Companies
MA,
United States
(on-site)
CH
Senior Manager, Information Governance and Privacy
CVS Health
Hartford,
CT,
United States
(on-site)
Apply
Site Map
Terms of Use
Privacy Policy
© 2025 AIIM – Association for Intelligent Information Management.
All Rights Reserved.
8403 Colesville Road, Suite 1100
Silver Spring,
Maryland 20910-5616
(301) 587-8202
Job Location
Worcester, Massachusetts, United States
Median Salary
Net Salary per month
$4,007
Median Apartment Rent in City Center
(1-3 Bedroom)
$1,943
-
$2,926
$2,435
Safety Index
51 /100
51
Utilities
Basic
(Electricity, heating, cooling, water, garbage for 915 sq ft apartment)
$100
-
$350
$193
High-Speed Internet
$50
-
$80
$66
Transportation
Gasoline
(1 gallon)
$3.18
Taxi Ride
(1 mile)
$3.28
Data is collected and updated regularly using reputable sources, including corporate websites and governmental reporting institutions.
Loading...
No content
No content
{Error Message Title}
{Warning Message Title}
{Success Message Title}
-->
×
Insert additional messaging here.
-->
We use cookies on this site to enhance your experience. By using our website you accept our use of cookies.
Yes, I agree
More Information
Cookies YourMembership uses cookies for your convenience and security. Cookies are text files stored on the browser of your computer and are used to make your experience on web sites more personal and less cumbersome. You may choose to decline cookies if your browser permits, but doing so may affect your ability to access or use certain features of this site. Please refer to your web browser's help function for assistance on how to change your preferences.
View complete Cookie Policy
Close