Kirwan Institute at The Ohio State University
Skip to main content
Show Links
Map
Buckeye Link
Webmail
Search Ohio State
The Kirwan Institute for the Study of Race and Ethnicity
About
Who We Are
Kirwan's Future
10-Year Strategic Vision
Kirwan Strategic Plan
Research
Poverty Alleviation
2024-2025 Ohio Urban-Suburban-Rural Opportunity Index Report
Franklin County Auditor Report: Investigating the Appraisal Process
The Color of Wealth in Miami
Sustainable Future-Ready Youth Employment
A Positive Evolution: Exploring the Impact of the MBK Village Initiative
Champions for Children Report: Strengthening Social Fabric
Kirwan Innovations
Toward a Better Governed City of Los Angeles
Towards Equitable Investments for Addressing Challenges and Needs of Older African Americans in the State of Ohio
Partnerships
Intellectual Communities of Practice
Faculty Affiliates
IQRMI
Land Grant Communities of Practice
The Kirwan Forum Series
News and Events
Events
News
Collaborate
Become a Faculty Affiliate
Contact Us
Donate
Search
Submit search
Toggle search dialog
Home
Welcome to The Kirwan Institute for the Study of Race and Ethnicity
Explore research
Work with us
Make a donation
Bold Ideas. Prosperous Futures.
At the Kirwan Institute, we produce the bold, evidence-based research concepts that changemakers across the country use to drive prosperity and possibility for every community. Guided by a shared vision of transformative research that inspires collaborations among unlikely partners, Kirwan welcomes all Ohioans to utilize our research to design a prosperous future for all of us.
Learn more about Kirwan
60%
increase in research projects over the last two years
48
American states have been explored using Kirwan’s community-led opportunity mapping approach
7x
increase in Faculty Affiliates in the last two years
2024-2025 Ohio Urban-Suburban-Rural Opportunity Index Report
It is a common headline across the United States: quality affordable housing is increasingly difficult to find. It is especially challenging for federal, state and local housing agencies to incentivize affordable housing developers to build more housing units in the locations that need it most.
Read the report
Research Topics
The Kirwan Institute has over 20 years of national recognition for innovative research concepts and multi-sector collaborations across 480+ jurisdictions in the United States, including six national projects.
Poverty Alleviation
Sustainable Future-Ready Youth Employment
Kirwan Innovations
View all research
Latest News
Kirwan to House 2026 Intersectional Qualitative Research Methods Institute (IQRMI)
After ten successful years at the University of Maryland, Kirwan is delighted to welcome IQRMI to OSU.
Kirwan Institute Marks 20th Anniversary, Launches Strategic Plan | Ohio State News
Kirwan Institute Leadership Announcement
Poor and Black Franklin County Neighborhoods were Overvalued for Real Estate Taxes for Years, New Report Finds | The Columbus Dispatch
Browse all news
Upcoming Events
Browse all events
There are no upcoming Events of this type. Please check back soon.
Browse all events
Keep Up with Kirwan
Want to know what’s new at Kirwan? You can sign up for our mailing list, learn how to support Kirwan, and more on our collaboration page.
Contact Us
Kirwan Institute
33 W. 11th Avenue
Columbus, OH 43201
kirwan-admin@osu.edu
Phone: 614-292-OHIO
Fax: 614-247-1633
Facebook profile — external
X profile — external
YouTube profile — external
If you have a disability and experience difficulty accessing this content, please contact us .
Privacy Statement
Non-discrimination Notice
Cookie Settings
Login
© 2025 The Ohio State University
Back to top