Mary Rumbaugh
Director
October 16, 2025

BCC Agenda Date/Item: ______________

Housing Authority Board of Commissioners
Clackamas County
Approval of a Resolution designating the Executive Director as the authorized officer to negotiate
and execute a Development Agreement, street vacation, and Phase II replat for Buildings D & E of
the Hillside Park Redevelopment Project. Funding is through Low-Income Housing Tax Credits,
Oregon Housing and Community Services, and Metro Regional Affordable Housing Bonds.
No County General Funds are involved.
Previous Board
Action/Review

Performance
Clackamas
Counsel Review
Contact Person

• Approved accepting Affordable Housing Construction Excise Tax Grant funding
from the City of Milwaukie, June 29, 2023.
• Approved the HACC-Related Northwest Exclusive Negotiation Agreement for
redevelopment of Hillside Park, September 29, 2022.
• Approved the Authority’s submittal of the Section 18 Disposition application to
HUD, August 15, 2021.
• Approved the Hillside Park Master Plan Design Concept, October 3, 2019.
• Approved pre-development loan for Phase D/E and Shortstack Lot G, June 12,
2025.
Safe, Secure, and Livable Communities and Strong Infrastructure.
Yes - Allison Schwartzman,
Foster Garvey
Devin Ellin

Procurement Review

NA

Contact Phone

971-227-0472

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY: The Housing Authority of Clackamas County (HACC), a component unit within
the Housing and Community Development Division of the Health, Housing, and Human Services
Department, is requesting approval of a resolution for additional activities involved in continuing the
redevelopment of the Hillside Park property.
In June 2025, HACC received Board Authorization for a pre-development loan to finance pre-development
costs incurred for Lots D and E of the Hillside Park Redevelopment Project. Lots D and E of the Hillside
Park Redevelopment will comprise approximately 160 units in four buildings, consisting of three and four
stories. The buildings will be clustered around open spaces and resident parking, with new public streets
bisecting the master plan site and connecting new infrastructure throughout the campus.
Related NW has submitted a funding application to Oregon Housing
and Community Services for tax credit allocation and gap funding
and has been scheduled by OHCS for a June 2026 closing to begin
construction on the project.
Metro has provided Concept
Endorsement for HACC to allocate at least $5.5 million in Metro
Housing Bond funding for the project. Related NW has formed a tax
credit partnership that will own the newly constructed buildings. The
partnership will lease the land from HACC through a capitalized
ground lease.

Healthy Families. Strong Communities.

For Filing Use Only

2051 Kaen Road, Oregon City, OR 97045 • Phone (503) 650-5697 • Fax (503) 655-8677
www.clackamas.us

Through this resolution, the Authority requests authorization for Authorized Officers to negotiate and execute
a Development Agreement pertaining to the development of Buildings D & E, including related infrastructure
and other improvements. Activities will include petitioning the City of Milwaukie for a Street Vacation
necessary for redevelopment and applying to the City of Milwaukie for a Phase II Replat to accommodate
the new buildings, street access, and associated infrastructure for the new development.
RECOMMENDATION: Staff respectfully request that the Housing Authority Board approve resolution (2001)
and authorize Chair Roberts or his designee to sign on behalf of the Housing Authority.
Respectfully submitted,
Mary Rumbaugh
Director of Health, Housing, and Human Services
ATTACHMENTS: Authorization Resolution

BEFORE THE BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS
OF THE HOUSING AUTHORITY OF CLACKAMAS COUNTY
In the Matter of Authorizing Actions in Connection
with the Hillside Park Redevelopment Project,
Including Execution of a Development Agreement
pertaining to Buildings D/E, Street Vacations, and a
Replat of Phase II Property

RESOLUTION NO. 2001
Page 1 of 3

BE IT RESOLVED BY THE BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS OF THE HOUSING AUTHORITY
CLACKAMAS COUNTY as follows:

Section 1.
Recitals and Findings. The Board of Commissioners (the “Board”) of the Housing
Authority of Clackamas County (the “Authority”) finds and determines:
Statutory Authorization. The Authority is a public body corporate and politic of the State
(a)
of Oregon and a housing authority authorized by the Housing Authorities Law (ORS 456.005 to 456.235)
to, among other things, to: (i) “[p]repare, carry out, acquire, lease and operate housing projects” (ORS
456.125(5)) and [p]rovide for the construction, reconstruction, improvement, alteration or repair of any
housing project or any part thereof” (ORS 456.125(6)); (ii)“lease or rent any housing, land, buildings,
structures or facilities embraced in any housing project and, subject to the limitations of the Housing
Authorities Law, to establish and revise the rents or charges therefor” (ORS 456.120(8)); (iii) “sell,
mortgage, lease, rent, transfer, assign, pledge or otherwise dispose of any real property or any interest
therein” (ORS 456.120(11)); (iv) finance, develop, own, operate or manage a mixed income housing
project” if certain requirements are met (ORS 456.120(19), ORS 456.153); (v) “make and execute
contracts and other instruments necessary or convenient to the exercise of the powers of the
authority” (ORS 456.120(4)); and (vi) “delegate to one or more of its agents or employees such powers
or duties as it deems proper” (ORS 456.135). As used in the Housing Authorities Law, “housing project”
includes any work or undertaking “[t]o provide decent, safe and sanitary urban or rural housing for
persons or families of lower income” which may include “buildings, land, equipment, facilities and
other real or personal property for necessary, convenient or desirable appurtenances” (ORS
456.065(2)), “mixed income housing” means “a housing project that houses tenants with a mixture of
income levels, including those not of lower income, for the purposes of: (a) [r]educing the rents for
tenants whose incomes are no greater than 80 percent of the area median income; and (b) [m]eeting
the housing needs of tenants” (ORS 456.055(10)), and “person of lower income” or “family of lower
income” means a person or a family residing in the State of Oregon “whose income is not greater than
80 percent of area median income, adjusted for family size” (ORS 456.055(14)).

(b)

The Project. The Authority is currently redeveloping the Authority’s Hillside Park Project
(the “Project”). Phase I of the Project includes Buildings A/B and C, construction of which is underway.
Phase I of the Project is expected to also include Buildings D and E (“Buildings D/E”), to include
approximately 160 units of housing and related infrastructure and other improvements. Phase II of the
Project is expected to include the construction of up to 225 new units.

(c)

Street Vacation. In connection with the Project, the Authority expects to petition the City
of Milwaukie to vacate portions of S.E. Hillside Court, A Street, B Street and C Street (the “Street
Vacation”) to allow for realignment of public streets and development of the Project.

(d)
Phase II Replat. Development of Phase II of the Project requires property boundary
changes, and the Authority expects to apply to the City of Milwaukie for a replat of certain of the Hillside
Property (the “Phase II Replat”).
HACC Resolution # 2001 – Hillside Park Development Agreement, Street Vacation, Replat – Page 1 of 3

FG: 104166660.1

Section 2.

Development Agreement Documents. The Board authorizes the Executive
Director of the Authority, the Director of Housing Development of the Authority, and the Chair of the
Board of Commissioners of the Authority (each, an “Authorized Officer” and collectively, the “Authorized
Officers”), and each of them acting alone, to negotiate and approve a Development Agreement with
Related/Hillside Park Buildings D & E Development Co., LLC, pertaining to the development of Buildings
D/E and related infrastructure and other improvements (the “Development Agreement”). The Authorized
Officers, and each of them acting alone, are authorized to execute the Development Agreement and
any other documents reasonably required to be executed in connection with the Development
Agreement (collectively, the “Development Agreement Documents”) on behalf of the Authority. The
execution of the Development Agreement Documents by any Authorized Officer shall be conclusive
evidence of approval by the Authority of the terms set forth therein.

Section 3.
Street Vacation. The Authority is authorized to petition the City of Milwaukie for
the Street Vacation. The Authorized Officers, and each of them acting alone, are authorized to execute
an Application for Street Vacation, a Petition for Street Vacation, a Consent to Street Vacation, and any
other documents reasonably required to be executed in connection with the Street Vacation (collectively,
the “Street Vacation Documents”). The execution of the Street Vacation Documents by any Authorized
Officer shall be conclusive evidence of approval by the Authority of the terms set forth therein.
Section 4.

Phase II Replat. The Authority is authorized to apply to the City of Milwaukie for
the Phase II Replat. The Authorized Officers, and each of them acting alone, are authorized to execute
all documents reasonably required to be executed in connection with the Phase II Replat (collectively,
the “Phase II Replat Documents” and collectively with the Development Agreement Documents and the
Street Vacation Documents, the “Documents”). The execution of the Phase II Replat Documents by any
Authorized Officer shall be conclusive evidence of approval by the Authority of the terms set forth therein.

Section 5.
Supplemental Authorization. The Authorized Officers, and each of them acting
alone, are authorized on behalf of the Authority to: (i) determine in their discretion, prior to the execution
of the applicable Document, whether to proceed with the element of the Project to which such Document
pertains, (ii) determine that any document authorized by this resolution is, at the time such document
otherwise would be executed, no longer necessary or desirable and, based on such determination,
cause the Authority not to execute or deliver such document; (iii) execute and deliver and, if applicable,
file (or cause to be delivered and/or filed) any government forms, affidavits, certificates, letters,
documents, agreements, and instruments that such officer determines to be necessary or advisable to
give effect to this resolution and to consummate the transactions contemplated herein; and (iv) cause
the Authority to expend such funds as are necessary to pay for all filing fees, application fees, registration
fees, and other costs relating to the actions authorized by this resolution.
Section 6.
Execution of Duties and Obligations. The Board authorizes and directs the
Authority’s Executive Director to cause the Authority to fulfill the Authority’s duties and obligations under
the Documents.
Section 7.
Acting Officers Authorized. Any action authorized or directed by this resolution to
be taken by the Executive Director of the Authority, may in the Executive Director’s absence be taken
by a duly authorized acting Deputy Director of the Authority or any other employee of the Authority that
has been designated by the Executive Director or the Board to act in the Executive Director’s absence.
Any action authorized or directed by this resolution to be taken by the Chair of the Board may, in the
absence of such person, be taken by the duly authorized acting Chair of the Board.
Section 8.
Changes to Titles or Parties. While the titles of and parties to the Development
Agreement Documents described herein may change, no change to such titles or parties shall affect the
HACC Resolution # 2001– Hillside Park Development Agreement, Street Vacation, Replat – Page 2 of 3

FG: 104166660.1

authority conferred by this resolution to execute, deliver, file (if required), enforce and perform the
documents in their final form.

Section 9.
Ratification and Confirmation. All actions of the Authority and its officers prior to
the date hereof and consistent with the terms of this resolution are ratified and confirmed.
Section 10. Severability. If any provision in this resolution is declared by any court of
competent jurisdiction to be contrary to law, then such provision shall be null and void and shall be
deemed separable from the remaining provisions of this resolution and shall in no way affect the validity
of the other provision of this resolution.
Section 11. Effective Date. This resolution shall be in full force and effect from and after its
adoption and approval.
Dated this _____ DAY OF _________, 2025.
BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS OF THE
HOUSING AUTHORITY OF CLACKAMAS COUNTY

Chair

Secretary

HACC Resolution # 2001 – Hillside Park Development Agreement, Street Vacation, Replat – Page 3 of 3
FG: 104166660.1

