Oregon Housing and Community Services : ORCA DEI Agreement : Oregon Centralized Application : State of Oregon Skip to main content An official website of the State of Oregon Learn How you know » (how to identify a Oregon.gov website) An official website of the State of Oregon » Translate this site into other Languages Toggle Main Menu Main Navigation About OHCS Housing Stability Council Programs Procurement Career Opportunities Contact Us News & Updates Need Help Now? Proposed Federal Budgets for Housing and Homelessness Search this site Submit close Back to Home Oregon Centralized Application You are here: Oregon Housing and Community Services Rental Housing Housing Development Oregon Centralized Application ORCA DEI Agreement ORCA DEI Agreement Site Navigation Housing Development Oregon Centralized Application (ORCA) How to apply Get Help with ORCA ORCA’s Affordable Housing Pipeline ORCA Outcomes and Key Impacts Project owners, developers, and developer consultants must complete a short survey to select four out of 15 diversity, equity, and inclusion (DEI) goals. Applicants must submit a DEI Agreement during Impact Assessment. Partners will self-report progress on their goals annually by renewing their agreement. The registry exists independently from projects submitted through the Oregon Centralized Application process. Global Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion Benchmarks (GDEIB) Derived from insights from a distinguished panel of 112 experts, the Global Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion Benchmarks (GDEIB) comprise 275 benchmarks that encapsulate proven strategies for elevating organizational performance standards across 15 distinct categories and four groups. The GDEIB document can be found here: Global Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion Benchmarks. These groups include: The Foundation Group: Centered on strategic development, this group aligns DEI vision with organizational objectives, reinforcing leadership accountability and support structures. The Internal Group: Addressing internal policies and processes, this group focuses on recruitment, advancement, compensation, performance management, and work-life balance initiatives. The External Group: Emphasizing engagement with communities and stakeholders, this group underscores the importance of external interactions in DEI endeavors. The Bridging Group: Serving as a cohesive link, this group integrates efforts across all domains, recognizing the interconnectedness of various DEI initiatives. Effective use of the GDEIB requires organizations to achieve a minimum rating of level three out of five for each benchmark. Not all groups or benchmarks align with every organization, so they should be customized to meet your organization's needs. The five-tiered rating system encompasses: Level One - Inactive: No DEI work has begun; DEI is not part of the institutional mission, vision, and goals. Level Two - Reactive: A compliance mindset; actions are taken primarily to comply with relevant laws and social pressures. Level Three - Proactive: A clear awareness of the value of DEI; starting to implement DEI systemically where DEI strategies, practices, and staff are becoming competent. This level is required and expected of all organizations. Level Four - Progressive: Implementing DEI systemically and showing improved results and outcomes beyond what is required or expected. DEI practices are being embedded into the organization's culture, and all organizational structures support DEI with regular communication and robust learning opportunities. Level Five - Best Practices: Demonstrating current global best practices in DEI, exemplary DEI strategies are integral and deeply embedded in the organization. These include proactive and responsive actions to address DEI challenges, and a comprehensive approach to inclusion, equity, and racial justice in all systems and with all internal and external stakeholders. The GDEIB is a versatile resource for various DEI-related activities, including: Vision and strategy development Organizational assessment Stakeholder engagement Progress measurement Recruitment guidance Knowledge sharing It can be used by organizations with or without DEI personnel, with feedback solicited as informed opinions. Formal evaluations should encompass quantitative and qualitative assessments, focusing on departmental performance rather than overarching organizational rankings. Footer Address North Mall Office Building 725 Summer Street NE, Suite B Salem, OR 97301-1266 We accept visitors by appointment only. Call 800-453-5511 for scheduling. Directions to our main office Salem Capitol Mall Map Links Career Opportunities Public Records Request Speaker Request Form Website Feedback Email Contact Us 800-453-5511 Fax 503-986-2020 General Inquiries Email Media Requests Email OHCS Ombuds Inquiry About Oregon Back to Top × How to recognize an official Oregon website .gov Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock icon ( ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Only share sensitive information on official, secure websites. Close Hidden Submit Your browser is out-of-date! It has known security flaws and may not display all features of this and other websites. Learn how ×