HMIS Data Standards - HUD Exchange Skip to main content NEED HOUSING ASSISTANCE? Email Updates Log In HUD Exchange Search Toggle navigation Search Form title Search Log In Programs Programs & Related Topics CDBG Program Continuum of Care Program Community Project Funding Emergency Solutions Grants Program Environmental Review Fair Housing and Civil Rights HOME Program HOPWA Program Housing Counseling Program Public Housing and Voucher Programs DRGR Log In e-snap s Log In Housing Counseling System Log In IDIS Log In Sage Log In View All Programs & Related Topics Resources Resource Library Explore featured publications and browse regulations, policy guidance, toolkits, and other resources. FAQ Collections Find answers to frequently asked questions. Trainings Upcoming Training Register for upcoming training, webinars, conferences, and more. Learning Pathways Explore collections of guided learning opportunities on a variety of topics. On-Demand Training Learn through self-paced online trainings, recorded webinars, and more. View All Trainings Program Support Ask a Question Ask a basic policy or reporting system question. Request In-Depth Assistance Request in-depth assistance with implementing a HUD-funded program. View All Program Support Grantees Find a Grantee Page Search for a specific grantee and view its awards, contact information, and reports, and more. Awards & Allocations Find award and allocation amounts for grantees by year, program, and state. Contact Information Find point of contact information for HUD's grantees. Reports & Plans Browse the library of grantee reports and plans, organized by program. Project Descriptions Learn about what HUD grantees are doing across the nation. Find Information About HUD Grantees News Home Log-in Programs Resources Resource Library FAQ Collections Trainings Upcoming Training Learning Pathways On-Demand Training Program Support Ask a Question Request In-Depth Assistance Grantees Find a Grantee Awards and Allocations Contact Information Reports & Plans Project Descriptions News Email Updates Need Housing Assistance? Home Resources HMIS Data Standards Guides and Training Manuals HUD Guidance HMIS Data Standards Print ShareThis Date Published: December 2025 Description HMIS data standards are established by HUD, the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), and the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) to allow for standardized data collection across systems about individuals and families experiencing homelessness. The HMIS Data Dictionary and the HMIS Data Standards Manual are the documentation of requirements for the programming and use of all HMIS and comparable database software. The HMIS Data Standards Manual supports data collection and reporting efforts of HMIS Leads/System Administrators, Continuums of Care (CoCs), and HMIS end users to help them understand the data elements that are required in HMIS to meet participation and reporting requirements established by HUD and the federal partners. The HMIS Data Dictionary is designed for HMIS vendors and HMIS Leads/System Administrators to identify the data elements required in HMIS and understand the function and specific use of each element by the appropriate federal partner. The Interactive HMIS Data Standards Tool is an interactive, web-based combination of the guidance from both the HMIS Data Manual and the HMIS Data Dictionary. Note: The FY 2026 HMIS Data Standards are effective as of October 1, 2025 . FY 2026 Resource Links FY 2026 Interactive HMIS Data Standards Tool - Updated October 2025 FY 2026 HMIS Data Dictionary (PDF) - Coming Soon FY 2026 HMIS Data Standards Manual (PDF) FY 2026 HMIS Mapping Instructions (XLSX) Data Collection Requirements for Transition to FY 2026 Data Standards (PDF) FY 2026 Zip Code to Geography Crosswalk (XLSX) Federal Partner Participation (HTML) - Coming Soon Tags: CoC ESG HMIS Author Organization HUD TA Providers Resource Approver HUD Approved HUD EXCHANGE Program delivery support for HUD's local partners Connect with Us HUD.gov No Fear Act FOIA Privacy Accessibility Web Policies Contact Us © 2025 U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. All Rights Reserved. Website Disclaimer Note: This material is based upon work supported by funding under an award with the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. The substance and findings of the work are dedicated to the public. Neither the United States Government, nor any of its employees, makes any warranty, express or implied, or assumes any legal liability or responsibility for the accuracy, completeness, or usefulness of any information, apparatus, product, or process disclosed, or represents that its use would not infringe privately-owned rights. Reference herein to any specific commercial product, process, or service by trade name, trademark, manufacturer, or otherwise does not necessarily constitute or imply its endorsement, recommendation, or favoring by the U.S. Government or any agency thereof. Opinions expressed on the HUD Exchange are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the official position of, or a position that is endorsed by, HUD or by any HUD program. Login