UNITED STATES
Department of Housing and Urban Development

ANNUAL CONTRIBUTIONS CONTRACT

Project-based Section 8 Contract Administration


1       DEFINITIONS

        For definitions of terms related to determination of PHA administrative fees,
        see also § 4.1 of Exhibit A of the ACC.

        ACC. Annual Contributions Contract.              This contract between HUD and
        the PHA.

        ACCEPTABLE QUALITY LEVEL (AQL). The required performance level
        for each IBPS task. The AQL for each IBPS task is specified in the
        performance requirements summary (PRS).

        ADMINISTRATIVE FEE. The monthly fee HUD pays the PHA for each
        covered unit under HAP contract on the first day of the month. The
        administrative fee (per unit per month) is the total of the basic fee plus the
        incentive fee.

        BASIC FEE.       The sum of the earned IBPS fees for a covered unit.       HUD
        pays the basic fee (per unit per month) to the PHA for a covered unit under
        HAP contract on the first day of the month during the ACC term.

        Exhibit E of the ACC specifies the amount of the maximum basic fee per
        unit per month for each FMR area in the PHA service area. HUD has
        allocated each task to be performed (IBPS task) a certain percentage of the
        maximum basic fee amount (IBPS percentage). The performance
        requirements summary (PRS) (see § 4.7 of Exhibit A of the ACC) states
        the IBPS percentage for each IBPS task.

        HUD may reduce the basic fee earned if HUD determines that PHA
        performance of IBPS tasks is below the minimum acceptable quality level
        (AQL). The basic fee earned is reduced by subtracting the disincentive
        deduction for an IBPS task from the IBPS fee.




Annual Contributions Contract:   Project-based Section 8 Contract Administration    (6/00)

                                               Page 1
        BUDGET AUTHORITY. The maximum amount of funds available for
        payment to the PHA for each HAP contract. Budget authority is
        authorized and appropriated by the Congress. The amount of budget
        authority for each HAP contract is listed on Exhibit C.

        COVERED UNITS. Section 8 assisted units under HAP contracts
        assigned to the PHA for contract administration under the ACC during the
        ACC term. Covered units are listed on Exhibit B. (Covered units are
        added by HUD notice to the PHA.)

        DISINCENTIVE DEDUCTION.                A deduction from the per unit per month
        IBPS fee.    For each IBPS task, the disincentive deduction equals the
        maximum IBPS fee times the disincentive deduction percentage. HUD
        deducts this amount for PHA performance of an IBPS task that fails to meet
        the acceptable quality level.       Exhibit A of the ACC specifies the
        performance standard for assessing a disincentive deduction for
        performance of an IBPS task.          (During the term of the ACC, HUD may
        amend the performance standard or the disincentive deduction percentage
        by HUD notice to the PHA.)

        DISINCENTIVE DEDUCTION PERCENTAGE. A percentage used to
        calculate the amount of a disincentive deduction from the IBPS fee. The
        disincentive deduction percentage for each IBPS task is specified in the
        performance requirements summary (PRS).

        EARNED BASIC FEE. The amount of the basic fee earned by the PHA per
        unit per month (in an FMR area). The earned basic fee equals the sum of
        the earned IBPS fees for the IBPS tasks.

        EARNED       IBPS FEE.      The amount of the IBPS fee earned by the PHA per
        unit per month. The earned IBPS fee equals the maximum IBPS fee minus
        any disincentive deduction.

        EARNED       INCENTIVE FEE.         The amount of an incentive fee earned by the
        PHA.

        FISCAL YEAR. The PHA fiscal year.                Exhibit   C states the last month and
        day of the PHA fiscal year.

        FMR.     Fair Market Rent. HUD establishes an FMR by publication in the
        Federal Register in accordance with Section 8.

        FMR    AREA.     The area for which       HUD    has established an FMR.




Annual Contributions Contract:   Project-based Section 8 Contract Administration        (6/00)

                                               Page 2
        FUNDING INCREMENT.          Each commitment of funding (budget authority)
        by HUD to the PHA for a HAP contract under the ACC. The funding
        increments are listed on Exhibit C.

        HAP CONTRACT.            A Section 8 Housing Assistance Payments Contract.

        HUD. The United States Department of Housing and Urban
        Development.

        IBPS.    Incentive-based Performance Standards.

        IBPS FEE. The maximum fee per unit per month for performance of an
        IBPS task listed in the PRS. The IBPS fee for an IBPS task equals the
        maximum basic fee times the IBPS percentage.

        IBPS PERCENTAGE. The percentage of the maximum basic fee for PHA
        performance of each of the IBPS tasks. The IBPS percentage times the
        maximum basic fee is the maximum IBPS fee per unit per month for each
        IBPS task. The earned IBPS fee may be reduced by disincentive
        deductions for PHA performance of an IBPS task that falls below the
        acceptable quality level.

        IBPS TASK.       Any of the contract administration core tasks listed in the
        performance requirements summary (PRS). HUD measures the PHA’s
        performance of each IBPS task to determine the amount of the PHA’s
        earned basic fee or earned incentive fee for each covered unit.

        INCENTIVE BASED PERFORMANCE STANDARDS (IBPS):                              A
        description of specific elements of each core task. HUD will measure the
        PHA’s performance of each such element as the performance standard to
        determine the amount of PHA’s earned administrative fees (including
        earned basic fees and earned incentive fees).

        INCENTIVE FEE. A per unit per month administrative fee in addition to
        the basic fee. The incentive fee is paid for PHA performance of an IBPS
        task that exceeds the acceptable quality level for the IBPS task. HUD
        determines the amount of the incentive fees earned. The total of
        incentive fees earned in each quarter is paid quarterly (at the end of the
        quarter). The total of incentive fees earned for each month of the ACC
        term may not exceed the amount of the incentive fee pool for the month.




Annual Contributions Contract:   Project-based Section 8 Contract Administration       (6/00)

                                               Page 3
        INCENTIVE FEE PERCENTAGE. The percentage of the incentive fee pool
        for PHA performance of an IBPS task that exceeds the acceptable quality
        level. Column E of the performance requirements summary (PRS) (see
        Exhibit A) specifies the incentive fee percentage, and the performance
        standard for awarding the incentive fee for performance of the task.

        INCENTIVE FEE POOL.              The maximum        amount of incentive fees that
        may be earned by the PHA for each month of the ACC term.                     (See fee
        calculation procedure at § 4.8 of Exhibit A.)

        MAXIMUM BASIC FEE. The amount of the maximum basic fee per unit
        per month for each FMR area in the PHA service area. The amount of the
        maximum basic fee for each FMR area in the service area (and for each
        year of the ACC term) is specified in Exhibit E of the ACC.

        MAXIMUM        IBPS FEE.      The maximum basic fee times the IBPS percentage
        (before any disincentive deduction).

        PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS SUMMARY (PRS). § 4.7 of Exhibit A
        of the ACC. (HUD may amend the PRS during the term of the ACC by
        HUD notice to the PHA.)

        PHA.       Public Housing Agency.

        PORTFOLIO REENGINEERING.                    FHA-insured multifamily housing
        mortgage and housing assistance restructuring                of an eligible multifamily
        project.

        PROGRAM EXPENDITURES. Amounts which may be charged against
        program receipts in accordance with the ACC and HUD requirements
        (including housing assistance payments and administrative fees).

        PROGRAM PROPERTY. Program receipts, including funds held by a
        depository institution, and PHA rights or interests under a HAP contract
        for covered units.

        PROGRAM RECEIPTS. Amounts paid by HUD to the PHA under the
        ACC, and any other amounts received by the PHA in connection with
        administration of the Section 8 program under the ACC.




Annual Contributions Contract:   Project-based Section 8 Contract Administration           (6/00)

                                               Page 4
        PROJECT RESERVE. An unfunded account established by HUD for a
        HAP contract from amounts by which the amount of budget authority
        available for payment under the HAP contract during the owner's fiscal
        year as determined by HUD exceeds the amount actually approved and
        paid by HUD.       HUD    may use this account as the source for additional
        payments under the program.

        PUBLIC HOUSING AGENCY (PHA). The agency that has entered the
        ACC with HUD. Such agency is a “public housing agency” as defined in
        Section 3 of the United States Housing Act of 1937 (42 U.S.C.
        1437a(b)(6)).

        SECTION 8. Section 8 of the United States Housing Act of 1937 (42
        U.S.C. 1437f).

        SERVICE AREA.            The area where the PHA provides contract
        administration services under the ACC.             The PHA service area is
        described in Exhibit D of the ACC.

        STATEMENT         OF WORK        (SOW).     The description of core contract
        administration tasks to be performed by the PHA under the ACC (Section
        3 of Exhibit A).

2       ACC

        a        Purpose

                 (1)     This ACC is a contract between the PHA and HUD.               The
                         ACC was awarded by HUD pursuant to a proposal submitted
                         in response to HUD’s published Request for Proposals for
                         PHAs to provide contract administration services for units
                         receiving project-based Section 8 housing assistance (64
                         Federal Register 27360 (5/19/99), amendment no. 1 (8/2/99)
                         and amendment no. 2 (11/15/99)) .

                 (2)     Under Section 8 of the United States Housing Act of 1937
                         (42 U.S.C. 1437f), HUD is authorized to enter into an annual
                         contributions contract with a PHA that enters a HAP contract
                         with an owner to pay housing assistance payments for
                         housing units occupied by eligible families, including         a HAP
                         contract assigned to the PHA by HUD for contract
                         administration under the ACC. Under this ACC,             the PHA will
                         provide contract administration services for dwelling units in
                         the service area receiving project-based assistance under
                         Section 8.


Annual Contributions Contract:   Project-based Section 8 Contract Administration         (6/00)

                                               Page 5
        b        Exhibits

                This ACC includes the following exhibits:

                 Exhibit A:       PHA Contract Administration Responsibilities

                 Exhibit B:       Covered Units

                 Exhibit C:       Funding

                 Exhibit D:       Service Area

                 Exhibit E:       PHA Administrative         Fees

        C        HUD revision of ACC exhibits

                 (1)     HUD     may amend      Exhibit B:

                                  To add covered units.

                                  To withdraw covered         units for which the HAP   contract
                                  has expired or been terminated.

                                  To withdraw covered units in connection with portfolio
                                  reengineering.

                 (2)     HUD may amend           Exhibit C:

                                  To add a funding increment, or

                                  To remove a funding increment for which the HAP
                                  contract has expired or been terminated

                                  To remove a funding increment in connection with
                                  portfolio reengineering.

                 (3)   | HUD may amend Exhibit B or Exhibit C of the ACC by giving
                         the PHA written notice of the revised exhibit. The         HUD
                         notice constitutes an amendment of the ACC.

        d       ACC term

                 (1)   | The PHA shall provide contract administration services for
                         the covered units during the ACC term.




Annual Contributions Contract:   Project-based Section 8 Contract Administration          (6/00)

                                               Page 6
                 (2)     The initial term of the ACC shall be thirty-six calendar
                         months commencing on the first day of the month of HUD’s
                         first assignment to the PHA of existing HAP contracts for
                         covered units for contract administration pursuant to the
                         ACC. (The same ACC term shall apply for all covered units,
                         whether such covered units are included in the first HUD
                         assignment of covered units, or are added subsequently.)

                 (3)     HUD may unilaterally elect to renew the ACC for up to two
                         additional twelve month renewal terms after the initial term.
                         Each such renewal shall be at HUD’s sole discretion, and
                         shall be exercised by written notice to the PHA of HUD’s
                         election to renew. HUD shall give such renewal notice at
                         least three calendar months before the end of the expiring
                         term (the initial term and the first twelve month renewal term).

                 (4)   | The PHA may unilaterally elect to terminate the ACC term at
                         the end of the last month of the initial ACC term, or at the
                         end of any month of the first or second twelve month
                         renewal term, if the PHA gives HUD written notice of the
                         PHA’s election to terminate the ACC term at least twelve
                         calendar months before termination.

3       PHA CONTRACT ADMINISTRATION SERVICES

        a        Coverage

                 (1)     The PHA shall enter into or assume HAP contracts with
                         owners of covered units to make housing assistance
                         payments to the owners of such units during the HAP
                         contract term.

                 (2)   | During the ACC term, the PHA shall provide contract
                         administration services for covered units in the service area.

                 (3)     HUD will assign to the PHA existing HAP contracts for
                         covered units. The PHA agrees to accept all such
                         assignments by HUD for the purpose of administering such
                         HAP contracts in accordance with the ACC during the ACC
                         term. Upon assignment by HUD, the PHA immediately and
                         automatically assumes, during the ACC term, the contractual
                         rights and responsibilities of HUD pursuant to such HAP
                         contracts for covered units in accordance with the ACC and
                         HUD     requirements.




Annual Contributions Contract:   Project-based Section 8 Contract Administration    (6/00)

                                               Page 7
        b        PHA services

                 (1)     The PHA shall perform all PHA responsibilities under the
                         ACC, in accordance         with   applicable provisions of:

                                  The United States Housing Act of 1937 (42 U.S.C.
                                  1437 et seq.) and other Federal laws. Including any
                                  amendments or changes in the law.

                                  HUD regulations and other requirements, including
                                  any amendments or changes in HUD requirements.

                                  The ACC.

                                  The HUD-approved proposal submitted in response
                                  to the HUD Request for Proposals, and any HUD-
                                  approved modifications of the proposal. (However, if
                                  any provision of the proposal conflicts with the law,
                                  the ACC or any HUD regulation or other requirement,
                                  the law, ACC or HUD requirement will govern.)

                 (2)   | The PHA shall perform all the following core tasks as
                         described in the Statement of Work.

                                  Conduct management and occupancy reviews.

                                  Adjust contract rents.

                                  Process HAP contract terminations or expirations.

                                  Pay monthly vouchers from Section 8 owners.

                                  Respond to health and safety issues.

                                  Submit Section 8 budgets, requisitions, revisions and
                                  year-end statements.

                                  Submit audits of the PHA’s financial condition.

                                  Renew     HAP   contracts.

                                  Report on PHA operating plans and progress.

                                  Follow up on results of physical inspections of
                                  projects with covered units.



Annual Contributions Contract:   Project-based Section 8 Contract Administration       (6/00)

                                               Page 8
                 (3)     The PHA shall perform all core tasks in accordance with the
                         SOW core task descriptions.

                  (4)    |The PHA shall require owners to comply with HUD
                         requirements for occupancy of covered units, including
                         requirements governing eligibility for assistance, resident
                         contribution to rent, and examinations and reexaminations of
                         family income.

                 (5)     The PHA shall determine the amount of housing assistance
                         payments to owners in accordance with the terms of the
                         HAP contracts and HUD requirements.               The PHA shall pay
                         owners the amount of housing assistance payments due to
                         owners under such HAP contracts from the amount paid to
                         the PHA by HUD for this purpose.

                  (6)    |The PHA shall take prompt and vigorous action, to HUD’s
                         satisfaction, and as required or directed by HUD, to enforce
                         owner compliance with the terms of HAP contracts for
                         covered units. Such actions include requiring actions by the
                         owner to cure a default, termination, or abatement or other
                         reduction of housing assistance payments, termination of
                         the HAP contract, or recovery of overpayments. However,
                         the PHA may not terminate a HAP contract without HUD’s
                         prior written consent.

4       FEES AND PAYMENTS

        a        HUD payments

                 (1)     HUD will make payments to the PHA for covered units in
                         accordance with HUD requirements.

                 (2)     For each PHA fiscal year, HUD will pay the PHA the amount
                         approved by HUD to cover:

                         e        Housing assistance payments by the PHA to owners
                                  of covered units.

                         °        PHA fees for contract administration of covered        units.




Annual Contributions Contract:   Project-based Section 8 Contract Administration        (6/00)

                                               Page 9
                 (3)    | The amount approved and paid by HUD for housing
                          assistance payments shall be sufficient for timely payment
                          by the PHA to owners of the amount of housing assistance
                          payments due to the owners under HAP contracts for
                          covered units. If the PHA is unable to make timely payment
                          to owners because of HUD delay in paying the PHA the
                          amount sufficient for such payment by the PHA to the
                          owners (and such HUD delay is not caused by the PHA’s
                          action or failure to act), the PHA’s failure to make timely
                          payment to owners shall not be a default by the PHA under
                          the ACC.

                 (4)    | The amount of the HUD payment may be reduced, as deter-
                          mined by HUD, by the amount of program receipts (Such as
                          interest income) other than the HUD payment.



                  (1)     The PHA earns an administrative fee for each covered unit
                          under HAP contract on the first day of the month. The
                          monthly administrative fee is composed of the basic fee and
                          the incentive fee.

                 (2)      The amount of earned administrative fees is determined in
                          accordance with Exhibit A and Exhibit E.

                 (3)    | Basic fees earned by the PHA shall be paid monthly.
                          Incentive fees earned by the PHA shall be paid quarterly.
                          Payment of administrative fees is subject to availability of
                          appropriated funds.

                 (4)      lf HUD determines that the PHA has performed below the
                          minimum acceptable quality level in any month, HUD may
                          reduce the amount of the basic fee per unit per month by
                          subtracting the amount of the disincentive deductions
                          determined by HUD in accordance with Exhibit A.

                 (5)      lf HUD determines that the PHA has performed above the
                          minimum acceptable quality level, HUD may award an
                          incentive fee per unit per month, in addition to the basic fee,
                          in the amount determined by HUD in accordance with Exhibit
                          A. The total of earned incentive fees for each month, as
                          determined by HUD, shall not exceed the amount of the
                          incentive fee pool for such month.




Annual Contributions Contract:   Project-based Section 8 Contract Administration    (6/00)

                                              Page 10
                  (6)     HUD will not pay an administrative fee for any covered units
                          for which the HAP contract has expired or been terminated.

                 (7)      lf HUD determines that the PHA has failed to comply with
                          any obligations under the ACC, HUD may reduce the
                          amount of any administrative fee as otherwise determined
                          by HUD in accordance with Exhibit A if HUD has given the
                          PHA reasonable notice of such failure, and reasonable
                          opportunity to cure such failure prior to such reduction.     In
                          determining the length of such HUD notice and the extent or
                          nature of such opportunity to cure, HUD shall have
                          discretion to consider the circumstances of the case,
                          including such factors as prior failure or pattern of failure by
                          the PHA to comply with PHA contract administration
                          obligations under the ACC, and the seriousness of such
                          failures.

fs)     LIMIT ON PAYMENTS FOR FUNDING INCREMENT

        The total amount of HUD payments to the PHA for any funding increment
        over the increment term shall not exceed the amount of budget authority
        for the funding increment.

6       REDUCTION OF AMOUNT PAYABLE BY HUD

        a       lf HUD determines that the PHA has committed any default under
                the ACC, HUD may reduce to an amount determined by HUD:

                 (1)    | The amount of the HUD payment to the PHA for any funding
                          increment.

                 (2)    | The budget authority for any funding increment.

        b        HUD shall give the PHA written notice of the reduction.

        Cc      If HUD reduces the amount of the HUD payment below the
                amount necessary to cover housing assistance payments to
                owners of covered units, the PHA has no obligation to pay housing
                assistance payments to owners that exceed the amount paid to the
                 PHA by HUD for this purpose.

        d       The HUD notice may include a revision of the funding exhibit
                (Exhibit C) that reduces the amount of budget authority for a
                funding increment. The notice of a revised funding exhibit, or of




Annual Contributions Contract:   Project-based Section 8 Contract Administration      (6/00)

                                              Page 11
                 revisions to the funding exhibit constitutes an amendment of the
                ACC.

7       PROJECT RESERVE

        HUD may establish and maintain a project reserve account for a HAP
        contract administered by the PHA under the ACC. The amount in the
        project reserve is determined by HUD. The project reserve may be used
        by HUD to pay any portion of the payment approved by HUD for a fiscal
        year.

8       BUDGET AND REQUISITION FOR PAYMENT

        a        For each fiscal year, the PHA shall submit to HUD an estimate of
                the HUD payments for the program and any supporting data
                required by HUD. The budget estimate and supporting data shall
                be submitted at such time and in such form as HUD may require,
                and are subject to HUD approval and revision.

        b       The PHA shall requisition periodic payments on account of each
                 annual HUD payment to the PHA.              Each requisition shall be in the
                form prescribed by HUD. Each requisition shall include certification
                that housing assistance payments have only been paid to owners
                in accordance with HAP contracts for covered units, and in
                accordance with HUD requirements.

        Cc      If HUD determines that payments by HUD to the PHA for a fiscal
                year exceed the amount of the annual payment approved by HUD
                in the budget for the fiscal year, the excess shall be applied as
                determined by HUD. Such applications determined by HUD may
                include, but are not limited to, application of the excess payment
                against the amount of the annual payment for a subsequent fiscal
                year. The PHA shall take any actions required by HUD respecting
                the excess payment, and shall, upon demand by HUD, promptly
                remit the excess payment to HUD.

9       FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT

        a        Use of program receipts

                 (1)   | The PHA shall use program receipts in compliance with the
                         U.S. Housing Act of 1937 and all HUD regulations and other
                         requirements.




Annual Contributions Contract:   Project-based Section 8 Contract Administration         (6/00)

                                              Page 12
                         The PHA may only use program receipts to pay program
                         expenditures, including administrative fees payable to the
                         PHA, and housing assistance payments payable to owners
                         for covered units.

                         Administrative fees earned by and paid to the PHA as
                         program expenditures in accordance with this ACC are no
                         longer subject to HUD requirements governing use of
                         program receipts.       The PHA may use or distribute any    such
                         earned administrative fee income, including basic fees and
                         incentive fees, for any purpose.

                         If required by HUD, program receipts in excess of current
                         needs shall be promptly remitted to HUD or shall be invested
                         in accordance with HUD requirements.

                 (5)     Interest on the investment of program receipts constitutes
                         program receipts.

        b.       Depository

                 (1)     Unless otherwise required or permitted by HUD, all program
                         receipts shall be promptly deposited with a federally insured
                         financial institution selected as depository institution by the
                         PHA in accordance with HUD requirements.

                         The PHA shall enter an agreement with the depository
                         institution in the form required by HUD.

                         The PHA may only withdraw deposited program receipts for
                         use in connection with the program in accordance with HUD
                         requirements, including payment of housing assistance
                         payments to owners and payment of administrative fees to
                         the PHA.

                         lf HUD determines that the PHA has committed any default
                         under the ACC, and has given the PHA notice of such
                         determination, HUD may freeze deposited program receipts
                         held by the depository institution, and may withdraw
                         deposited funds. The PHA agreement with the depository
                         institution shall provide that if required under a written freeze
                         notice from HUD to the depository:

                         °        The depository institution shall not permit any
                                  withdrawal of deposited funds by the PHA unless



Annual Contributions Contract:   Project-based Section 8 Contract Administration     (6/00)

                                              Page 13
                                  withdrawals by the PHA are expressly authorized by
                                  written notice from HUD to the depository institution.

                         °        The depository institution shall permit withdrawals of
                                  deposited funds by HUD.

                 (5)     Unless approved by HUD, the PHA may not deposit under
                         the depository agreement monies received or held by the
                         PHA in connection with any contract between the PHA and
                         HUD.

10      FIDELITY BOND COVERAGE

        The PHA shall carry adequate fidelity bond coverage, as required by
        HUD, to compensate the PHA and HUD for any theft, fraud or other loss
        of program property resulting from action or non-action by PHA officers or
        employees or other individuals with administrative functions or
        responsibility for contract administration under the ACC.

11      MANAGEMENT           REQUIREMENTS

        a       The PHA shall (without any compensation or reimbursement in
                addition to administrative fees in accordance with § 4.b of the ACC)
                perform all PHA obligations under the ACC, and provide all
                services, materials, equipment, supplies, facilities and professional
                and technical personnel, needed to carry out all PHA obligations
                under the ACC, in accordance with sound management practices,
                Federal statutes, HUD regulations and requirements and the ACC.

        b       The PHA shall:

                 (1)   | Maintain telephone service during normal and customary
                         business hours.

                 (2)   | Design and implement procedures and systems sufficient to
                         fulfill all PHA obligations under the ACC.

                 (3)     Take necessary actions to maintain good relations with
                         owners, residents and their representatives, neighborhood
                         groups, and local government agencies.

                 (4)     Respond fully and promptly to inquiries from assisted
                         residents, and refer inquiries from Congress or other
                         governmental entities to HUD.




Annual Contributions Contract:   Project-based Section 8 Contract Administration    (6/00)

                                              Page 14
12      PROGRAM         RECORDS

        a       The PHA shall maintain complete and accurate accounts and other
                records related to operations under the ACC. The records shall be
                maintained in the form and manner required by HUD, including
                 requirements governing computerized or electronic forms of record-
                 keeping. The accounts and records shall be maintained in a form
                 and manner that permits a speedy and effective audit.

                The PHA shall maintain complete and accurate accounts and
                records for each HAP contract.

                The PHA shall furnish HUD such accounts, records, reports,
                documents and information at such times, in such form and
                 manner, and accompanied by such supporting data, as required by
                 HUD, including electronic transmission of data as required by HUD.

                The PHA shall furnish HUD with such reports and information as
                may be required by HUD to support HUD data systems.

                HUD and the Comptroller General of the United States, or their
                duly authorized representatives, shall have full and free access to
                all PHA offices and facilities, and to all accounts and other records
                of the PHA that are relevant to PHA operations under the ACC,
                including the right to examine or audit the records and to make
                copies. The PHA shall provide any information or assistance
                needed to access the records.

                The PHA shall keep accounts and other records for the period
                required by HUD.

                HUD may review and audit PHA performance of its responsibilities
                under the ACC. The PHA shall comply with Federal audit
                requirements. The PHA shall engage an independent public
                accountant to conduct audits that are required by HUD. The PHA
                shall cooperate with HUD to prompily resolve all audit findings,
                including audit findings by the HUD Inspector General or the
                General Accounting Office.

13      DEFAULT BY PHA

        a        Definition of default

                 Occurrence of any of the following events is a default by the PHA in
                 performance of its obligations under the ACC:



Annual Contributions Contract:   Project-based Section 8 Contract Administration   (6/00)

                                              Page 15
                 (1)     |The PHA has failed:

                         °        To comply with PHA obligations under the ACC, or

                         °        To comply with PHA obligations under a HAP contract
                                  with an owner, or

                         e        To take appropriate action, to HUD's satisfaction or
                                  as required or directed by HUD, for enforcement of
                                  the PHA's rights under a HAP contract.

                  (2)    The PHA has made any misrepresentation to HUD of any
                         material fact.

        b        Termination of ACC because of PHA default

                  (1)    HUD may terminate the ACC at any time in whole or in part
                         if:

                         e        HUD determines that the PHA has committed any
                                  default or pattern of default under the ACC, and

                         °        HUD has given the PHA reasonable notice of the
                                  default to the PHA, and reasonable opportunity to
                                  cure the default prior to termination.           However, the
                                  PHA shall comply with HUD instructions on remedial
                                  actions necessary to cure the default.

                 (2)     In determining the length of such HUD notice and the extent
                         or nature of such opportunity to cure, HUD shall have
                         discretion to consider the circumstances of the case,
                         including such factors as prior failure or pattern of failure by
                         the PHA to comply with PHA contract administration
                         obligations under the ACC, and the seriousness of such
                         failures.   If HUD determines that urgent or other exigent
                         circumstances require immediate termination of the ACC,
                         HUD     may terminate the ACC at any time, without allowing
                         any opportunity to cure.        Such circumstances          include
                         diversion or misuse of program receipts, PHA
                         misrepresentation to HUD of any material facts, or failures of
                         program administration that affect or may affect the welfare
                         of assisted families.

                 (3)     If HUD elects to terminate the ACC,           HUD shall terminate the
                         ACC by written notice to the PHA, which shall state:



Annual Contributions Contract:   Project-based Section 8 Contract Administration               (6/00)

                                              Page 16
                         e        The reason for termination.

                         e        The date of termination.

        C        Other remedies

                 (1)     HUD may take title or possession to any or all program
                         property:

                         e        Upon occurrence of a default by the PHA, or

                         e        Upon termination of the ACC in whole or in part, or

                         °        Upon expiration of the ACC term.

                 (2)     HUD’s exercise or non-exercise of any right or remedy for
                         PHA default under the ACC is not a waiver of HUD's right to
                         exercise that or any other right or remedy at any time.

14      CONFLICT OF INTEREST

        a       Neither the PHA, nor any PHA contractor, subcontractor or agent
                for operations under the ACC, nor any other entity or individual with
                administrative functions or responsibility concerning contract
                administration under the ACC, may enter into any contract,
                subcontract, or other arrangement in connection with contract
                 administration under the ACC in which any covered individual or
                 entity has any direct or indirect interest (including the interest of any
                 immediate family member), while such person is a covered
                 individual or entity or during one year thereafter.

        b        “Immediate family member” means the spouse, parent, child,
                grandparent, grandchild, sister, or brother of any covered
                individual.

        Cc       “Covered individual or entity” means an individual or entity that is a
                 member of any of the following classes:

                 (1)     A member, officer or director of the PHA, or other PHA
                         official with administrative functions or responsibility
                         concerning contract administration under the ACC.

                 (2)     If the PHA is an instrumentality of         a governmental body:

                         e        A member, officer or director of such governmental
                                  body.


Annual Contributions Contract:   Project-based Section 8 Contract Administration        (6/00)

                                              Page 17
                         °        A member, officer or director of any entity that holds a
                                  direct or indirect interest in the instrumentality entity.

                 (3)   | An employee of the PHA.

                 (4)     A PHA contractor, subcontractor or agent with administrative
                         functions or responsibility concerning contract administration
                         under the ACC, or any principal or other interested party of
                         such contractor, subcontractor or agent.

                 (5)   — An individual who has administrative functions or
                         responsibility concerning contract administration under the
                         ACC, including an employee of a PHA contractor,
                         subcontractor or agent.

                 (6)     A public official, member of a governing body, or State or
                         local legislator, who exercises functions or responsibilities
                         concerning contract administration under the ACC.

        d       The PHA shall require any covered             individual or entity to disclose
                his, her or its interest or prospective interest in any contract,
                subcontract or other arrangement in connection with contract
                 administration under the ACC to the PHA and HUD.

        e       During the term of the ACC, the PHA shall not own or otherwise
                possess any direct or indirect interest in any covered unit (including
                a unit owned or possessed, in whole or in part, by an entity
                substantially controlled by the PHA), and shall not claim or receive
                any administrative fee for contract administration of a unit in which
                the PHA has any such interest.

        f        Notwithstanding paragraph e, if the PHA is a State, or an agency or
                 instrumentality of a State (not including a municipality, county or
                other agency of local government), and provides or has provided
                financing for development, repair or improvement of covered units,
                and holds a mortgage of the real property to secure such financing:

                 (1)     The existence of such mortgage or interest shall not be
                         considered a conflict of interest under paragraph e,
                         (provided that the PHA has not obtained any other
                         ownership interest in the property, by exercise of Its
                         remedies as mortgagee or otherwise), and in such case,
                         paragraph e shall not bar the PHA from claiming or receiving
                         an administrative fee for contract administration of such
                         covered units.



Annual Contributions Contract:   Project-based Section 8 Contract Administration          (6/00)

                                              Page 18
                 (2)   | The PHA shall fully disclose such mortgage or interest to
                         HUD, including any defaults by the mortgagee or borrower
                         under such mortgage, and any actions considered or taken
                         by the PHA to enforce the mortgage or the terms of such
                          financing against the owner or the real property. HUD may
                          require the PHA to take measures or actions necessary to
                          assure that the PHA’s interest as lender or mortgagee does
                          not prejudice the PHA’s full and vigorous performance of
                          contract administration services for the covered units in
                          accordance with the ACC, or may amend Exhibit B and C of
                          the ACC to withdraw such covered units, and the funding for
                          such units, from the scope of the ACC.

        g        HUD     may waive the conflict of interest requirements for good
                cause.     Any covered individual or entity for whom a waiver is
                granted may not execute any contract administration functions or
                 responsibility concerning a HAP contract under which such
                 individual is or may be assisted, or with respect to a HAP contract
                 in which such individual or entity is a party or has any interest.

        h        No member of or delegate to the Congress of the United States of
                America or resident commissioner shall be admitted to any share
                or part of the ACC or to any benefits which may arise from it.

15      EQUAL OPPORTUNITY

        a       The PHA shall comply with all equal opportunity requirements
                 imposed by Federal law, including applicable requirements under:

                 (1)   | The Fair Housing Act, 42 U.S.C. 3601-3619 (implementing
                         regulations at 24 CFR parts 100 et seq.).

                 (2)      Title VI of the Civil rights Act of 1964, 42 U.S.C. 2000d
                          (implementing regulations at 24 CFR part 1).

                 (3)   | The Age Discrimination Act of 1975, 42 U.S.C. 6101-6107
                         (implementing regulations at 24 CFR part 146).

                 (4)      Executive Order       11063, Equal Opportunity in Housing
                          (1962), as amended, Executive Order 12259, 46 FR 1253
                          (1980), as amended, Executive Order 12892, 59 FR 2939
                          (1994) (implementing regulations at 24 CFR part 107).

                 (5)      Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, 29 U.S.C. 794
                          (implementing regulations at 24 CFR part 8).



Annual Contributions Contract:   Project-based Section 8 Contract Administration      (6/00)

                                              Page 19
                 (6)     Title Il of the Americans with Disabilities Act, 42 U.S.C.
                         12101 et seq.

        b       The PHA shall submit a signed certification to HUD that the PHA
                shall carry out its responsibilities under the ACC in accordance with
                the Fair Housing Act, Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, the
                Age Discrimination Act of 1975, Executive Order 11063, Section
                504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, and Title Il of the Americans
                with Disabilities Act.

        Cc      The PHA shall cooperate with HUD in the conducting of
                compliance reviews and complaint investigations pursuant to
                applicable civil rights statutes, Executive Orders, and related rules
                 and regulations.

16      COMMUNICATION WITH HUD

        The CA shall communicate with HUD through the official or officials
        designated by HUD.

17      EXCLUSION OF THIRD PARTY RIGHTS

        a       A family that is eligible for housing assistance under the ACC is not
                 a party to or a third party beneficiary of the ACC.

        b        Nothing in the ACC shall be construed as creating any right of any
                third party to enforce any provision of the ACC, or to assert any
                claim against HUD or the PHA.




Annual Contributions Contract:   Project-based Section 8 Contract Administration      (6/00)

                                              Page 20
PUBLIC HOUSING AGENCY




Name of PHA (print)




Signature of authorized representative




Name and official title (print)


Date



U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (HUD)


Signature of authorized representative




Name and official title (print)




Date




Annual Contributions Contract:   Project-based Section 8 Contract Administration   (6/00)

                                              Page 21
                                     EXHIBIT A

             PUBLIC HOUSING AGENCY RESPONSIBILITIES

                             CONTENTS OF EXHIBIT A



1. INTRODUCTION                                                           3
2. PUBLIC HOUSING AGENCY                                                  4
 2.1. Overview of Public Housing Agency responsibilities                  4

 2.2. Qualification as Public Housing Agency                              4

 2.3. Instrumentality Entity eligibility                                  5

3. STATEMENT OF WORK
 3.1. Overview                                                            6

      3.1.1. Performance-based Service Contracting                            6
      3.1.2. Elements of core task descriptions                               6
      3.1.3. HUD regulations and requirements                                 7
      3.1.4. Core tasks                                                       7

 3.2. Management and occupancy reviews                                    8

 3.3. Rental adjustments                                                 10

 3.4. Opt-out and HAP contract termination                               14

 3.5. Monthly vouchers                                                   15

 3.6. Health and safety issues and community/resident concerns           18

 3.7. Section 8 budgets, requisitions, revisions and year-end statements 20

 3.8. Public Housing Agency audit                                        21

 3.9. Renewals of expiring Section 8 HAP contracts                       23



ACC                              EXHIBIT
                                       A — PAGE 1
 3.10. General reporting requirements                   24

 3.11. Physical inspection                              26

4. PHA ADMINISTRATIVE FEE                               28
 4.1. Definitions                                       28

 4.2. Evaluation of PHA performance                     31

 4.3. Incentive fee                                     31

 4.4. Fee payment                                       32

      4.4.1. Payment of basic fee                       32
      4.4.2. Payment of incentive fee                   33

 4.5. Availability of funds                             33

 4.6. Use of fee income                                 33

 4.7. Performance Requirements Summary (PRS)            33

 4.8. How to calculate earned administrative fees       46

5. ACC TERM                                             57
6. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMPLIANCE              57
7. DATA SYSTEMS                                         58
 7.1. Federal Requirements                              58

 7.2. Communication with owners                         58

 7.3. Communication with HUD                            58

 7.4. Fund transfer and payment                         59

8. MANAGEMENT CAPACITY AND QUALITY CONTROL PLAN         59




ACC                                 EXHIBITA — PAGE 2
1. INTRODUCTION

The Public Housing Agency (PHA) has entered this Annual Contributions Contract
(ACC) with HUD. Under the ACC, the PHA will provide contract administration
services for project-based Housing Assistance Payments Contracts (HAP
contracts) entered under Section 8 of the United States Housing Act of 1937 (42
U.S.C. 1437f) (Section 8).

The ACC does not apply to contract administration of Section 8 projects assisted
under the Section 8 moderate rehabilitation program (24 CFR part 882) (including
the Section 8 moderate rehabilitation single room occupancy program), or to
contract administration of projects assisted under the Section 8 project-based
voucher program or project-based certificate program (24 CFR part 983).

During the ACC term, the PHA will oversee HAP contracts for Section 8 projects in
accordance with HUD regulations and requirements. The PHA’s responsibilities
are governed by the ACC between HUD and the PHA. HUD will assign HAP
contracts for Section 8 projects to the PHA for contract administration during the
term of the ACC. Upon HUD assignment of HAP contracts with the owners of
Section 8 projects, the PHA immediately and automatically assumes, during the
ACC term, the obligations of HUD under the HAP contracts. The PHA will monitor
and enforce the compliance of each Section 8 owner with the terms of the HAP
contract and HUD regulations and requirements.

HUD seeks to achieve three programmatic and three administrative objectives.

Programmatic objectives:

          Calculate and pay Section 8 rental subsidies correctly.

          Administer project-based Section 8 HAP contracts consistently.

          Enforce owner obligations to provide decent housing for eligible
          families.

Administrative objectives:

          Execute an ACC only with a PHA that has the qualifications and
          expertise to oversee and manage affordable housing, and that has the
          capacity to perform the required contract administration services,
          including necessary personnel and other resources.

          Get the best value for dollars spent for PHA services.

          Encourage the development of joint ventures and or partnerships for
          contract administration services to obtain the benefit of the best
          practices of both public and private sectors.



ACC                            EXHIBITA — PAGE 3
2. PUBLIC HOUSING AGENCY


2.1. Overview of Public Housing Agency responsibilities

The PHA must administer Section        8 HAP contracts in accordance with the ACC,
Federal law, and HUD regulations and requirements, both current and as
amended in the future. The ACC with the PHA specifies the area where the PHA
is required to provide contract administration services (Service area).

The ACC specifies the Section 8 assisted units under HAP contracts that HUD
assigns to the PHA for contract administration under the ACC during the ACC term
(covered units). From time to time during the ACC term, HUD may add or delete
covered units for contract administration under the ACC. Each fiscal year, the
PHA will request funds from HUD to cover PHA administrative fees and housing
assistance payments to owners of covered units.

The Statement of Work (SOW) (Section 3 below)          details core functions (tasks)
that the PHA must perform.

The major tasks of the PHA include, but are not limited to the following:

             Monitor compliance of Section 8 project owners with their obligation to
             provide decent, safe, and sanitary housing to assisted residents.

             Pay Section 8 project owners accurately and timely.

             Submit required documents accurately and timely to HUD (or as
             required by HUD).

             Comply with HUD regulations and requirements, both current and as
             amended in the future, governing administration of Section 8 HAP
             contracts.


2.2. Qualification as Public Housing Agency

By law, HUD may only enter into an ACC with a legal entity that qualifies asa
“oublic housing agency” (PHA) as defined in the United States Housing Act of
1937 (42 U.S.C. 1487 et seq.).      However, that requirement does not preclude joint
ventures or other partnerships between a PHA and other public or private entities
to carry out the PHA’s contract administration responsibilities under the ACC
between the PHA and HUD.

Under the law, a public housing agency is defined as a:

      “_..otate, county, municipality, or other governmental entity or public body
      (or agency or instrumentality thereof) which is authorized to engage in or


ACC                               EXHIBIT
                                        A — PAGE 4
       assist in the development or operation of low-income housing.”          (42 U.S.C.
       1437a(b)(6)).

To qualify as a PHA that may enter into a Section 8 ACC with HUD,               the legal
entity must be one of the following:

              A general or special purpose governmental entity:        Such governmental
              entities include a State, municipality, housing authority, or
              governmental public benefit corporation.

              A multi-state, interstate or regional governmental     entity.

              An instrumentality entity: Such instrumentality entity must act as an
              instrumentality of a parent governmental entity, or multiple parent
              governmental entities. The instrumentality entity may be a for-profit or
              not-for-profit entity.

       The entity that has entered the ACC with HUD affirms and certifies that it is a
       Public Housing Agency (PHA) as required by Federal law, and that it has
       jurisdiction and authority to carry out Section 8 contract administration
       services in the agreed service area in accordance with the ACC.


2.3.    Instrumentality Entity eligibility

lf the PHA has qualified as an “instrumentality entity”, the relationship between an
instrumentality entity and a governmental entity (“parent entity”) must include all of
the following characteristics:

       The parent entity must have the right to approve the corporate charter or
       other organic documents of the instrumentality entity, including the right to
       approve any amendments.

       The parent entity must have the right to control, direct and authorize the
       execution of the ACC between HUD and the instrumentality entity.

       The parent entity must have the right to directly or indirectly control operation
       of the instrumentality entity.

       The parent entity must have the right that upon dissolution or termination of
       the instrumentality entity, title to all real or personal property held by the
       instrumentality entity must be transferred to the parent entity or an entity
       designated by the parent entity.

The charter or other organic documents of the instrumentality entity (e.g.,
certificate of incorporation, partnership agreement or certificate) must provide that
the instrumentality entity is authorized to “engage in or assist in the development or
operation of low-income housing.”


ACC                                     EXHIBITA— PAGE 5
Governmental parent entities may partner with private for-profit or non-profit
entities that hold an interest, directly or indirectly, in an instrumentality entity so
long as such instrumentality entity is otherwise in compliance with the above stated
requirements for eligibility of an instrumentality entity.   Private entities may contract
directly with an instrumentality entity.

3. STATEMENT OF WORK


3.1.     Overview


3.1.1.    Performance-based Service Contracting

For work performed under the ACC, HUD has used Performance-based Service
Contracting (PBSC). PBSC is based on the development of a performance work
statement, which defines the work in measurable, mission-related terms with
established performance standards and review methods to assure quality
performance of the work. PBSC assigns incentives to reward performance that
exceeds the minimally acceptable and assesses disincentives for unsatisfactory
performance.

The PHA must complete all tasks described in Exhibit A of the ACC, including both
requirements specifically designated as “incentive-based performance standards”
and all other “requirements.”

PHA failure to complete the tasks or comply with other PHA obligations under the
ACC will constitute a default under the ACC. HUD may terminate the ACC at any
time in whole or in part if HUD determines that the PHA has committed any default
under the ACC.


3.1.2.    Elements of core task descriptions

The description of each      core task contains the following elements:

       Outcome:     The required result of the task.

       Requirements:     A general description of specific tasks the PHA must
       perform.

           NOTE: The PHA must perform each task in accordance with all
           relevant HUD regulations and other requirements in effect
           during the term of the ACC. The ACC does not set forth the
           details of such regulations and requirements.

       Reference:    Current HUD regulations and other HUD requirements related to
       each task.


ACC                                 EXHIBITA — PAGE 6
      Incentive-based Performance Standards (IBPS): A description of specific
      elements of each core task. HUD will measure the PHA’s performance of
      each such element as the performance standard to determine the PHA’s
      earned administrative fees (including earned basic fees and earned incentive
     fees).

      Quality Assurance (QA): A listing of the methods and resources HUD will
      use to verify the accuracy of the PHA’s reported performance and
      accomplishments. HUD may use other methods that it deems appropriate to
      assure quality.


3.1.3.   HUD regulations and requirements

All references mentioned in the description of the tasks are generally available on
HUD’s website (http:/Awww.hudclips.org/cgi/index.cgi.). Interested parties may
order copies of HUD handbooks and other directives through the HUD website, or
through the HUD Multifamily Clearinghouse at 1-800-685-8470. The regulations
and directives listed may be updated from time to time.

HUD does not represent that the references listed in the ACC, or on the HUD
website are a complete listing of current relevant HUD regulations and
requirements. In addition, HUD regulations and other requirements may change
from time to time during the term of the ACC.

HUD’s codified regulations are issued as Title 24 of the Code of Federal
Regulations (CFR). Revisions or additions to HUD regulations are initially
published in the Federal Register. HUD may also publish Federal Register
notices. In addition to publication in the Federal Register and the CFR, HUD
issues additional program requirements as HUD “directives”, including HUD
notices, handbooks and forms.

The PHA must carry out the core tasks described in the Statement of Work (ACC
Exhibit A,§ 3), as well as other responsibilities related to contract administration
under the ACC, in accordance with all HUD regulations and requirements in effect
from time to time, as well as other responsibilities related to contract administration
under the ACC.


3.1.4.   Core tasks

This section describes ten core tasks that the PHA must perform:

1.    Conduct management and occupancy reviews.

2.   Adjust contract rents.

3.    Process HAP contract terminations or expirations.


ACC                             EXHIBIT
                                      A — PAGE 7
         Pay monthly vouchers from Section 8 owners.
    oF
         Respond to health and safety issues.
oN


         Submit Section 8 budgets, requisitions, revisions and year-end statements.
 PO




         Submit audits of the PHA’s financial condition.

         Renew   HAP   contracts.
oOo




         Report on PHA operating plans and progress.

 10. Follow up on results of physical inspections of Section 8 projects.


 3.2.     Management and occupancy reviews

 The PHA must conduct an on-site management and occupancy review of each
 Section 8 project, no less than annually. (Some projects may have multiple HAP
 contracts.) The review must be a comprehensive assessment of the owner’s
 procedures for directing and overseeing project operations, and the adequacy of
 the procedures for carrying out day to day, front-line activities. Some examples of
 the areas that the PHA must audit are: maintenance, security, leasing, occupancy,
 certification and recertification of family income, and determination of the family
 payments, financial management, Management Improvement and Operating
 (MIO) Plans, and general maintenance practices. The results of the on-site review
 must provide adequate documentation to support any enforcement actions
 proposed against the owner by the PHA or HUD.

 Outcome:        Identify and resolve areas of noncompliance with HUD regulations
                 and other requirements.

 Requirements:

         Schedule and conduct annual reviews of each project, using form HUD-9834
         or other appropriate documentation.

         Evaluate the owner’s operating policies and procedures following guidance in
         the appropriate HUD directives.

         Verify compliance with HUD regulations and requirements regarding
         occupancy issues (e.g., resident eligibility and selection, examination and
         reexamination of family income and assets, household characteristics), and
         verify that correct documentation is contained in each resident file to support
         claims for payment under the HAP contract. Use the following resident file
         random sampling:




 ACC                                 EXHIBITA — PAGE 8
 Number of Units           Minimum File Sample

 100 or fewer             5 files plus 1 for each 10 units over 50

 101-600                   10 files plus 1 for each 50 units or part of 50 over 100

 601-2000                 20 files plus 1 for each 100 units or part of 100 over
                          600
 over 2,000               OG       plus 1 for each 200 units or part of 200 over




       If the PHA’s review of the sample indicates a problem, the    PHA must require
    the owner to conduct a 100% review of the files and report the results of the
    review to the PHA. The PHA must test the review done by the owner to
    determine its reliability and accuracy.

    Verify owner compliance with civil rights regulations, including Title VI, Title
    VIII, the Americans with Disabilities Act, and Section 504 of the Rehabilitation
    Act of 1973.

       Notify the jurisdictional HUD office by close of next business day of any
       potential fraud or potential violations of law identified during the PHA review.

       Prepare and submit to the owner and jurisdictional HUD office a written
       report, on form HUD-9834, or other appropriate HUD-required documents,
    within 30 days of the PHA review, outlining any findings and
    recommendations for corrective action.

    Monitor implementation of corrective action. Notify jurisdictional HUD office
    within one business day when enforcement action is required.

       Enter required information into HUD data systems.

 References:

 HUD Handbook 4350.1

 HUD Handbook 4350.3


| Incentive-based Performance Standards




 ACC                               EXHIBITA — PAGE 9
1. The PHA must conduct annual Management and Occupancy Reviews in
   accordance with the PHA submitted and HUD approved workplan according
   to HUD requirements, document corrective actions taken against Section 8
       project owners or families, and monitor implementation of necessary
       corrective action.


2. The PHA review must document on the appropriate form compliance by
   Section 8 owners with civil rights regulations, including Title VI, Title VIII, the
   Americans with Disabilities Act, and Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of
       1973 and forward to the owner and the appropriate jurisdictional HUD office
       within 30 days.




Quality Assurance:

On-Site Reviews

Data Systems Reports


3.3.    Rental adjustments

Contract rent under each Section 8 HAP contract must be adjusted during the HAP
contract term in accordance with the HAP contract and HUD requirements.

The PHA must process contract rent adjustments correctly.

If applicable, the PHA must analyze adjustments of the owner utility allowance
schedule.

Outcome:        Contract rent adjustments are timely and correct.

Requirements:

A. Budget-based adjustments

Where applicable, the budget-based rent adjustment method requires a Section 8
owner to submit an operating budget and supporting documentation for PHA
review. The rent adjustment is subject to HUD-approval.

The PHA must determine budget-based adjustments of contract rent by
performing the following tasks:




ACC                               EXHIBIT
                                      A— PAGE          10
   Analyze the project’s operating budget and supporting documentation for a
   rent adjustment to determine reasonableness according to guidance in HUD
   Handbook 4350.1.

      Document contract rent increases on a rent schedule (Form HUD-92458)

   Analyze adjustments of the owner utility allowance schedule, if applicable.

      If the HAP contract requires the owner to maintain a reserve for replacement,
      analyze adjustment to the monthly reserve for replacement deposit as
      required and recommend action to HUD.

   Recommend approval or disapproval to HUD. HUD must notify PHA of the
   decision and the PHA must provide written notification to the owner.

   Verify accurate, timely completion and submission of the adjusted rent
   schedule by the owner.

   Enter data into the appropriate HUD data system within five business days
   from completion of action.

B. Annual Adjustment Factor (AAF)

This rent adjustment method generally requires the PHA to apply the AAF to
current contract rents. AAFs are published annually in the Federal Register.

The PHA must perform the following tasks:

      Determine the amount of annual adjustments in accordance with HUD
      requirements.

   Analyze adjustments of the owner utility allowance schedule, if applicable.

      If the HAP contract requires the owner to maintain a reserve for replacement,
      analyze adjustment to the reserve for replacement, and recommend action to
      HUD.

   Approve or disapprove the amount of rent adjustment and provide written
   notification to the owner.

   Validate comparability study if submitted by the owner to support a rent
   adjustment request.

   Verify accurate, timely completion and submission of adjusted rent schedule
   by the owner.

      Enter data into the appropriate HUD system within five business days from
   completion of action.


ACC                             EXHIBIT
                                    A— PAGE         11
C. Special adjustments

For HAP contracts which provide for AAF-adjusted rents, the Section 8 owner may
request a special adjustment for cost increases generally applicable to housing in
the locality, such as increases in cost items such as insurance, taxes or utility
rates. The appropriate jurisdictional HUD office must approve or deny all special
adjustments within 30 days of receipt of a properly documented request from the
PHA.

The PHA must process the owner’s request for a special rent adjustment to
determine if the special adjustment should be approved by HUD.      To accomplish
this, the PHA must perform the following tasks:

   Analyze a special adjustment request from the owner.

      Recommend action to the appropriate jurisdictional HUD office.

      Based on notification from HUD, notify the owner of rent adjustment approval
   or disapproval.

   Verify accurate, timely completion and submission of an adjusted rent
   schedule by the owner.

      Enter data into the appropriate HUD data system within 5 business days from
   completion of action.

D. Rent appeals

A Section 8 owner may appeal the PHA rent adjustment decision. The first level of
appeal is to the PHA; the second level of appeal is to the appropriate jurisdictional
HUD office. The PHA must review owner appeals.

The PHA must perform the following tasks:

First level appeal

   Analyze the owner’s rent appeal request.

   Provide the owner with written notice of PHA decision and justification within
   30 business days of receipt of the owner’s request.

lf the appeal is approved:

   Verify accurate, timely completion and submission by the owner of the
   adjusted rent schedule.

      Enter data into the appropriate HUD data system within 5 business days after
   completion of action.


ACC                             EXHIBIT
                                    A— PAGE         12
If the appeal is denied:

     Notify the owner of opportunity for second level appeal with notice of PHA
     decision and justification.

Second level appeal

If the appeal is approved by HUD:

      Receive approval from jurisdictional HUD office within 30 days after request
     for second
            level appeal

     Verify accurate, timely completion and submission of adjusted rent schedule
     by the owner.

      Enter data into the appropriate HUD data system.

References:

HUD Handbook 4350.1

Notice:   H-98-34

Notice:   H-98-3

Notice:   H-98-27

Housing Notices H-99-08, H-99-13, H-99-15

Incentive-based Performance Standards

3.    PHA completes processing of owner’s request for rent adjustment, and all
      PHA approved rent adjustments are executed and finalized within 30 days of
      receipt of owner’s request for a budget-based rent adjustment or on the
      anniversary date of the HAP contract for an AAF-based rent adjustment.



Quality Assurance:

On-Site Reviews

Data Systems Reports




ACC                             EXHIBIT
                                    A— PAGE          13
3.4.    Opt-out and HAP contract termination

A Section 8 HAP contract may terminate because:

       The HAP contract term expires and the owner chooses not to renew the
       expiring contract (opt-out); or

       The HAP contract is terminated by the PHA for owner default (after HUD
       approves the termination).

When a Section 8 HAP contract will terminate, the PHA must notify HUD, and
must work with HUD to obtain tenant-based voucher assistance for eligible
residents.     The PHA must coordinate efforts with the jurisdictional HUD office to
identify a PHA to administer the tenant-based assistance.

Outcome:           Provide ongoing rental assistance to eligible residents in
                   occupancy at the time of the opt-out.

Requirements:

A. Notification requirements

The PHA must:

       Inform the jurisdictional HUD office by close of next business day after notice
       by the owner that the owner has elected to opt-out of the HAP contract.

       Inform the jurisdictional HUD office of the PHA’s recommendation to
       terminate a HAP contract because of owner default.

       Verify that the owner has complied with the HAP contract and current law on
       opt-outs.

B.     PHA actions when HAP contract terminates

The PHA must:

       Obtain resident payment and family unit size data from the owner.

       Provide resident payment (family income and total tenant payment) and
       family unit size data (family size and composition, and size of Section 8 unit
       currently occupied by family) to jurisdictional HUD office within 3 business
       days after receipt of such information from the owner, and at least 90 days
       before HAP contract termination, for the purpose of obtaining Section 8
       vouchers for residents.

       Coordinate efforts with the jurisdictional HUD to identify   a PHA to administer
       tenant-based voucher assistance for residents.


ACC                                 EXHIBIT
                                        A — PAGE        14
       Help residents who must move from the project arranging to receive tenant-
       based voucher assistance from the PHA that will administer such assistance.

References:

Notice: H-98-34

Housing Notices H-99-08, H-99-13


Incentive-based Performance Standards

4. PHA notifies jurisdictional HUD office, by close of next business day after
   notice by owner, that the owner has elected to opt-out.

5. PHA provides complete resident data to jurisdictional HUD office at least 90
   days before HAP contract expiration.



Quality Assurance:

On-Site Reviews

Data Systems Reports


3.5.    Monthly vouchers

The “Automation Rule” (24 CFR Section 108, Part 208 - Electronic Transmission of
Required Data for Certification and Recertification and Subsidy Billing Procedures
for Multifamily Subsidized Projects) requires Section 8 project owners to request
housing assistance payments by vouchers submitted monthly through the Tenant
Rental Assistance Certification System (TRACS). Vouchers are due the tenth day
of the month preceding the month for which the owner is requesting payment. A
PHA may not pay owners until owner vouchers are received and reviewed for
accuracy.

Outcome:         Payments of Section 8 vouchers and claims are only authorized
                 and paid for eligible covered units. Payments are made to owners
                 by the first day of every month.

Requirements:

A.      Verify and certify accuracy of monthly Section 8 vouchers (forms HUD-
        52670 & HUD-52670-A)




ACC                             EXHIBIT
                                    A— PAGE         15
The PHA must verify and provide written documentation certifying the accuracy of
owner payment requests by the last day of each month before the month when
payment is due to the owner in accordance with the HAP contract. The PHA
disburses housing assistance payments to the owner in response to the owner’s
payment request as verified by the PHA. To accomplish this task, the PHA must:

      Monitor owner follow-up efforts on discrepancies identified as a result of any
      income matching initiatives.   HUD will provide discrepancy reports to the
      PHA.

     Monitor compliance by owners with requirements for entry of all resident
     certification and recertification data in TRACS.

     Verify voucher submissions by owner through the TRACS system by the
     tenth day of the month preceding the month for which the owner is requesting
     payment.

     Verify through TRACS that the amount of the housing assistance payment
      paid on behalf of each resident family is accurate.

     Verify that all recertifications are completed by the owner in a timely manner
      and entered into TRACS.

     Verify that the owner’s payment request does not include any covered units
     for which Section 8 assistance has been abated.

     Analyze required adjustments prior month’s vouchers to determine accuracy
     and validity.

      Determine if authorized rent or utility allowance adjustments have been
      implemented timely and accurately.

     Verify pre-approval of Section 8 Special Claims (See paragraph B of this
     section).

      Notify the owner, in writing, of any corrections required and track corrections.

     Verify that owners are complying with current HUD rules and other
      requirements.

B.     Verify and authorize payment only on valid Section 8 Special Claims for
       unpaid rent, resident damages or vacancy loss.

A Section 8 project owner may claim reimbursement from the PHA --to the extent
provided in the HAP contract -- for unpaid rent, resident damages, and vacancy
losses on covered units. Eligible claims must be pre-approved by the PHA before
being submitted with owner’s monthly voucher. The PHA must:



ACC                              EXHIBIT
                                     A— PAGE          16
     Analyze, verify and approve or disapprove owner claims in accordance with
     HUD regulations and other requirements (including program requirements in
     HUD directives such as handbooks, notices or forms); and using TRACS and
     information provided by the owner.

      Enter data into a spreadsheet program. for monitoring PHA payments.     (The
      program must comply with HUD standards and requirements.)

      Return the HUD-approved claim to the owner for owner submission with the
      next owner voucher.

C.     Disburse Section 8 payments to owners

After the PHA has approved the owner’s Section 8 voucher (see paragraph A of
this section), the PHA must disburse housing assistance payments to the owner by
an electronic fund transfer (EFT).

The PHA must disburse each monthly housing assistance payment to the owner
no earlier than the first of the calendar month for which payment is due, and no
later than the first business day of that month.

Reference:

HUD     Handbook 4350.3




ACC                             EXHIBIT
                                    A — PAGE       17
Incentive-based Performance Standards

6.      PHA must promptly review and verify each monthly payment voucher
        submitted by an owner, and either approve or modify the voucher, so the
        monthly payment to the owner is sent no earlier than the first of the
        calendar month for which payment is due to owner, and no later than the
        first business day of the calendar month.

7.      Each month, the PHA must provide written formal notification to HUD of
        corrective actions by the PHA, including corrective action as a result of PHA
        verification that shows overpayment to an owner. The PHA must provide
        such notification to HUD within ten days after the PHA’s verification and
        certification of the owner’s vouchers, and determination of discrepancies in
        payments to the owner. The PHA must monitor cases of overpayment or
        other discrepancies for adequate resolution, and must complete resolution
        of such cases within 30 days after PHA verification of overpayment to the
        owner, or determination of other discrepancies in payments to the owner.

8.      The PHA must monitor and report owner’s follow-up efforts on
        discrepancies identified as a result of tenant income-matching.




Quality Assurance:

On-Site Reviews

Data Systems Reports


3.6.    Health and safety issues and community/resident concerns

The PHA must accept resident complaints and follow-up with owners to ensure
that owners take appropriate action.

Outcome:          Resolve health and safety issues and establish positive relations
                 and communications with residents and the community.

Requirements:

A. Respond to all life threatening health and safety issues

       Respond immediately to all life threatening health and safety issues.




ACC                              EXHIBIT
                                     A— PAGE          18
   Maintain tracking system for inquiries, responses and corrective actions and
   submit log to jurisdictional HUD office with monthly invoices.

      Notify owner of all concerns and determine appropriate corrective action.

      Monitor owner response to concerns and implementation of corrective
      actions.

B. Respond to all non-life threatening health and safety and
   community/resident concerns

      Respond to all non-life threatening health and safety issues within two
      business days of notification during normal business hours.

   Maintain tracking system for community and resident inquiries and
   complaints, PHA responses, and corrective actions by owner. Submit log to
   jurisdictional HUD office with monthly invoices.

      Notify owner of all concerns and determine appropriate corrective action.

      Monitor owner response to concerns and owner implementation of corrective
      actions.

References:

HUD Handbook 4381.5        REV-2




ACC                             EXHIBIT
                                    A— PAGE          19
Incentive-based Performance Standards


        Respond, document and notify owner of life-threatening health and safety
       issues within an hour of receipt of complaint or inquiry or other knowledge
       of the issue, or before close of business day (whichever is sooner).


10.     PHA documents PHA initiatives and actions taken to notify the owner of
        non-life threatening health and safety issues, inquiries or complaints, and
        responds to residents within two business days after notification to the
       owner.    Until final resolution of issue, PHA continues to provide follow-up
        information to residents every two weeks.      Documentation of all action is
        recorded.




Quality Assurance:

On-Site Reviews

Monthly Invoice


3.7. Section 8 budgets, requisitions, revisions and year-end statements

In order to receive monthly ACC payments, the PHA must:

      Prepare and submit Section 8 budgets and requisitions (and revisions as required)
      for each HAP contract at least 90 days before the beginning of the PHA fiscal year.

      Prepare and submit year-end settlement statements within 45 days after the end of
      the PHA fiscal year.

Outcome:        PHA submits accurate financial documents on time to HUD on time.

Requirements:

      Prepare and submit annually to HUD Section 8 budget (HUD Forms 52672
      and 52673) at least 90 days before the beginning of the PHA fiscal year.

      Prepare and submit annually to HUD annual requisition for partial payment of
      Annual Contributions (HUD Form 52663) at least 90 days before the
      beginning of the PHA fiscal year.

      Perform monthly comparison of HAP payments to owners and monthly ACC
      partial payments from HUD.


ACC                               EXHIBIT    A — PAGE 20
       Prepare and submit to HUD a revised budget and requisition (HUD Form
       52663) when and if monthly comparison indicates ACC payments will exceed
       housing assistance payments by more than 5%. The PHA must complete
       submissions by the end of the PHA fiscal year.

       Prepare and submit the year-end settlement statement (HUD Form 52681) to
       HUD within 45 days after the end of the PHA fiscal year.

Reference:

HUD Handbook 7420.7, Chapter 8

Incentive-based Performance Standards

11.     The PHA must submit to HUD an acceptable and accurate budget and
        annual requisition for each HAP contract at least 90 days before the PHA
        fiscal year.

        If monthly reviews of HAP payments to owners and ACC payments
        received from HUD indicate that the PHA will be overpaid by more than five
        percent, the PHA must submit a revised budget and annual requisition to
        reduce future HUD payments accordingly. The revised budget and
        requisition must be submitted no later than the first day of the month
        following such indication of overpayment.

12.     The PHA must submit the year-end statement to HUD within 45 days after
        the end of the PHA’s fiscal year.



Quality Assurance:

Monthly Invoice

Status Report


3.8.    Public Housing Agency audit

The PHA must maintain complete and accurate financial records covering the
PHA’s contract administration of covered units under the ACC.

Outcome:          The PHA’s records are complete and accurate.

Requirements:




ACC                              EXHIBITA— PAGE 21
      Records concerning contract administration under the ACC must be distinct
      and separate from records concerning any other business of the PHA.

   The PHA must maintain complete and accurate records regarding activities
   relating to each HAP contract for covered units.

      If the PHA is required to submit audited financial statements under OMB’s
      Circular A-133, the PHA must submit audited annual financial statements that
   fully comply with the requirements of OMB Circular A-133 by the earlier of:(1)
   30 days after receipt of the auditor’s report or (2) 9 months after the PHA
   fiscal year end (FYE). This audit must be performed by an independent public
      accountant (IPA).

   If the PHA submits its audited financial statements more than 60 days after
   the PHA fiscal year end, the PHA must submit all financial reports required by
   the HUD in unaudited form within 60 days after the PHA fiscal year end.

      Submission of financial information must also be in accordance with the
      requirements of HUD’s Uniform Financial Reporting Standards (24 CFR,
      Part 5, Subpart H). The audit must be performed by an independent auditor,
      procured using the standards in Circular A-133 and other documents
      referenced in Circular A-133.

   A PHA not required to submit separate audited financial statements under
   OMB’s Circular A-133 must submit annual unaudited financial statements
   within 60 days after the PHA fiscal year end. For-profit instrumentality PHA
   entities must submit audited financial statements within 60 days after the end
   of the PHA’s fiscal year.

   If there are audit findings that require corrective actions, the PHA must
   provide HUD with a proposed plan of corrective actions as part of the audit
   submission package. By the first day of each month, until all corrective
   actions are completed as required by HUD, the PHA must submit a status
   report to HUD of corrective actions being implemented. Corrective actions
      must proceed as rapidly as possible.   If the PHA fails to timely   provide all
   required audited or unaudited financial statements, or fails to proceed with
   timely implementation of required corrective actions, HUD may determine that
   such failure is a default by the PHA in performance of its obligations under
   the ACC.

Reference:

ACC contract

HUD     Handbook 7420.7

OMB Circular A-133



ACC                             EXHIBIT      A— PAGE 22
Incentive-based Performance Standards

13.     A PHA that is required to comply with OMB’s Circular A-133 must submit
        unaudited financial statements to HUD, including all required data, not later
        than 60 days after end of the PHA fiscal year, and audited financial
        statements no later than 9 months after the end of the PHA fiscal year.

        A PHA that is not required to comply with OMB’s Circular A-133 must
        submit unaudited financial statements to HUD, including all required data,
        within 60 days after the end of the PHA fiscal year.

        A For-profit instrumentality PHA entity must submit audited financial
        statements to HUD, including all required data, within 60 days after the end
        of the PHA fiscal year.



Quality Assurance:

100% Review of the audit

3.9.    Renewals of expiring Section 8 HAP contracts

As HAP contracts come to an end, owners must apply for HAP contract renewals
to have units remain with Section 8 project-based assistance. The PHA must
ensure that owners fulfill their obligations to residents and HUD that are consistent
with owner renewal decisions.

Outcome:       Expiring Section 8 contracts are renewed.

Requirements:

       Verify that owners of projects with expiring Section 8 HAP contracts provide
       required notice to the PHA and project residents.

       If the owner opts not to renew, take the actions described in Task 3.4

       Maintain copies of owner’s notice to PHA and project residents.

       If the owner chooses to renew, determine which available option (form of
       renewal authorized by HUD) the owner wishes to use and notify the
       jurisdictional HUD office.

       Prepare renewal HAP contract in the form required by HUD.

       After receipt of confirmation of funding for renewal from HUD, ensure the
       HAP contract is executed (signed) by the owner and the PHA.


ACC                              EXHIBIT   A — PAGE 23
      Execute and distribute copies of the HAP contract within one business week
      to the owner, jurisdictional HUD office, and PHA files.

Reference:

Notice:    H-98-34

Housing Notices H-99-08, H-99-13



Incentive-based Performance Standards

14.     Monitor, process and execute renewal HAP contract documents.

Quality Assurance:

On-Site Reviews

Data Systems Reports

Monthly Invoice


3.10.     General reporting requirements

To track the performance of the Section 8 program, monitor and evaluate PHA
performance, and identify technical assistance needs, HUD requires the PHA to
regularly report tts contract administration activities. Consequently, the PHA must
provide monthly, quarterly, and annual reports to the jurisdictional HUD office.

Outcome:       HUD can monitor and evaluate program and PHA performance from
               accurate, timely reports by the PHA.

A.    Monthly reports

The PHA must submit reports and an invoice to the Contract Administrator
Oversight Monitor (CAOM) by the tenth business day of each month for the
previous month’s activities.

      Hot topics: Projects that required special attention due to such matters as,
      abatement actions, excessive resident complaints, inquiries from governmental
      officials or the general public.




ACC                              EXHIBIT A — PAGE 24
  Work Plan Status Report: The Work Plan status report details:

  e Areas reviewed and services performed, including date of review and
    services; names of PHA staff performing the review and performing the
    services

  e Any significant administrative actions that could affect administration of the
      contract

  ¢   Quality control activities and results

  e   Major accomplishments, success stories, etc.

  e   Noteworthy meetings

  e   Pending issues

B. Quarterly reports

The PHA must submit an updated Work Plan and Work Plan status reports to the
designated CAOM.

C. Annual reports

By the close of each PHA fiscal year, the PHA must submit to HUD a report that
details its progress in accomplishing the Work Plan for that fiscal year. The report
should detail all of the PHA actions and services (including dates, locations, and
employee names) for that fiscal year. Also at the close of each fiscal year, the
PHA must submit a Work Plan for the following year that details its plan to satisfy
the ACC contract administration requirements.




ACC                             EXHIBIT        A— PAGE 25
Incentive-based Performance Standards

15.     HUD    receives PHA’s

        (a)   Monthly Reports by the tenth business day after the end of the month

        (6)   Quarterly reports by the tenth business day after the end of the quarter

        (c)   Annual reports by the twentieth business day after the end of the PHA
              fiscal year


Quality Assurance:

On-Site Reviews

Data Systems Reports

Review of submitted reports


3.11.     Physical inspection

HUD has or will conduct a baseline physical inspection for every Section 8 property
with a HUD-administered HAP contract. The Real Estate Assessment Center's
(“REAC”) physical inspection software and protocol is being used for all
inspections. (See http:/Wwww.hud.gov/reac/reaphyin.html). Once this baseline
physical inspection is completed, HUD will determine frequency of future
inspections. HUD may issue a task order under the ACC to have the PHA perform
annual physical inspections. If such a task order is issued, HUD will negotiate with
the PHA a fixed-price fee for such services at that time.

Outcome:           Verify completion of corrective actions based upon the analysis of
                  the results of the annual physical inspections conducted on
                   properties included in the ACC.   Take legal actions as directed by
                   HUD for enforcement of the HAP contract.

Requirements:

Post Inspection Activities:

      Provide follow-up with owner on violations and corrective actions needed.

      Provide owner with time-frame to correct violations.

      Work with owner to eliminate the deficiencies.




ACC                                EXHIBIT A — PAGE 26
   Abate payments when owner fails to correct violations within designated time
      period.

      Notify jurisdictional HUD office of abatement of payments and specific
      reasons for the action.

      Notify jurisdictional HUD office of the completion of required actions.

   Take legal action as directed by HUD for enforcement of the HAP contract.

Reference:

HUD Handbook 4350.1

Federal Register, September 1, 1998

Housing Assistance Payments (HAP) Contract




ACC                              EXHIBIT A — PAGE 27
Incentive-based Performance Standards

16.    PHA monitors performance and compliance indicators of unacceptable
       physical inspection results. Until final resolution, PHA continues to provide
       follow-up to HUD every 30 days on actions by the owner and PHA.



4. PHA ADMINISTRATIVE FEE

4.1.   Definitions

ACCEPTABLE QUALITY LEVEL (AQL). The required PHA performance level for
each IBPS task. The AQL for each IBPS task is specified in column C of the
Performance Requirements Summary (PRS) table.

ADMINISTRATIVE FEE. The monthly fee HUD pays the PHA for each covered
unit under HAP contract on the first day of the month. The administrative fee (per
unit per month) is the total of the basic fee plus the incentive fee.

BASIC FEE.     The sum of the earned IBPS fees for a covered unit (per unit per
month). HUD pays the earned basic fee to the PHA for each covered unit under
HAP contract on the first day of the month during the ACC term.

Each IBPS task is allocated a specified percentage (IBPS percentage) of the
maximum basic fee (per covered unit per month for each FMR area in the PHA
service area). The Performance Requirements Summary (PRS) states the IBPS
percentage for each IBPS task (see column D of the PRS). (During the term of the
ACC, HUD may elect to amend the specification of IBPS tasks, the AQL for
performance of an IBPS task, or the IBPS percentage for an IBPS task.)

BASIC FEE PERCENTAGE. A percentage used to calculate the amount of the
maximum basic fee after the first two years (twenty-four calendar months) of the
ACC term. The amount of the basic fee percentage for each subsequent year
(twelve calendar months) of the ACC term is specified in Exhibit E of the ACC.     For
each such year, and for each FMR area in the PHA service area, the maximum
basic fee for each month is calculated by multiplying the basic fee percentage
specified in Exhibit E of the ACC times HUD’s two-bedroom published FMR (for
the FMR area) in effect at the beginning of that year of the ACC term.

DISINCENTIVE DEDUCTION. A deduction from the per unit per month IBPS fee.
For each IBPS task, the disincentive deduction equals the maximum IBPS fee
times the disincentive deduction percentage. HUD deducts this amount for PHA
performance of an IBPS task that falls below the acceptable quality level. The
ACC specifies the performance standard for assessing a disincentive deduction for



ACC                             EXHIBIT A — PAGE 28
performance of an IBPS task.    (During the term of the ACC, HUD may elect to
amend the performance standard or the disincentive deduction percentage.)

DISINCENTIVE DEDUCTION PERCENTAGE. A                  percentage used to calculate
the amount of a disincentive deduction from the IBPS fee.      The disincentive
deduction percentage for each IBPS task is specified in column F of the PRS.

EARNED BASIC FEE. The amount of the basic fee earned by the PHA per unit
per month (in an FMR area). The earned basic fee equals the sum of the earned
IBPS fees for the IBPS tasks.

EARNED    IBPS FEE.    The   amount of the IBPS fee earned by the PHA per unit per
month. The earned IBPS fee equals the maximum IBPS fee minus any
disincentive deduction.

EARNED INCENTIVE FEE. The amount of an incentive fee earned by the PHA.

IBPS. Incentive-based Performance Standards.

IBPS FEE. The maximum fee per unit per month for performance of an IBPS task
listed in the PRS. The IBPS fee for an IBPS task equals the maximum basic fee
times the IBPS percentage.

IBPS PERCENTAGE. The percentage of the maximum basic fee for performance
of each of the IBPS tasks. The IBPS percentage times the maximum basic fee is
the maximum IBPS fee per unit per month for each IBPS task. The earned IBPS
fee may be reduced by disincentive deductions for PHA performance of an IBPS
task that falls below the acceptable quality level.

IBPS TASK. Any of the core contract administration tasks listed in the PRS (and
described in the SOW). (Column A of the PRS lists the IBPS tasks.) HUD
measures the PHA’s performance of each IBPS task to determine the amount of
the PHA’s earned basic fee or earned incentive fee for each covered unit.

INCENTIVE-BASED PERFORMANCE STANDARDS (IBPS): A description of
specific elements of each core task. HUD will measure the PHA’s performance of
each such element as the performance standard to determine the PHA’s earned
administrative fees (including earned basic fees and earned incentive fees).

INCENTIVE FEE. A per unit per month administrative fee in addition to the basic
fee. The incentive fee is paid for PHA performance of an IBPS task that exceeds
the acceptable quality level for the IBPS task.   The total of incentive fees earned in
each calendar quarter is paid at the end of the quarter.

INCENTIVE FEE PERCENTAGE.            The percentage of the incentive fee pool for
PHA performance of an IBPS task that exceeds the acceptable quality level.
Column E of the PRS specifies the incentive fee percentage, and the performance
standard for awarding the incentive fee for performance of the IBPS task.


ACC                            EXHIBIT A — PAGE 29
INCENTIVE FEE POOL. The maximum amount of incentive fees that may be
earned by the PHA for each month of the ACC term. (The procedure for
calculating the incentive fee pool is specified as Steps [17 - 21] of the fee
calculation procedure at § 4.8 of ACC Exhibit A.)

MAXIMUM BASIC FEE. The amount of the maximum basic fee per unit per
month for each FMR area in the PHA service area. The amount of the maximum
basic fee for each FMR area in the service area (and for each year of the ACC
term) is determined in accordance with Exhibit E of the ACC.

MAXIMUM     IBPS FEE.   The maximum basic fee times the IBPS percentage
(before any disincentive deduction).

PRS.   Performance Requirements Summary (see § 4.7 of Exhibit A).

SOW. Statement of Work. A description of the core tasks to be performed by the
PHA under the ACC (see § 3 of Exhibit A).




ACC                            EXHIBIT A — PAGE 30
4.2.   Evaluation of PHA performance

During the ACC term, HUD will conduct a monthly and quarterly evaluation and
scoring of the PHA’s performance in contract administration of the covered units.
Calculation of the amount of the administrative fees earned by the PHA is based
on HUD’s rating of the PHA’s performance against defined levels of performance
of specific contract administration tasks designated as performance standards.

The Statement of Work (SOW) describes specific core contract administration
tasks, and specific incentive-based performance standards (IBPS) that will be
used to rate PHA performance of the core tasks. The performance requirements
summary (PRS) (§ 4.7 of Exhibit A) defines measurable levels of IBPS
performance that determine whether the PHA receives an increased fee (by
adding “incentive fees”) or a reduced fee (by subtracting “disincentive deductions’).

Each month, HUD rates the PHA’s performance in completion of the IBPS tasks to
determine the amount of earned basic fees. HUD determines the amount of the
earned basic fee (per covered unit per month) by monthly scoring of the PHA’s
performance of IBPS tasks. This scoring is based on HUD’s review of data
submitted and certified in the monthly invoice by the PHA.

Each quarter, HUD rates the PHA’s performance in completion of specified IBPS
tasks (designated in column E of the PRS) to determine the amount of earned
incentive fees. HUD determines the amount of the incentive fees earned by the
PHA by quarterly scoring of the PHA’s contract administration performance of the
specified IBPS tasks.

The monthly and quarterly scoring is based on the level of PHA’s performance of
the tasks used as incentive-based performance standards (IBPS) described in the
Statement of Work. The PRS specifies the levels of IBPS performance used to
determine incentive fees (column E of the PRS) or disincentive deductions
(column F of the PRS). During the term of the ACC, HUD may amend the IBPS
standards or the PRS by giving notice of such amendment to the PHA..
Amendments to the IBPS standards or the PRS will be effective no later than the
first month of the next quarter following such notification.


4.3.   Incentive fee

In addition to the basic fee, the PHA may earn an incentive fee determined by
HUD for PHA performance of the contract administration services for designated
IBPS tasks that exceeds acceptable quality levels (AQL) of performance.      § 4.8 of
Exhibit A (Part Il of fee calculation procedure) specifies the step-by-step procedure
for calculating the amount of earned incentive fees.

Each month, HUD will evaluate the PHA’s performance in providing contract
administration services for all covered units under the ACC to determine the


ACC                            EXHIBITA— PAGE 31
amount of earned incentive fees paid quarterly. This evaluation will determine the
portion of the monthly incentive fee pool that the PHA has earned for each month
of that quarter.

HUD may add or modify performance standards during the ACC term, may add or
modify the factors used to measure performance, and may specify the amount of
the incentive fee for a specified level of performance.   However, HUD must notify
the PHA of any such changes before the rating period for which such changes are
used to rate PHA performance.

4.4.     Fee payment

Each month, earned administrative fees are calculated and based upon the
number of covered units under contract administration by the PHA on the first day
of the month.

4.4.1.     Payment of basic fee

Column H of the PRS specifies whether the IBPS fee for a particular IBPS task is
paid monthly or annually.

Each invoice must be fully supported by documentation (as required by HUD) of
the PHA's level of performance of each IBPS standard for an IPBS task. Such
documentation shall be sufficient to show:

1.       Whether the PHA has met the AQL for the performance standard (column C
         of the PRS).

2.       The amount of any disincentive deduction (as calculated in accordance with
         column F of the PRS).

3.       |The amount of any incentive fee (as calculated in accordance with column E
         of the PRS).

The determination of performance levels used to calculate earned administrative
fees (earned basic fees and earned incentive fees), and the determination of the
amount of such fees is subject to modification and correction by HUD as a result of
HUD quality assurance reviews or otherwise.      HUD may recover any
overpayments, and may adjust amounts of payments against subsequent invoices
to correct or adjust any overpayment or error in determination of earned
administrative fees.

Notwithstanding any disincentive deductions from earned administrative
fees for PHA failure to meet the AQL for any IBPS task, failure to meet the
AQL in performance of the IBPS task is a violation of PHA obligations under
the ACC. HUD may exercise any available remedies for such default or any
other default under the ACC. HUD may terminate the ACC at any time, in



ACC                               EXHIBIT A — PAGE 32
whole or in part, if HUD determines that PHA has committed any default
under the ACC.

4.4.2.    Payment of incentive fee

HUD will pay earned incentive fees for a particular IBPS task quarterly. HUD will
base the amount of the earned incentive fee per unit per month on the PHA’s
performance against the incentive based performance standards listed in the
Statement of Work. The amount of the incentive fee for each IBPS task is
calculated in accordance with column E of the PRS. Column E specifies the
standard of performance required for the PHA to earn the incentive fee for
performance of the IBPS task. Column E also specifies the percentage of the
monthly incentive fee pool that the PHA will earn for meeting this performance
standard.

HUD will review the PHA’s performance in carrying out the PHA’s annual Work
Plan and PHA progress reported in the monthly invoices for the applicable quarter.
The HUD findings will be compared to the PHA invoice for the incentive fee and
adjustments may be made to reflect the results of the HUD findings.

4.5. Availability of funds

All fee payments are subject to the availability of appropriated funds.

4.6.     Use of fee income

The PHA may use or distribute for any purpose administrative fees that the PHA
has earned under the ACC.       HUD may reduce or request reimbursement of
administrative fees paid if subsequent quality assurance indicates the performance
indicated by the PHA was not attained.


4.7.     Performance Requirements Summary (PRS)

There is at least one IBPS performance standard for each core task described in
the Statement of Work. These IBPS standards are used to determine the amount
of earned basic fees and earned incentive fees.

For each IBPS task, the PRS table below specifies:

       IBPS task number (column A).

       IBPS task and SOW.     Task description and reference to SOW requirement
       (column B)

       Acceptable quality level (AQL) (column C).




ACC                              EXHIBIT A — PAGE 33
      IBPS percentage.   The IBPS percentage of the maximum basic fee (column
      D).

      Incentive fee (as percentage of monthly incentive fee pool).   How to calculate
   the incentive fee (if incentive fees may be awarded for performance of the
   particular IBPS task) (column E). The PRS table specifies the available
   incentive fee amount as a percentage of the incentive fee pool, and describes
   the performance standard that must be met to receive an incentive fee for
      performance of the IBPS task.

   Disincentive deduction. How to calculate the amount of a disincentive
   deduction from the maximum basic fee (column F). The PRS table specifies
   the performance standard that determines when the disincentive deduction is
   assessed, and specifies the amount of the disincentive deduction as a
      percentage of the maximum    IBPS fee.

      Quality assessment (QA). How HUD will assure the quality of the PHA’s
      reported performance (column G).

      Payment. When HUD will pay the IBPS administrative fees earned for
      performance of a particular IBPS task (monthly or annually) (column H).

The information in the PRS table below governs HUD’s payment of administrative
fees to the PHA for all work performed under the ACC.




ACC                             EXHIBIT A — PAGE 34
                           IBPS PERFORMANCE                   REQUIREMENTS SUMMARY

     A           B                    Cc                D              E                  F                 G         H



IBPS     TASK & SOW       ACCEPTABLE                  IBPS      INCENTIVE         DISINCENTIVE        | QA       PAYMENT
TASK                      QUALITY LEVEL               PER-      FEE               DEDUCTION             METHOD
                          (AQL)                       CENT    | PERCENT           (“deduction”)
#
                                                      (of                         (as % of
                                                      max.      (as % of          maximum
                                                      basic     incentive fee   | IBPS fee)
                                                      fee)      pool)

1.       Management & | Each month, 95% of             8%       20% of the        2% deduction         On-Site   Monthly
         occupancy      required reports and                    Incentive fee     for every 1%         Reviews
         reviews        data are submitted                      pool if PHA       that the
                        to HUD on time                          submits           percentage of        Systems
         Section 3.2    (within 30 calendar                     100% of           on time              Data
                          days after scheduled                  required          submissions          Reports
                          completion of the                     reports and       falls below the
                          M&O review)                           data on time      AQL

                          AQL 95% submitted
                          on time

2.       Documenting      Each month, 95% of           5%       20% of the        2% deduction         On-Site   Monthly
         owner civil      required civil rights                 Incentive fee  for every 1%            Reviews
         rights           compliance reports                    pool if PHA    that the
         compliance       are submitted to                      submits 100% | percentages of          Systems
                          HUD on time ( within                  of required       on time              Data
         Section 3.2      30 calendar days                      reports on        submissions          Reports
                          after M&O review                      time              falls | below the
                          completion)                                             AQL

                          AQL::
                          95% of civil rights
                          reports submitted on
                          time




ACC                                 EXHIBIT       A — PAGE 35
                          IBPS PERFORMANCE               REQUIREMENTS SUMMARY

     A           B                 Cc              D             E                   F                 G         H



IBPS     TASK & SOW      ACCEPTABLE              IBPS      INCENTIVE         DISINCENTIVE       | QA        PAYMENT
TASK                     QUALITY LEVEL           PER-      FEE               DEDUCTION            METHOD
                         (AQL)                   CENT    | PER CENT          (“deduction”)
#
                                                 (of                         (as % of
                                                 max.      (as % of          maximum
                                                 basic     incentive fee   | IBPS fee)
                                                 fee)      pool)

3.       Processing      Each month, 100%         5%            N/A          1% deduction         On-Site   Monthly
         rental          of owner requests                                   for every 1%         Reviews
         adjustments     for rent adjustments                                that
                         and all rent                                        performance          Systems
         Section 3.3     adjustments are                                     falls below the      Data
                         correctly processed                                 AQL, but not         Reports
                         within 30 calendar                                  below 75%.
                         days after owner's
                         request for a budget-                               50% deduction
                         based rent                                          if performance
                         adjustment, or on                                   falls below 75%.
                         the anniversary date
                         of the HAP contract
                         for an AAF based
                         rent adjustment

                         AQL:
                         100% of owner rent
                         adjustment requests
                         correctly processed
                         within 30 calendar
                         days
4.       Owner opt-out   Each month, 100%         5%            N/A          1% deduction         On-site   Monthly
         notices and     of owner opt-out                                    for every            Reviews
         Contract        notices or                                          business day
         Terminations    terminations are                                    that the average   | Systems
                         submitted to HUD                                    time when            Data
         Section 3.4     within one business                                 owner notices        Reports
                         day after notice by                                 or termination
                         owner                                               announcements
                                                                             are supplied to
                         AQL:                                                HUD exceeds
                         100% of owner opt-                                  the AQL (partial
                         out notices or                                      days are
                         terminations                                        rounded to the
                         submitted within one                                lowest whole
                         business day                                        day)



ACC                             EXHIBIT A — PAGE 36
                            IBPS PERFORMANCE               REQUIREMENTS SUMMARY

     A            B                  Cc                D            E                  F                G          H



IBPS     TASK & SOW        ACCEPTABLE             IBPS       INCENTIVE         DISINCENTIVE        | QA       PAYMENT
TASK                       QUALITY LEVEL          PER-       FEE               DEDUCTION             METHOD
                           (AQL)                  CENT     | PERCENT           (“deduction”)
#
                                                  (of                          (as % of
                                                  max.       (as % of          maximum
                                                  basic      incentive fee   | IBPS fee)
                                                  fee)       pool)

5.       Owner Opt-out   | 100% of complete       5%         30% of the        50% deduction        On-site   Monthly
         and HAP           resident data                     incentive fee     if average           Reviews
         contract          submitted to                      pool if PHA       notification time
         termination:     jurisdictional HUD                 submits           is from 85-89        Systems
         Submit            office 90 calendar                100% of data    | calendar days        Data
         resident data     days before contract              to HUD an         before               Reports
         to HUD            expiration and/or                 average of        expiration
                           termination.                      100 days or       and/or
         Section 3.4                                         more before       termination
                          AQL:                               contract          (portions of
                           100% of resident                  expiration        days are
                          data submitted 90                  and/or            rounded to the
                           calendar days before              termination       nearest whole
                           contract expiration                                 day).
                           and/or termination
                           and/or termination                                  100% deduction
                                                                               if average
                                                                               notification time
                                                                               is less than 85
                                                                               calendar days
                                                                               before
                                                                               expiration
                                                                               and/or
                                                                               termination




ACC                               EXHIBIT A — PAGE 37
                            IBPS PERFORMANCE                REQUIREMENTS SUMMARY

     A           B                    Cc              D             E                   F                G          H



IBPS     TASK & SOW        ACCEPTABLE               IBPS      INCENTIVE         DISINCENTIVE       | QA        PAYMENT
TASK                       QUALITY LEVEL            PER-      FEE               DEDUCTION            METHOD
                           (AQL)                    CENT    | PERCENT           (“deduction”)
#
                                                    (of                         (as % of
                                                    max.      (as % of          maximum
                                                    basic     incentive fee   | IBPS fee)
                                                    fee)      pool)

6.       Review, verify,   100% of monthly          15%       N/A               1% deduction         On-Site   Monthly
         and authorize     vouchers are                                         for every 1% the   | Reviews
         monthly           processed so                                         processing of
         § 8 vouchers      monthly payment to                                   vouchers falls       Systems
                           the owner is sent no                                 below the AQL,       Data
         Section 3.5       earlier than the first                               except that if       Reports
                           calendar day of the                                  performance
                           month and no later                                   falls below 75%,
                           than the first                                       a 50%
                           business day of the                                  deduction shall
                           month.                                               apply

                           AQL:
                           100% of vouchers
                           processed within
                           specified time-frame




ACC                                 EXHIBIT A — PAGE 38
                        IBPS PERFORMANCE               REQUIREMENTS SUMMARY

     A             B              Cc               D           E                   F                  G         H



IBPS     TASK & SOW    ACCEPTABLE             IBPS       INCENTIVE         DISINCENTIVE        | QA        PAYMENT
TASK                   QUALITY LEVEL          PER-       FEE               DEDUCTION             METHOD
                       (AQL)                  CENT     | PERCENT           (“deduction”)
#
                                              (of                          (as % of
                                              max.       (as % of          maximum
                                              basic      incentive fee   | IBPS fee)
                                              fee)       pool)

7.       Notice of     In100% of cases        3%         N/A               1% deduction          On-Site   Monthly
         corrective    requiring corrective                                for every 1%          Reviews
         actions       action, PHA notifies                                that the
                       HUD of such action                                  notifications and   | Systems
         Section 3.5   within 10 calendar                                  resolutions           Data
                       days after PHA                                      combined falls        Reports
                       verification and                                    below the AQL
                       certification of                                    of 100%, except
                       voucher.                                            that if
                                                                           performance
                        In 100% of                                         falls below 75%,
                       overpayments, PHA                                   a 50%
                       resolves                                            deduction shall
                       overpayment issue                                   apply
                       within 30 calendar
                       days after PHA
                       verification and
                       certification of
                       voucher.

                       AQL:
                       100% of total cases
                       (corrective action
                       cases plus
                       overpayment cases)
                       handled within
                       specified time-
                       frames




ACC                             EXHIBIT A — PAGE 39
                              IBPS PERFORMANCE                REQUIREMENTS SUMMARY

     A                B                   Cc              D           E                   F                G          H



IBPS     TASK & SOW          ACCEPTABLE              IBPS       INCENTIVE         DISINCENTIVE       | QA        PAYMENT
TASK                         QUALITY LEVEL           PER-       FEE               DEDUCTION            METHOD
                             (AQL)                   CENT     | PER CENT          (“deduction”)
#
                                                     (of                          (as % of
                                                     max.       (as % of          maximum
                                                     basic      incentive fee   | IBPS fee)
                                                     fee)       pool)

8.       Monitoring &        100% of projects        3%         N/A               3% deduction        On-site    Monthly
         reporting           with households                                      for every day       reviews
         owner’s follow- | identified through                                     the AQL is          Systems
         up efforts on     tenant income-                                         exceeded for        data
         discrepancies       matching                                             any project         reports
         identified as a     discrepancies are
         result of tenant | Monitored and
         income              reported to HUD by
                  :          the tenth business
         maroning            day of each month.

                             AQL:
         Section 3.5         Monitoring report to
                             HUD by tenth
                             business day of
                             each month for all
                             projects.

9.       Life-               100% of initial PHA     7%         N/A               1% deduction        On-Site    Monthly
         threatening         responses to life-                                   for every 1% of     Reviews
         health & safety   | threatening health                                   responses that
         issues              and safety issues                                    exceed the          Monthly
                             (notice to owner or                                  AQL, except         Invoices
         Section 3.6A        other appropriate                                    that if
                             initial PHA response)                                performance
                             are completed within                                 falls below 75%
                             one hour after the                                   of responses , a
                             PHA knows about                                      50% deduction
                             the issue.                                           shall apply

                             AQL:
                             100% of responses
                             and notifications of
                             life-threatening
                             issues completed
                             within one hour.




ACC                                 EXHIBIT A — PAGE 40
                               IBPS PERFORMANCE                    REQUIREMENTS SUMMARY

      A           B                      Cc                    D           E                     F              G          H



IBPS      TASK & SOW          ACCEPTABLE                  IBPS       INCENTIVE         DISINCENTIVE       | QA        PAYMENT
TASK                          QUALITY LEVEL               PER-       FEE               DEDUCTION            METHOD
                              (AQL)                       CENT     | PER CENT          (“deduction”)
#
                                                          (of                          (as % of
                                                          max.       (as % of          maximum
                                                          basic      incentive fee   | IBPS fee)
                                                          fee)       pool)

10        Non-life-           PHA responds to             5%         N/A               10% deduction       On-Site    Monthly
          threatening         100% of all non-life                                     for every           Reviews
          health & safety   | threatening health                                       business day, or
          issues              and safety inquiries                                     part of a day,      Monthly
                              and complaints                                           that the average | Invoices
          Section 3.6B        within two business                                      PHA response
                              days follows-up                                          time exceeds
                              every two weeks                                          two business
                              until final resolution                                   days

                              AQL:
                              100% of PHA
                              responses within
                              two business days

11.       Budgets,            100% of all budgets         8%         N/A               2% deduction        Monthly    Monthly
          requisitions,       & annual requisitions                                    for every 1% of     Invoices
          revisions           for all HAP contracts                                    PHA
                              are submitted to                                         submissions         FMC
          Section 3.7         HUD ninety calendar                                      that falls below    Status
                              days before the                                          the AQL             Reports
                              PHA’s fiscal year.

                              100% of revised
                              budgets & annual
                              requisitions to
                              reduce future
                              payments are
                              submitted to HUD by
                              the first day of the
                              month after
                              identification of
                              overpayments.

                              AQL:
                              100% on time
                              submissions




ACC                                  EXHIBIT           A— PAGE 41
                         IBPS PERFORMANCE               REQUIREMENTS SUMMARY

      A           B                    C            D           E                  F              G          H




IBPS      TASK & SOW    ACCEPTABLE             IBPS       INCENTIVE         DISINCENTIVE     | QA       PAYMENT
TASK                    QUALITY LEVEL          PER-       FEE               DEDUCTION          METHOD
                        (AQL)                  CENT     | PER CENT          (“deduction”)
#
                                               (of                          (as % of
                                               max.       (as % of          maximum
                                               basic      incentive fee   | IBPS fee)
                                               fee)       pool)

12.       Year-end      The year-end           8%         N/A               4% deduction      Status    Annually
          statement     statement is                                        for every day     Report
                        submitted within 45                                 the submission
          Section 3.7   calendar days after                                 exceeds the
                        the end of the PHA’s                                AQL
                        fiscal year.

                        AQL:
                        Submission within
                        45 calendar days.




ACC                             EXHIBIT A — PAGE 42
                            IBPS PERFORMANCE                 REQUIREMENTS SUMMARY

      A           B                   Cc                 D           E                   F                     G        H



IBPS      TASK & SOW       ACCEPTABLE               IBPS       INCENTIVE         DISINCENTIVE         | QA         PAYMENT
TASK                       QUALITY LEVEL            PER-       FEE               DEDUCTION              METHOD
                           (AQL)                    CENT     | PERCENT           (“deduction”)
#
                                                    (of                          (as % of
                                                    max.       (as % of          maximum
                                                    basic      incentive fee   | IBPS fee)
                                                    fee)       pool)

13.       Public Housing   For a PHA that must      3%         N/A               2% deduction          100%        Annually
          Agency audit     comply with OMB’s                                     for every             Review of
                           Circular A-133,                                       calendar day          Audit
          Section 3.8      unaudited financial
                           statement is
                                                                                 that the financial
                           submitted to HUD
                                                                                 statements
                           within 60 calendar                                    exceeds the
                           days after the PHA’s                                  days specified
                           fiscal year end and                                   in the AQL
                           audited financial
                           statement is submitted
                           to HUD within nine
                           calendar months after
                           the PHA’s fiscal year
                           end. For a PHA that
                           is not required to
                           comply with OMB’s
                           Circular A-133,
                           unaudited financial
                           statement is submitted
                           to HUD within sixty
                           calendar days after
                           the PHA’s fiscal year
                           end.

                           For a For-profit
                           instrumentality PHA,
                           the audited financial
                           statement is submitted
                           to HUD within sixty
                           calendar days after
                           the PHA’s fiscal year
                           end

                           AQL:
                           100% of financial
                           statements submitted
                           on time




ACC                                EXHIBIT A — PAGE 43
                          IBPS PERFORMANCE                  REQUIREMENTS SUMMARY

      A             B              Cc                   D            E                     F                  G         H



IBPS      TASK & SOW     ACCEPTABLE               IBPS        INCENTIVE            DISINCENTIVE      | QA          PAYMENT
TASK                     QUALITY LEVEL            PER-        FEE                  DEDUCTION           METHOD
                         (AQL)                    CENT      | PERCENT              (“deduction”)
#
                                                  (of                              (as % of
                                                  max.        (as % of             maximum
                                                  basic       incentive fee      | IBPS fee)
                                                  fee)        pool)

14.       Renewals of    90% of renewal HAP      | 12%        20% of the           3% deduction        On-Site     Monthly
          expiring HAP   contracts executed                   incentive fee        for every 1% of   | Reviews
          contracts      and submitted    to                  pool to              renewal HAP
                         (HUD) sixty                          monitor,             contracts           Data
          Section 3.9    calendar days before                 process, &           submitted to        Systems
                         contract expiration                  execute 95%          HUD after the       Reports
                                                              of HAP               AQL period
                         AQL:90% of HAP                       contract                                 Monthly
                         contracts submitted                  documents.                               Invoices
                         on time                              An additional
                                                              10% of the
                                                              incentive fee if
                                                              100% is
                                                              attained.

15.       General        16 out of 17 required   | 5%         N/A                  10% deduction       On-Site     Annually
          reporting      reports submitted to                                      per report not      Reviews;
          requirements   HUD on time                                               submitted on
                                                                                   time                Data
          Section 3.10   AQL:                                                                          Systems
                         16 reports submitted
                         to HUD on time                                                                Reports;
                                                                                                       Review of
                                                                                                       submitted
                                                                                                       reports




ACC                             EXHIBIT A — PAGE 44
                          IBPS PERFORMANCE                   REQUIREMENTS SUMMARY

      A           B                 Cc                   D           E                   F                  G          H



IBPS      TASK & SOW     ACCEPTABLE                 IBPS       INCENTIVE         DISINCENTIVE        | QA         PAYMENT
TASK                     QUALITY LEVEL              PER-       FEE               DEDUCTION             METHOD
                         (AQL)                      CENT     | PER CENT          (“deduction”)
#
                                                    (of                          (as % of
                                                    max.       (as % of          maximum
                                                    basic      incentive fee   | IBPS fee)
                                                    fee)       pool)

16.       Monitoring     For 95% of projects        3%         N/A               2% reduction          On-Site    Monthly
          physical       with unacceptable                                       for every 1% of     | Reviews
          inspection     physical inspection                                     notifications and
          results        performance and                                         follow-up             Systems
                         compliance                                              reports               Data
          Section 3.11   indicators:                                             completed after     | Reports
                                                                                 the AQL period
                         PHA notifies owners                                                           Monthly
                         within thirty days                                                            Invoices
                         after receipt of
                         inspection results
                         from HUD, and

                         PHA monitors
                         follow-up reports to
                         HUD by the tenth
                         business day of
                         every month until
                         final resolution is
                         reached.

                         AQL:
                         95% of initial
                         notifications and
                         follow up reports
                         completed within
                         required time
                         frames.




ACC                             EXHIBIT         A — PAGE 45
4.8.   How to calculate earned administrative fees


                         MONTHLY FEE CALCULATION

 PART 1      DETERMINING EARNED BASIC FEES



            DETERMINING TOTAL EARNED BASIC FEES

            Part | calculates the total amount of the PHA’s earned basic fees for
            the fee month.

1 to 4      DETERMINING TOTAL OF MAXIMUM BASIC FEES FOR ALL
            COVERED UNITS

            Execute Steps 1 to 4 for each FMR area in the PHA service area.
            In Step 5, add the Step 3 amounts for all FMR areas..-




ACC                            EXHIBIT A — PAGE 46
      DETERMINING MAXIMUM BASIC FEE
      (FOR COVERED UNITS IN AN FMR AREA)

      Step 1 determines the maximum basic fee amount used to calculate
      administrative fees for any fee month in any year of the ACC term
      (initial ACC term or any renewal term). Each year of the ACC term is a
      period of twelve calendar months. The first year of the ACC term
      commences on the first day of the month of HUD’s first assignment to
      the PHA of existing HAP contracts for covered units for contract
      administration under the ACC.

      For a fee month in the first two years of the ACC term
      (the first twenty four months):
      Exhibit E of the ACC specifies the dollar amount of the maximum basic
      fee (per unit per month) for each FMR area during the first two years of
      the ACC term.   The maximum basic fee is entered in Step 1-B

      For a fee month in subsequent years of ACC term
      (years three, four or five):
      The ACC does not specify the dollar amount of the maximum basic fee
      for each subsequent year of the ACC term (years 3, 4 or 5). For each
      FMR area and for each subsequent year, Exhibit E of the ACC
      specifies the basic fee percentage that is used to calculate the
      maximum basic fee. The maximum basic fee (for each FMR area) is
      calculated by multiplying the basic fee percentage for that year times
      the two-bedroom published FMR in effect at the beginning of that year
      of the ACC term. The maximum basic fee for year 3, 4 or 5 is
      calculated in Steps 1-C to 1-E.

      Year of ACC term             Enter the year of the ACC term in which
                                   the fee month falls (year 1 to year 5).

                                   After completing Step 1-A:
                                   e     For fee month in year 1 or year 2 of
                                         ACC term, go to Step 1-B.
                                   e     For fee month in a subsequent year of
                                         the ACC term, go to Steps 1-C to 1-E.



1-B   MAXIMUM    BASIC FEE:            Step-1 B states the maximum basic fee in
      IN FIRST TWO YEARS           year 1 or year 2 of the ACC term (as
      OF ACC TERM                  specified in Step 1-A).

                                   ACC




ACC                      EXHIBIT A — PAGE 47
1-B                              From Exhibit E of the ACC, enter the
                                 amount of the maximum basic fee for the
                                 FMR area for year 1 or year 2.

                                 Enter the same amount in Step 1-F.     Skip
                                 to Step 1-F.

      MAXIMUM BASIC FEE:         Steps 1-C to 1-E are used to calculate the
      IN SUBSEQUENT YEAR         maximum basic fee for a fee month in
      OF THE ACC TERM            year 3, 4 or 5 of ACC term (as specified in
                                 Step 1-A ).

                                 From Exhibit E of the ACC, enter the
                                 basic fee percentage for that year.

1-D                              Enter the amount of the two-bedroom
                                 FMR   for the FMR   area.

                                 Use the two-bedroom FMR in effect at the
                                 beginning of the first month of the year of
                                 the ACC term specified in Step 1-A. (from
                                 HUD’s published FMR notice).

                                 Enter the amount calculated by multiplying
                                 Step 1-C times Step 1-D.

                                 Enter the same amount in Step 1-F.

      Maximum basic fee          For fee month in year 1 or year 2 of the
      (for covered units in      ACC term (as specified in Step 1-A):
      FMR area)                  Enter amount from Step 1-B.

                                 For fee month in year 3, 4 or 5 of the ACC
                                 term (as specified in Step 1-A):
                                 Enter amount from Step 1-E.

      Covered units (in FMR      Enter the number of covered units in the
      area)                      FMR area (at the beginning of the fee
                                 month). (HUD will provide a summary of
                                 units in each FMR area monthly).

      Total for FMR   area       Multiply Step 1-F times Step 2.




ACC                      EXHIBIT A — PAGE 48
      Repeat for next FMR       Repeat Steps 1 to 3 for the next FMR area
      area                      (loop to Step 1-A). After executing these
                                steps for all FMR areas in the service area,
                                go to Step 5.

      Total for PHA service     Add the Step 3 amounts for all FMR areas.
      area




ACC                     EXHIBIT A — PAGE 49
          CALCULATION OF EARNED BASIC FEES

          The earned basic fee is the sum of the earned IBPS fees for a covered
          unit.   The following steps calculate the total amount of the PHA’s
          earned basic fees for all covered units in the service area.

          Column H of the PRS specifies whether the IBPS fee for performance
          of each particular IBPS task is paid monthly or annually. The total of
          earned basic fees for the fee month is calculated by adding earned
          IBPS fees for monthly IBPS tasks and for annual IBPS tasks payable
          for that fee month.

6 to 10   IBPS TASKS PAID MONTHLY:
          DETERMINING TOTAL IBPS FEES

          Steps 6 to 8 calculate the IBPS fee for each IBPS task paid monthly.
          Repeat these steps for each such IBPS task..

          Step 10 calculates the total of these IBPS fees for all covered units in
          the service area.

          At the time of   ACC execution, the PRS specifies that IBPS fees for the
          following IBPS tasks are paid monthly:
          IBPS tasks 1 to 10 and 13 to 15.

          DETERMINING MAXIMUM IBPS FEE

6-A       IBPS percentage                For each IBPS task paid monthly (as
                                         specified in column H of the PRS):
                                         Enter the IBPS percentage for the IBPS
                                         task (from Column D of the PRS).

6-B       Maximum total IBPS             Multiply Step 5 times Step 6-A..
          fees for an IBPS task


          DETERMINING DISINCENTIVE DEDUCTION

7-A       Disincentive deduction      | Calculate and enter any applicable
          percentage                    disincentive deduction percentage for the
                                        IBPS task.

                                         Column F of the PRS explains how to
                                         calculate the disincentive deduction
                                         percentage for each IBPS task.



ACC                             EXHIBIT A — PAGE 50
7-B         Disincentive deduction        | Multiply Step 6-B times Step 7-A.
            amount

8           Total IBPS fees earned      | Subtract Step 7-B from Step 6-B
            for an IBPS task

9           Repeat                          Repeat Steps 6 to 8 for the next IBPS task
                                            paid monthly (loop to Step 6-A). After
                                            executing for all such IBPS tasks, go to
                                            Step 10.

10          Total IBPS fees (for            Add the IBPS fees for all IBPS tasks paid
            IBPS tasks paid                 monthly as calculated in Step 8.
            monthly)


11 to 15   | IBPS TASKS PAID ANNUALLY:
             DETERMINING TOTAL IBPS FEES

            For each IBPS task paid annually, Steps 11 to 15 calculate the total of
            annual IBPS fees for all covered units in the service area.. Repeat
            these steps for each such IBPS task.

            At the time of   ACC execution, the PRS specifies that IBPS fees for the
            following IBPS tasks are paid annually:
            IBPS tasks 12, 13 and 15.

11          DETERMINING MAXIMUM IBPS FEE

11-A        IBPS percentage                 For each IBPS task paid annually (as
                                            specified in column H of the PRS):
                                            Enter the IBPS percentage for the IBPS
                                            task (from Column D of the PRS).

11-B        Maximum total IBPS              Multiply Step 5 times Step 11-A.
            fees for an IBPS task




ACC                             EXHIBIT      A— PAGE 51
11-C                              For the fee month when the annual IBPS
                                  fee is payable: Enter zero.


                                  For the other fee months:(i.e., all fee
                                  months except the fee month when the
                                  annual IBPS fee is payable):
                                  Add the Step 11-C amount from the
                                  monthly fee calculation for the preceding
                                  fee month and the Step 11-B amount from
                                  the monthly fee calculation for the current
                                  fee month.

11-D                              Enter Step 11-C amount from the monthly
                                  fee calculation for the preceding fee month

11-E   Annual IBPS fee pool       Add Step 11-B and Step 11-D

12     DETERMINING DISINCENTIVE DEDUCTION

12-A   Disincentive deduction     Calculate and enter any applicable
       percentage                 disincentive deduction percentage for the
                                  IBPS task.

                                  Column F of the PRS explains how to
                                  calculate the disincentive deduction
                                  percentage for each IBPS task.

12-B   Disincentive deduction     Multiply Step 11-E times Step 12-A.
       amount

13     Total IBPS fees earned     Subtract Step 12-B from Step 11-E
       for an IBPS task

14     Repeat                     Repeat Steps 11 to 13 for the next IBPS
                                  task paid annually (loop to Step 11-A).
                                  After executing for all such IBPS tasks, go
                                  to Step 15.

15     Total IBPS fees (for       Add the IBPS fees for all IBPS tasks paid
       IBPS tasks paid            annually as calculated in Step 13.
       monthly)

16     Total IBPS fees for fee    Add Step 10 and Step 15
       month




ACC                       EXHIBIT A — PAGE 52
PART 2 | DETERMINING EARNED INCENTIVE FEES



17        Determining the incentive fee pool

          The incentive fee pool is the maximum amount of incentive fees that
          may be earned by the PHA for each month of the ACC term. The total
          amount of earned incentive fees for each month may not exceed the
          amount of the incentive fee pool available for the month.

          Step 17 calculates the total amount of the incentive fee pool

          Earned Incentive fees are paid quarterly The quarterly payment is the
          total of earned incentive fees for the three calendar months in the
          quarter..

17-A      Year of ACC term              e   Fora fee month in year 1 or year 2 of
                                            the ACC term (from Step 1-A), go to
                                            Step 17-B.
                                        e   Fora fee month in year 3. 4 or 5 of the
                                            ACC term (from Step 1-A), go to
                                            Step 17-D.

17-B &   | MAXIMUM    INCENTIVE         Steps 17-B and 17-C are used to calculate
17-C      FEE:                          the maximum incentive fee (per unit per
          IN FIRST TWO YEARS            month) for a fee month in year 1 or year 2
          OF ACC TERM                   of the ACC term (as specified in Step 1-A).

17-B                                    For a fee month in year 1 or year 2 of the
                                        ACC term:
                                        For each FMR area, enter the amount of
                                        the two-bedroom FMR for the FMR area.

                                        Use the two-bedroom FMR in effect at the
                                        beginning of the ACC term (from HUD’s
                                        published FMR notice).


17-C                                    Multiply 0.01 (one percent) times the
                                        amount in Step 17-B.

                                        Enter the same amount in Step 17-F.




ACC                           EXHIBIT A — PAGE 53
17-D &   MAXIMUM INCENTIVE              Steps 17-D and 17-E are used to calculate
17-E     FEE:                           the maximum incentive fee for a fee month
         IN SUBSEQUENT YEAR             in year 3, 4 or 5 of the ACC term (as
         OF ACC TERM                    specified in Step 1-A).

17-D                                    For a fee month in year 3, 4 or 5 of the
                                        ACC term
                                        For each FMR area, enter the amount of
                                        the two-bedroom FMR for the FMR area.
                                        (See Exhibit E).

17-E                                    Multiply 0.01 (one percent) times the
                                        amount in Step 17-D.

                                        Enter the same amount in Step          17-F.

17-F     Maximum incentive fee          For a fee month in year 1 or year 2 of the
         (for covered units in          ACC term (as specified in Step 1-A):
         FMR area)                      Enter the amount from Step 17-B.

                                        For a fee month in year 3, 4 or 5 of the
                                        ACC term (as specified in Step 1-A):
                                        Enter the amount from Step 17-E.

18       Covered units in FMR           Enter the number of covered units in the
         area                           FMR area (at the beginning of the month).
                                        (Same as amount in Step 2.)

19       Total for FMR   area           For each FMR area, multiply Step 17-F
                                        times Step 18.

20       Repeat                         Repeat Steps 17 to 19 for the next FMR
                                        area (loop to Step 17-A). After completing
                                        Step 19 for all FMR areas, go on to
                                        Step 21.

21       Incentive fee pool --          Add the amounts calculated in Step 19 for
         Total for PHA service          all FMR   areas in the service area.
         area




ACC                             EXHIBIT A — PAGE 54
22     Determining incentive fee (for IBPS task)

       The PHA may earn incentive fee for above AQL performance of
       specified IBPS tasks (Column E of the PRS). Step 22 calculates the
       amount of any incentive fees earned for performance of an IBPS task.
       Repeat Step 22 for each IBPS task for which incentive fee may be
       earned.

       At the time of ACC execution, the PRS specifies that the PHA may earn
       incentive fees for performance of the following four IBPS tasks::
       IBPS task #1 (management and occupancy reviews),
       IBPS task #2 (document owner compliance),
       IBPS task # 5 (provide resident data to HUD), and
       IBPS task #14 (renewals of expiring § 8 HAP contracts).

       By notice to the PHA, HUD may modify the designation of such IBPS
       tasks, and may modify the performance standard or incentive fee
       percentage used to calculate the incentive fee.

       For IBPS #14, there are two separate incentive fee performance
       standards and incentive fee percentages for performance at the
       specified performance level.

       Execute Steps 22 for each IBPS task designated as a performance
       standard used to determine incentive fees.

22-A   Incentive fee percentage | Enter incentive fee percentage for the
                                  IBPS task and performance standard (from
                                  Column E of the PRS).



22-B   Incentive fee earned         Determine if PHA qualifies for the incentive
                                    fee (for the IBPS task and performance
                                    standard). Column E of the PRS explains
                                    how to determine when the PHA qualifies
                                    for an incentive fee.

                                    If the PHA qualifies for an incentive fee,
                                    multiply Step 8-D times Step 9-A (for the
                                    IBPS task and performance standard).

22-C   Repeat                       Repeat Step 22 for the next IBPS task and
                                    performance standard (loop to Step 22-A).
                                    After completing Step 22-B for each IBPS
                                    standard (for which an incentive fee may
                                    be earned), go on to Step 23.



ACC                       EXHIBIT    A— PAGE 55
23       Total incentive fees for   Add the incentive fees earned for all IBPS
         fee month                  tasks as calculated in Step 22-B.

24                                  e   For the last month of the calendar
                                        quarter: (when earned incentive fees
                                        are payable):

                                        Enter zero.

                                        Then go to Step 25.

                                    e   For the other fee months (i.e., the first
                                        two months of the calendar quarter):

                                        Add the Step 24 amount from the
                                        monthly fee calculation for the
                                        preceding fee month and the Step 23
                                        amount from the monthly fee
                                        calculation for the current fee month.

                                        Then go to Step 27.

25                                  Enter Step 24 amount from the monthly
                                    fee calculation for the preceding fee month

26       Total incentive fees for   Add Step 23 and Step 25.
         quarter

27       Total incentive fees       For the last month of the quarter:
         payable in fee month       Enter the amount in Step 26.

                                    For the other fee months (i.e., the first two
                                    months of the calendar quarter):
                                    Enter zero.



PART 3    DETERMINING EARNED ADMINISTRATIVE FEES



28       Total Administrative       Add Step 16 and Step 27.
         Fees




ACC                         EXHIBIT A — PAGE 56
5. ACC TERM

The initial term of the ACC shall be thirty-six calendar months commencing on the
first day of the month of HUD’s first assignment to the PHA of existing HAP
contracts for covered units for contract administration pursuant to the ACC. (The
same ACC term shall apply for all covered units, whether such covered units are
included in the first HUD assignment of covered units, or are added subsequently.)

HUD may unilaterally elect to renew the ACC for up to two additional twelve month
renewal terms after the initial term. Each such renewal shall be at HUD’s sole
discretion, and shall be exercised by written notice to the PHA of HUD’s election to
renew. HUD must give such renewal notice at least three calendar months before
the end of the expiring term (the initial term and the first twelve month renewal
term).

The PHA may unilaterally elect to terminate the ACC term at the end of the last
month of the initial ACC term, or at the end of any month of the first or second
twelve month renewal term, if the PHA gives HUD written notice of the PHA’s
election to terminate the ACC term at least twelve calendar months before
termination.

6. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMPLIANCE

The PHA shall not discriminate against any employee or applicant for employment
because of race, color, creed, religion, sex, handicap or national origin. The PHA
shall take affirmative action to ensure that applicants and employees are treated
without regard to race, color, creed, religion, sex, handicap, or national origin.
Such action shall include, but not be limited to, the following:   employment,
upgrading, demotion, or transfer; recruitment or recruitment advertising; layoff or
termination; rates of pay or other forms of compensation; and selection for training,
including apprenticeship.

The PHA shall post in conspicuous places, available to employees and applicants
for employment, notices to be provided by HUD setting forth the provisions of this
nondiscrimination clause. The PHA shall assure in all solicitations or
advertisements for employees placed by or on behalf of the PHA that all qualified
applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, color,
creed, religion, sex, handicap or national origin. The PHA must incorporate the
foregoing requirements of this paragraph in all of its contracts for project work,
except contracts for standard commercial supplies or raw materials, and must
require all of its contractors for such work to incorporate such requirements in all
subcontracts for project work.




ACC                             EXHIBIT A — PAGE 57
7. DATA SYSTEMS

7.1.   Federal Requirements

The PHA must comply with all Federal data processing and data reporting
requirements applicable to PHA functions under the ACC, including requirements
for Public Housing Agencies described in the Automation Rule (Section 108 of 24
CFR, Part 208 —Electronic Transmission of Required Data for Certification and
Recertification and Subsidy Billing Procedures for Multifamily Subsidized Projects).
See also program records requirements at § 12 of the ACC.

The PHA must have Internet Service Provider (ISP) access for electronic
communication over the Internet with HUD, owners or others. The PHA must
comply with HUD requirements for electronic communication (including
requirements concerning email and other communication over the Internet).      The
PHA must comply with HUD requirements for data entry and data transfer over the
Internet.

The PHA must ensure that all electronic data systems are virus free.

The PHA must have the capability to implement changes in data processing and
data reporting procedures to comply with changes in HUD requirements. HUD will
provide reasonable advance notice (by HUD directive to PHAs or otherwise) of
changes in HUD requirements concerning automated data systems and
automated data reporting. HUD will provide such advance notice a minimum of 90
days before PHA compliance will be required.

7.2.   Communication with owners

The PHA must have the capability to receive resident certification and
recertification data (form HUD 50059) and voucher data (form HUD 52670)
electronically from owners in a form consistent with HUD reporting requirements
for the HUD TRACS System. The PHA must have the capability, in the form
acceptable to HUD, for communicating errors in HUD 50059 and HUD 52670
submissions to owners.



7.3.   Communication with HUD

The PHA must provide HUD with data on HAP contracts, rent adjustments and
payments to owners, contract renewal processing, management and occupancy
reviews, and other documents and information relevant to the PHA responsibilities
outlined in this RFP. The PHA must have the capability to transmit data to HUD
over the Internet as required by HUD.

The PHA must have the capability to transmit HUD 50059 data to the HUD
TRACS Tenant System and HUD 52670 data to the HUD TRACS


ACC                            EXHIBIT A — PAGE 58
Voucher/Payment System, and to receive return messages transmitted from
TRACS.       The PHA’s Internet access must provide the PHA with the capability to
review the resident and voucher data that the PHA has transmitted to HUD, to
ensure that the data maintained by HUD is correct and consistent with the data
maintained in PHA files.

Resident reporting requirements specified for HUD’s TRACS Tenant System and
voucher reporting requirements specified for the TRACS Voucher/Payment
System are published on the TRACS Documents Page on the world wide web.
The PHA must meet the requirements specified in these documents. (At this time,
the PHA can access the TRACS            Documents Page at
http://www.hud.gov/fha/mfh/trx/html/trxdocs.html.)

7.4.    Fund transfer and payment

The PHA must have a depository account with a federally insured financial
institution capable of receiving and sending electronic fund transfer (EFT)
transactions. See also depository requirements at § 9b of the ACC.

The PHA must have facilities acceptable to HUD for making timely and accurate
housing assistance payments to owners. The PHA must also transmit budget,
requisition, and year-end settlement data to HUD via the Internet, or as otherwise
specified by HUD.

8. MANAGEMENT CAPACITY AND QUALITY CONTROL PLAN

The PHA must have a detailed quality control plan (QC Plan) that will:

e      Ensure that the contract performance requirements are met;

e      Provide accountability and separation of duties to detect and prevent potential
       fraud, waste, and abuse of funds, and

e      Identify processes/procedures to prevent, detect, and resolve conflicts of
       interest in accordance with the ACC.

The QC Plan must include, but is not limited to:

1.      A Work Plan including all contract administration services, with a break down
        of each task/sub-task. The Work Plan must:

              Specify all areas and services that the PHA will review.

              Include a timeline (duration, start, finish) the PHA will review areas/services.

              Depict the resource name/s and task usage for each task.




ACC                                 EXHIBIT A — PAGE 59
2.    The name(s) and qualifications of the individual(s) responsible for performing
      the quality control reviews and the specific areas/services these individuals
      will inspect.

3.    A method to identify performance deficiencies and to take corrective action to
      ensure against unsatisfactory performance.

4.    Ameans to document all quality control reviews and any required corrective
      action.   The PHA shall establish and maintain files for such documentation
      through the term of the ACC.    The filing method shall be such that all
      information relative to quality control inspections is logically grouped together
      and readily accessible. The files shall be the property of HUD and be made
      available to HUD upon demand during the PHA’s regular business hours.
      The files shall be turned over to HUD within 10 business days after
      completion or termination of the ACC.

5.    Workflow and organizational charts that describe the processes and controls
      that the PHA will use to implement and operate its technical approach and to
      execute the QC plan.




ACC                             EXHIBIT A — PAGE 60
                                 EXHIBIT B

                             COVERED UNITS
Contract No.   Property   Name                    Assisted Units




ACC                          EXHIBIT B — PAGE 1
Contract No.   Property   Name                   Assisted Units




ACC                          EXHIBIT B— PAGE 2
Contract No.   Property   Name                    Assisted Units




ACC                          EXHIBIT B—- PAGE 3
Contract No.   Property   Name                    Assisted Units




ACC                          EXHIBIT B — PAGE 4
                           EXHIBIT C

                           FUNDING
PHA   Fiscal Year




      Contract Number         Property Name    Budget
                                              Authority




ACC                     EXHIBIT
                              C — PAGE 1
      Contract Number        Property Name    Budget
                                             Authority




ACC                     EXHIBIT
                              C — PAGE 2
      Contract Number        Property Name    Budget
                                             Authority




ACC                     EXHIBIT
                              C — PAGE 3
      Contract Number        Property Name    Budget
                                             Authority




ACC                     EXHIBIT
                              C — PAGE 4
      Contract Number        Property Name    Budget
                                             Authority




ACC                     EXHIBIT
                              C — PAGE 5
      Contract Number         Property Name    Budget
                                              Authority




ACC                     EXHIBIT
                              C — PAGE 6
                    EXHIBIT D
      PUBLIC HOUSING AGENCY SERVICE AREA




ACC             EXHIBIT D — PAGE 1
                    EXHIBIT E
              PHA Administrative Fee


FY 2000 FMR                  FMR Area




ACC              EXHIBIT E — PAGE 1
                                Maximum Basic Fee
                                Per Unit Per Month
      FMR Area                     Year 1     Vear 2




ACC      EXHIBIT   E — PAGE 2
