Major Service Change, Disparate Impacts and Disproportionate
Burden Policies
PURPOSE:

The purpose of the Fare and Service Change directive is to ensure no person or group of persons shall be
discriminated against with regard to the routing, scheduling, or quality of transportation service furnished
by Delaware Transit Corporation (DTC) on the basis of race, color or national origin. Frequency of
service, age and quality of vehicles assigned to routes, quality of stations serving different routes, and
locations of routes may not be determined on the basis of race, color or national origin.

DEFINITIONS:

Title VI Major Service Change is defined as an service change affecting 15 percent or more of the
ridership within the county for which the reduction/addition is proposed, or at least 15 percent
reduction/addition of the service miles currently operating in the affected county, or at least 25 percent
reduction/addition of the revenue service trips of any 1 route including new routes (Note: Delaware Code
Title 2, Chapter 13, Section 1309(28)(b)(1), defines a Major Service Change but FTA guidelines require
DTC to amend its policy to also include new or increased services).

Title VI Disparate Impact establishes the threshold for when the adverse effects of a major service change
or fare increase is borne by minority populations.

       For major service changes, the most recent and available census data will be used along with
        route level operating data to estimate the impacts on minority populations. In evaluating the
        major service change, DTC will estimate the ridership impacts and the population of minority
        persons impacted. A disparate impact will occur when the minority population adversely affected
        by a major service change is twenty percent (20%) more than non-minority population adversely
        affected by the major service change.
       For fare policy changes, ridership data by route along with results from the most recent on-board
        survey will be used by DTC to estimate the ridership impacts and the number of minority riders
        affected. A disparate impact will occur when the minority riders adversely affected by a fare
        policy increase is twenty percent (20%) more than non-minority riders adversely affected by the
        fare increase.

Title VI Disproportionate Burden establishes the threshold for when the adverse effects of a major service
change or Fare policy change is borne by low-income populations.

       For major service changes, the most recent and available census data will be used along with
        route level operating data to estimate the impacts on low-income populations as defined by the
        U.S. Census. In evaluating the major service change, DTC will estimate the ridership impacts and
        the population of low income persons affected. A disproportionate burden will occur when the
        low-income population adversely affected by a major service change is twenty percent (20%)
        more than non-low income population adversely affected by the major service change.

For fare policy changes, ridership data by route along with results from the most recent on-board survey
will be used by DTC to estimate the ridership impacts and the number of low-income riders impacted. A
disproportionate burden will occur when the low-income riders adversely affected by a fare increase is
twenty percent (20%) more than non-low income riders adversely affected by the major service change.
DIRECTIVE:

Following the guidelines set forth by FTA Circular 4702.1B, DTC has established the below process for
determining when to conduct an equity analysis for a major service change and/or fare change. The
process is used to compare the level of service provided to predominantly minority areas with the level of
service provided to predominantly non-minority areas to ensure the result of policies and decision-making
is equitable.

Planning staff identifies service changes and/or fare policy changes for review by Executive Team. This
includes service changes that are part of the normal bi-annual service changes and changes that may be
required by a unique or emergency situation.

        1. Upon approval to proceed by the Executive Team, Planning Staff prepares Title VI Service
           Change Equity Analysis (Title VI Reporting Form) and/or Title VI Fare Policy Equity
           Analysis.

                   In the event prior decisions have triggered a disparate impact because of race, color,
                    or national origin, DTC will take corrective actions to remedy the disparities to the
                    greatest extent possible.
                   Additionally, a report of the disparate impacts and actions taken to rectify will be
                    included in the subsequent Title VI Program update.

        2. Public meetings for fare policy changes and major service changes will be held as required by
           Delaware Code and as outlined in the DelDOT Public Involvement Policy. In carrying out the
           public participation process, DTC will take affirmative steps to ensure meaningful access for
           minority and low-income populations.
        3. Following the public comment period, the Title VI Service Change Equity Analysis, Title VI
           Fare Policy Equity Analysis and public comments will be reviewed by a committee existing
           of at least the Planning Manager, Compliance Officer, Chief Administrative Officer and
           Chief Operating Officer.
        4. Upon final recommendation of the committee, the Title VI Service Change Equity Analysis
           and Title VI Fare Policy Equity Analysis will be presented for approval by Chief Executive
           Officer and the Secretary.
        5. Service and/or fare change implemented.

DIRECTIVE IMPLEMENT:

The Compliance Officer and Chief of Performance Management are responsible for the administration,
revision and application of this directive. The directive will be reviewed annually or as required by FTA
changes and will be revised as needed.




October 2019
