Oregon Government Ethics Commission
              June
                1, 2024




                  903-378-5105
              mail@ogec.oregon.gov
              www.oregon.gov/ogec
TABLE      OF CONTENTS

Mission, Vision, Values, Goals ...........0...c cece ccccccccccceccesescssessssssssssssssssssscsesevsseeseeserersessssasesseess 1


Strategies | Key Engagement Strategies... ccccccssscceccecceesssseceeceecesessaseeeecescessnsaeeeeeees 2


Strategies | Key Development & Operations Strategies 2.0.0.0...                                  ccc cccceseccccessseceecestsseeeeenens 3


Monitor & Evaluation oo...               ccc cccccsceseeeseceseeeeneceseeseeceseeseeceeeesseeceeeceseeceeseeesueeesaeesiesesaeseeeeaaes 4
OGEC    DEI   Plan



Mission:
Impartially and effectively administer and enforce Oregon’s Government Ethics Laws for the
benefit of Oregon’s citizens. OGEC will emphasize education in achieving its mission.

Vision:
OGEC envisions an agency that is able to support the
training needs of the State of Oregon with regards to
Oregon Ethics Law, Public Meetings Law, and Lobby Law,
while ensuring effective compliance is in place.

Values:
   e Striving to make ethical choices the standard for all
       public officials.
       Championing government transparency.
       Focusing on education and training.
       Building racial equity into the foundation of OGEC.
       Investing in sustainable operations for a better climate future.
       Serving Oregon Constituents.

Additionally, OGEC recognizes the importance of diversity and inclusion, expertise, personal
responsibility, collaboration, effectiveness, accountability, and effective communication in
accomplishing our mission.

Who    We Are:
The Oregon Government Ethics Commission (OGEC) administers Oregon Ethics Law, Lobby
Law, and Public Meetings Law.

The Commission is made up of nine Commissioners. Eight Commissioners are appointed by the
Governor upon recommendation, two each by the Democratic and Republican leaders of the
Oregon House and Senate. The Governor selects one Commissioner directly. All nine
Commissioners must be confirmed by the Senate. No more than three of the Commissioners
may be from the same political party.

OGEC staff consists of the Executive Director who is appointed by the Commission and 14 full-
time employees (FTE). Prior to the 2023 Legislative session, OGEC’s total staff was 9;
however, with the passage of OGEC’s budget and House Bill 2805, OGEC grew by 6 FTE. This
new growth has given OGEC an opportunity to reshape its DEI plan and move forward from
previous stagnation. The new FTE has brought in an increased passion for DEI and
accessibility which will help OGEC learn from its gaps and shortcomings, while taking the time
to appreciate the history of the agency. Previously, DEI attempts were hindered by a lack of
buy-in from staff and Commissioners. OGEC is hopeful that the agency will be able to build up
the passion and energy of the new staff and those of the existing staff to create a new culture
within the agency.
OGEC     Diversity, Equity, & Inclusion Plan


Our Goals:
The OGEC DEI plan has two fundamental goals to advance its mission for the next three years
and beyond:
   = Educate on the laws within OGEC’s jurisdiction in a manner that is accessible and
         inclusive.
    «    Strive to improve OGEC’s internal and external DEI baseline.

Key Engagement Strategies

The last twelve months have brought significant change in OGEC’s structure and makeup as
mentioned in the “Who we are” section. During this time, OGEC has experienced loss of
staffing, including a long-term executive director, but have also gained new staff. This has
given OGEC an opportunity to learn from past experiences and to hopefully grow and adapt.
OGEC utilized contributions from staff, Commissioners, and solicited feedback from the
“Ethics Matters’ newsletter to craft OGEC’s DEI plan.

Relationships, both internal and external, play key roles in DEI. OGEC has let previously
established relationships lapse and needs to take the time to reestablish those relationships,
as well as establish new relationships and connections with other external invested parties,
partners, and communities.

OGEC also needs to take the time to engage staff and initiate conversations internally about
what DEI and an inclusive culture looks like to OGEC going forward.


    1.   Engage Staff — Define what engagement and disengagement looks like
            a. Initiate conversations and staff meetings around diversity, equity, and inclusion.
                      i. This could be small pockets of time set during weekly staff meetings to
                         collaborate as a staff and work forward from there.
                    ii. Invite staff to bring forward ideas or topics that they are passionate about.
            b. Invite the Office of Cultural Change to speak to staff and potentially Commission
               about the importance of DEI.
            c. Stream sponsored statewide DEI trainings in the large conference room to
                    encourage participation.
             d.     Have staff look for free or affordable DEI resources/trainings/activities to spark
                    conversation.
    2.   Hold Each Other Accountable — Define what an Inclusive Culture looks like to OGEC
             a. Define together what kind of culture OGEC wants to have.
             b. Establish ways to talk to each other when accountability is needed.
             c. Be accountable to each other as established in 2(b).

    1.   (Re)Build Relationships
             a. Re-establish working relationships with external partners that have collapsed
                    over time. This will be a slow, methodical process.



Oregon Government   Ethics Commission — Diversity, Equity, & Inclusion Plan 2024
                                                                               2
OGEC     Diversity, Equity, & Inclusion Plan
                        a.  Review relationships that have fallen behind and reach out in a variety of
                            ways to reestablish contact and move forward at the pace established by
                           the partner.
             b.     Establish new relationships with external partners that were overlooked
                previously. This will take time and will not be an immediate fix.
    2.   Trainings
             a.     Review who attends OGEC trainings and who has access to the trainings.
             b.     Extend the reach of OGEC trainings to those that have been historically under-
                    represented. Establish contact with those that have been missing trainings. This
                    will not be a quick process to form those connections.
             c.     Ensure trainings are accessible.
                        a.   Increase staff exposure to accessibility trainings and resources.
                        b.   Utilize tools such as plain language reviews and font/visual aid
                             recommendations.
                        c.   Utilize training feedback surveys to gauge success.



Key Development & Operations Strategies

OGEC has identified three key operations and development strategies with actions to work
toward that will ultimately help the agency meet the key engagement goals.

    1.   Assess and Reassess Status Quo
             a.     Review current state of OGEC, both internally and externally, with a DEI focused
                    lens.
                    i. This strategy will be repeated with each update of the Strategic Plan as
                       OGEC progresses and changes the lens through which the state of OGEC
                       is viewed.
             b. Determine the DEI related gaps in OGEC’s internal and external processes.
    2.   Evaluate Resources
             a.     Review available resources, both free and paid.
             b.
              Review OGEC resources for accessibility and accuracy.
             c.
              Coordinate with partners to develop additional resources for both internal and
              external use to improve equity and accessibility within OGEC’s materials.
    3. Train and Plan for the Future
           a. Create an agency wide development plan for staff that is more inclusive.
                    i. Note that this plan will take time to develop and implement.
                  ii. Address the gaps in the status quo and work towards closing the gaps.
                 iii. OGEC is looking to develop a more diverse and inclusive workforce and
                       place of employment.
           b. Create a long-term plan for outreach.
                    i. Note that this will take time to develop and implement as the relationships
                       will need to be re-established and developed.
                  ii. Establish short-term and long-term outreach goals.


Oregon Government   Ethics Commission — Diversity, Equity, & Inclusion Plan 2024
                                                                               3
OGEC     Diversity, Equity, & Inclusion Plan




Monitor:
OGEC will work to build processes into the Compliance, Training, and Administration teams’
workflows to establish the capability to monitor the progress of OGEC’s goals and strategies.
As processes are established, the DEI plan will be updated accordingly to reflect those
processes, such as:

Training Team:
    e    Revise and review post-training surveys for feedback.
    e    Review trainings for accessibility throughout the year.

Compliance Team:
   e Take an internal bias training annually to determine where biases may be during
         investigative process.
    e    Review and recommend revisions of the penalty matrix annually.

Administration Team
    e   Review communications to partners, both internally and externally, for accessibility
        through the year.
    e   Create and send out post-Statement of Economic Interest Survey to public officials who
         are required to file an annual Statement of Economic Interest Survey for ways to
         improve DEI processes, including accessibility and access.

Each year, OGEC is required by the Oregon Legislature to review the Annual Key Performance
Measures, which include the review of statutory deadlines and the annual customer
satisfaction survey. OGEC has been implementing changes to the customer satisfaction
survey to make it a year-round process to give more accurate results throughout the year to
allow for more immediate feedback. These Key Performance Measures also give OGEC an
opportunity to review customer satisfaction and performance of the agency as a whole.


Evaluation:
The OGEC Leadership Team shall review and evaluate progress and notate on each strategy
and goal every six months and update the overall DEI plan every two years.

OGEC acknowledges the growth the agency has to do in terms of DEI. The staff is committed
to taking the time to learn and grow together to make OGEC a more welcoming and diverse
agency.




Oregon Government   Ethics Commission — Diversity, Equity, & Inclusion Plan 2024
                                                                               4
