U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND URBAN           DEVELOPMENT
Office of Community Planning and Development
Community Development Block Grant Program




BUYING RIGHT
CDBG—_-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery

September, 2017




                         COMMUNITY
                         PLANNING
                         DEVELOPMENT
     BUYING RIGHT

 CDBG-DR           and Procurement:



        A Guide to Recovery


U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
   Office of Community Planning and Development
    Community Development Block Grant Program
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery


                                                            Contents
Chapter 1: CDBG-DR Procurement Toolkit Introduction ..........cccciccccceeeesessseececeeeeeeeseennaeeeeceeeeees 1
      1.1     Background 0.0... ccccccccesesssnnneecececeseesessenaeeeecceeeesessneaaeceeeceeeeeeqaeeeeceeeeeeeeeeaaaaeeeeceeseeeeeaaas 1
      1.2     Federal RESOUmCES ...........ccccsssecceccecessesssnneececceecesensneececeecceeeeeeaaeeeeceesceseseeaaeeeeeeeeseeeeeaaes 1
      1.3     PLOCULEMENL 0.0... eceecceeeesennneceececescesesseaaeeeeeceeeesessnneeeeeeeeeeeeeeaaeeeeceeeceeeeeeaaaaeeeecesseeeesgaas 2
      1.4     How to Use This Tool kit... eecccsscscccecceecssesssnececcecceeeeeennneeeeceeeeeseeeeaaeeeeeeesseeeeeaaas 4
      1.5     Quick Resource List............ccccesssssssssesececceccccccscecceseeeuuuesssseesesececcecsesssseseeeeaeausensssnseeeees 5
Chapter 2: Procurement Basics and Specific Methods ...............ccccccssessessscssncsecceccecceceeceeseeseeeeeeeees 6
      2.1     State Grantees of CDOBG-DR funds 000.0... cccccccccceeeesennneeeeceeceeeesseaaeeeeceesesseeeeeaaaeeees 7
      2.2     Understanding the Basics... eeeecsssssscccecceeeesesseececeecceeeeeennneeeeceeseeseeeeaaaeeeeeessseeeeaaas 8
      2.3     Procurement Methods ..........cccccccceccssssssnnneccecceeeesessneececeecceeeeeennneeeeceesceeeeeeaaaeeeeeeeseeseeaaas 8
Chapter 3: Pricing the Contract, Executing and Making Payment..............cccssssccccceeceseeesenneeeees 13
      3.1     State PrOCUEMENL ....... ccc cceeessssssnececeecceeessenaeceeceeecesesensaaeceeceeeeesenaeeeeceeseeseeeeaaaaeeeees 13
      3.2     Local Government ProCureMent ..........ccccccceceesesesnnnecceceeeeeseseneneeceeceeeeseenaeeeeeceeseeeeeeaaas 14
      3.3     Contract ACMINIStratiOn........              eee eeessceeceeceesessenneececeescesesenaaaeceeceeeeeeeaaeeeeseeseeseseeaaaeees 14
      3.4     Cost/Price Analysis .........cccscccccceccessssennnecceceeecesessnaceceeeeeeeseeanaeeeeceeeeeseeeeaaaeeeeeeeseeeeeaaaas 14
      3.5     Types Of ProcureMent .........c:ccccccsssecceesssseececcsesececcesenaceceesesaeeeecsssneeeeeceseaaeecensenaeeeeees 15
      3.6     Price Amal ySIs ........ceesessennccccecceeeeesesnneececeesceeesseaaeeeeceeecesesaaaeeeesceseseeaaeeeeceeeseneeeeaas 17
      3.7     Cost Analysis .......eeeeesccssseccecceecessesssnaeceeeceeessessneaeeceeeeeeessesnaeeeeceeeceeeeeeaaaeeeeeeeeseeeeeaaaas 17
      3.8     Contract Award and Execution .........ccccccccceccssesssnncecceceeeeeeenneeeeceesceseseeaaaaeeeeceeseeeeeaaas 20
Chapter 4: Prohibited Practices... ceceesssssecceccecceeessennnecceceeccssesssaaeceeceeeeeseqnneeeeceesceseeeeaaaeeeeees 23
      4.1     Prohibition on Cost Plus a Percentage of Cost (CPPC) Pricing ...........ccccccceeeeeeeeeeees 23
      4.2     Prohibition on Practices that Restrict Full and Open Competition...                                                    ceeees 24
Chapter 5: Procurement ROad Map............cccccccccecceseeeeeeeeeeeeeseessensensnaaeaaeeaeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeneenees 30
      5.1     Procurement POLicy.........cccessccccccceeeesessneececceccesesseaaeececeeseeseseneaeeceeseeeeseeaaaeeeeceeseneeeeaaaes 30
      5.2     Differences between State and Entitlement Grantees ............cceceeeeeesnteeceeeeeeeeeeeeenes 30
      5.3     Full and Open Competition... cccccccccccccccccccecceeceseeseesseeseeeseeseessecsseeaseeeeeeeeeeseeees 31
      5.4     DOCUMENTATION 00.00...          eee eeeeeeenneccecceeeeeennneececeeeceeeseeaaaeeeeceeseesesaaaeeceesceseeeeaaaeeeeceseeeneeesaaas 31
      5.5     Bonding and Insurance ........ cc cceceesesssnnncccecceeeesesnnececeecceseseesnneeeeceesceeesseaaeeeeceeseeeeseas 32
      5.6     Utilize Local Businesses and Small, Minority Contractors 000.00... eeceeessseceeceeeeeeeeeeeeee 33
      5.7     Dealing with Subrecipients 20.0.0... cece eecsseccccceeessesssececeecceseeeesnneeeeceeeceseeseaaeeeeeeeseeeeseas 34
      5.8     Separation Of Duties... cccccccccccecceccesceseeseeeeeeeseeseessessnaaeaaeaseeeeeeeeeeseeseeseeeeeeeeeeeees 34
      5.9     Conflict Of Interest ...........cccccccccsssceccesessneceeeessseeeeeceseaeeecssesaaeeeeesssaeeeesceeeaaeeseeeenaaeesenes 35
      5.10    Debarred Contractor ROViCW ............cccessscccecceecesessnenceceecceseseesnneeeeceescneeeseaaeeeeceeseeeesaas 35

                                                                                                                                       Page iii
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery

       5.11      Contract AAMInistration........               ec ecccccceeesseecceeessteceeeessneceecceseaceeccsseaaeceeessseceeeessneeeesenees 35
       5.12      Public WebSite 0.0... cceccccecceeenneccesesneceeeessseeeeeceeeaaeeceesesaaeceeeesaeeeeeesenaeeeseneeeaaaeeees 36
       5.13.     Wrong Turns Off the Road to Good Procurement (Common Pitfalls in the
      PLOCUTEMENL PLOCESS)..........cccccccccessesececcecceeseececcceausesecescecuunssscecssceeusseecsseseauaseeceseeeunasesesess 36
       5.14      Examples of Procurement Audit Findings ............cccccccccesssstecceeessseceeceesseeecessenaaeeesees 39
Chapter 6: Micro-PUurchases...........cccccscccccceccesssssnnneeeecceeseeessseeeeeeeceesseeesaeeeeeeecensseeesaaeeeeeeeseneeeeneaas 47
       6.1       What are mMicro-purchases? .......ccccccccccccesssssssseceecceseesessseeeeeecceeeeeesseeeesseceseeeeesaaeeeeeeeees 47
       6.2     — PLOCESS woe. eeeeesssecceeessnecceeesssneeeeceeseneeeecesenaaeeeeessaeeeeeeesaeeeeeseseaaeeseesesaaeeesesaueceeeeseeeeeseneas 47
       6.3.      Price Reasonableness ............cceccsssecceeessneceeeessseeeecceeeaeeccesesaeeeeeessneeeeeeeseaeeesensenaaeeeeees A8
       6.4        Post-Award ISSUCS ..........ceccccccceesessceceeeeseneceeeessneeeeeceseaaeeceesesaeceeesssaeeeeeseeeaeeesenseaaaeeees 49
       6.5        DOCUMENTATION ....... cee ccecenececeesentceceesesnneeeeeessneeeeeceeeaaeeceesesaaeceeesseseeeeeseeuaeeeseneeeaaaeeenes 49
Chapter 7 — Small Purchase .............ccccccccccccccssssssnnneeeeceeesesesssecaeeeeeeesseeessneeeeeeeceesseeesaseeeeseeeeeneneeeaas 52
      7.1        What Are Small Purchases? ...........ccceccsssceccessssneceeeessneceeeceseaaeecceseaaeceeessaeceseeeseneeeees 52
      7.2        PLOCESS weeeeeeceesssccccesesneceeesssnneceeeessneeeeeeeseaaeeeceseaaeeeeeesaeeeesseeaeeeseeseaaaecessesaaeceseeeeaaeeesey 52
      7.3        The Solicitation .........cccceccsssccceesssseccecessneceeccseeeeeccesenaeceesessaeeeeeeeseeeeseeeeaaeeseneeeaaeeeees 54
      TA          N@2OtTATION.....      ee ecccccccceessntecceeessnneceeeessneeeesceseaeeeccesesaaeceeeesaaeeeeeeseaaeeesseeeaaeeeseeeeaaaeseses 54
      7.5        Environmental ASSeSSMent ...........ccccccccessssceccesesntecceeessneceeeceseaeeecceseaaeceseesaeeeseeseaeeeees 54
      7.6        Breaking down larger contracts and consolidating work across jurisdictions............ 54
      7.7      — Post-A ward ISSUES .........ccccccssseccessssnecceeessneeeecesseaeeeceesesaaeceeessaeeeeeeesaeeeesseeeaaeeseneeaaaeeenes 55
      7.8        DOCUMENTATION 00.00... cccceeesteeceeesssteceecessneceeeceseaaeecceseaaeceesesaeeeeesesaeeeeseeeeaaeeseneeeaaeeeees 55
      7.9        Clauses to be Included in Small Purchase Contract... eeeeesssseceeceeeeesssesnaaeeeees 57
Chapter 8 — Sealed Bids ........cccccccssccccccecccesesssnceeeeeceeeeeessneceeeeeeeeeseeessaeeeeseesenseeeeaaaeeeeeseeeeneeeeaaas 60
       8.1       What is the sealed bid procurement Process? ........ccccccccccccecceceeeceeeesceseesseeeeeeseeseerseaaas 60
       8.2       PLOCESS .....ecssscccessssneceecessneeceeeessneeeeecsseaeeeeeseaaeeeeeessaeeeescesaaeeceesesaeeceesesaueceseessaeeeeseeeaaees 61
       8.3       Price Reasonablene ......... ccc ccceeeesesnneececeeccesessenaeeeecceeeesesnneeeeceeecesesseaaeeeeceeseneeeenaaas 61
       8.4       The Invitation For Bids .......... ccc ceccessceccesesnneceeeeseneceecceseaeeeccseeaceceesesaeceeeesseeeesenseaees 62
       8.5       Pre-Bid Conference .........cccccsssccccessssneceeeessneccecceseaaeeccesenaaeceesesaeeeeseeeneeeeseneeaaeseeseeaas 62
       8.6       Handling the Bids 200... cecessceccessssseceeeessneeceecessaeeeccssesaaeceeseseeeeeseesseaeeecnseaaeeseneeaas 63
       8.7       Opening the Bids...........ccecccsssseeccessssneceeeessnecceeceseeeeccssesaaeceeeeseeeeeeeesneeeeceneeaaeeseneeaas 63
       8.8       Reviewing the Bids ............cccccssscccesssssecceeessseceeecesseeeccesesaeceeseseneeeeeeeeneeeesenseaeeseeseeaas 63
       8.9       Withdrawal of a Bid... eccsscccessssscceeeessneeceeceseeeeccssesaaeceeseseeeeeeeesseeeeeeeseaaeseeseeaas 64
       8.10      Award Of COmtract.......ccccccccccccsssceccesesnseceeeessseceeecessaeeccsseaaeceeeesaeeeeeseeneeeeseseeaaeeeeneeaas 64
       8.11      Environmental ASSeSSMeNt 0.0.0... ceesecceccecceeeesessneeeeceeeceeessennneeeeeeeseeseseeaaaeeeeceeseneeseas 64
       8.12      Post-A ward ISSUCS..........cccccccceesssceccesesnneceeeessneceeecesenaeecceseaaeceesessaeeeeeeseneeeeeeeeeaaaeeseneaas 64
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery

       8.13     DOCUMENTATION ..........cceececccccesenececcesestaeceeeessaeeeeeceeesaeecceseaaeceesessaeeeeseeeeeeeeeeeesaaeeseneeaas 65
       8.14     Contract Provisions ReEQuireMent..........ccccceessssecceccesceeessseceeececeeseesessseeeesesesensneeegas 66
Chapter 9 — Competitive Bids...........cccccccccccccssssssnsnecceceeeeesessseceeeeeeceseeeessaeeeeesecenseeeesaaeeeeseeseneesegeaas 69
      9.1       What are competitive DIdS? 0... cccecsssssceccecceeceeessseceeeeeceeseeeesaeeeeeeeccnseeeeaaeeeeseeees 69
      Q.2 — PLOCESS .oeeeeececceeesssnnneececceeeeeesseenaaeeeeeeeeeesessneaaeeeeeeeeeeeeaaeeeeeeeeeeseseeaaaeeeeseesseseseeaaaeeeeeeeees 70
      9.3.      Pre-Award Cost/Price Analysis ...........ccccssssccccceecesessenaceceeceeeeeeennnneeeceeseeseeeseaaaeeeeeeeeeees 70
      QA        The Solicitation 0... eecccessccccccecceeeesennneceeceescssesssaaaeceeceeeeseesnaneeeceseceseeeeaaaeceeeeeeeeses 71
      9.5       The Proposal and its Evaluation ............ccccccccccccccsssssensceccecceeeesessseeeeeeeccssseeeesaeeeeeeeeenes 72
      9.6       Environmental ASSeSSMeNt..........:cccccccssscccesesstecceeeesseccecceseeeeccesenaaeceesesneceesessneeeeseneas 73
      9.7     — Post-A ward ISSUCS..........eeeecesseecccceeceesesennneeeeceeecesessenaaeceeceeeeeeeaaeeeeceeseeseseeaaaeeeeeeeeeeees 73
      9.8       DOCUMENTATION ......... cc ccecencceceesentcecceeessneeeeeesseeeeeeceeesaeeceesesaaeceeeesaeeeeeseeeaeeesenseeaaeeeenes 75
Chapter 10 — Non-Competitive Proposals ..............ccccccssessenssnssnnneaeceeeeeceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeenseneeeenees 77
       10.1     What are non-competitive proposals?............ccccccceseesesessessessenssncncaeeceeeeceeceeseeseeeeeeeeees 77
       10.2     PLOCESS occ ccccecceeesssnnceccecceeeeesennneeeeceeeeesesseaaaeeeeceeeeeseseaaaeeeeeeeeeeeeaaeeeeceseseseeeeaaaeeeeeeeees 78
       10.3     Pre-Award Cost/Price AmalySIs ...........cccecsssseccecceeceeeesennneceeceeccesesseaaaeceeeeeeseesesenaaaeeeess 80
       10.4     The Solicitation ........ccccceccesssssnnneccecceseseesnneececeecceeeseennneeeeceesceseseeaaeeeeeeesceseeeenaaaeeeees 80
       10.5     Ne@gotiation..........cceccccccccesesssecceesesnseceeeessneceecceeeseeeeceseaaeceeeeaaeeeeeeseeeeesceeeaaeeeseneeaaaeeenes 81
       10.6     Post Award ......ccccccccccssccccessstsecceesssnneceeeessneeeeeceeeeeeeeceseaaeeeeeesaaeeeeesesaeeeesceeeaaeeeseneeaaaeeenes 81
       10.7     DOCUMENTATION ........ ccc ceccceeeesssssnececeecceeessesaeaceceeeceeessenaeeeeceeecesesesaaaeeeeeeesceeeseenaaaeeeess 81
Appendix — 2 CFR Part 200: Text and Guidance ..............cccccccesessessessenssnsnasecaeceeceecesceeseeeeeeeeeeeees 83




                                                                                                                                      Page v
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery


  Chapter 1: CDBG-DR Procurement Toolkit Introduction

1.1    Background

Community Development Block Grant disaster recovery (“CDBG-DR”) grantees and
subrecipients procuring goods and services with their grant funds must ensure that they are
following all program procurement statutory and regulatory requirements. The urgency in post-
disaster recoveries often leads state and local officials to work to quickly restore infrastructure,
public services, and help private companies and citizens make repairs. However, grantees and
subrecipients that do not follow all CDBG program requirements may be forced to repay Federal
funds.

This HUD Toolkit provides guidance to CDBG-DR grantees and subrecipients on how to
comply with these requirements while also moving as quickly as possible to recover from a
disaster.


1.2    Federal Resources

The Community Development Block Grant program is authorized under Title I of the Housing
and Community Development Act of 1974. Program regulations are codified at 24 CFR Part 570.

When a disaster occurs, Congress may appropriate supplemental CDBG-DR grant funds to be
awarded to States and local governments to carry out long-term recovery. Congressional
appropriations for disaster recovery funds are not guaranteed and can come either early or later
in the recovery effort. When Congress appropriates CDBG-DR funding, it usually also grants
HUD the authority to issue statutory and regulatory waivers and alternative requirements. These
are then published in a Federal Register Notice. HUD may also provide guidance on the CDBG-
DR program through CPD Notices.

Grantees and subrecipients should be familiar with all CDBG statutory and regulatory
requirements, including any waivers and alternative requirements that HUD may issue in the
Federal Register.

The CDBG-DR funds supplement other federal recovery programs including programs
administered by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), the Small Business
Administration (SBA) and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE).




                                                                                      Chapter 1 - 1
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery

The website https://www.hudexchange.info/cdbe-dr/cdbg-dr-         LC
laws-regulations-and-federal-register-notice contains further
links to the laws, regulations and Federal Register notices             RECENT          EVENTS
affecting CDBG-DR.
                                                                      Congress has appropriated
                                                                      tens of billions of dollars in
1.3       Procurement                                                 CDBG-DR funds since the
                                                                      World Trade Center disaster
Deploying CDBG-DR Resources. For many state and local                 in 2001, as follows:
governments that are CDBG-DR Grantees, the infusion of                = Louisiana Floods and Other
hundreds of thousands, millions or even hundreds of millions            2016 Events
of dollars in disaster recovery funds — and the work associated   |     sities      ere ti
with recovery — can be overwhelming. In these situations,             Hurricane Patricia, and
there is an urgency to use funds to catalyze physical, natural        Other Flood Events
and economic recovery. As fast as communities want to                 Occurring 2015
deploy resources to procure necessary goods and services, itis    | 5 lsliivsleeio Shreya Oy) ioe
important to know and understand what laws and regulations              Disasters Occurring in
apply to procurement.                                                   2011-2013
                                                                      = Multiple Disasters — 2011
Application of Federal Regulations to States. Local                   = Severe Storms and Flooding
Government Grantees must follow the procurement regulations             — March-May 2010
set forth in 2 CFR 200.318 — 200.326. State Grantees,                 = Multiple Disasters-2008
however, must demonstrate compliance by establishing                  = Hurricanes Katrina, Rita,
policies and procedures, and may do this by following their              Wilma — 2005
own State laws and regulations, or adopting the federal               = Multiple Disasters —
regulations either in whole or in part. Whatever set of                  September 2003-September
requirements States choose to implement in their policies and            2004
procedures, they must ensure that the procurement process             =" World Trade Center- 2001
involves fair and open competition. This difference, between
State and Local Grantees, must be emphasized.     This Toolkit
refers to the federal regulations, principally in 2 CFR Part 200.
Therefore, this Toolkit mostly focuses on local governments and those State Grantees that
choose to follow the federal regulations.

Throughout this toolkit, reference to Grantees shall mean Local Government Grantees and
those States that have chosen to adopt the federal regulations.

Importance of Procurement. If CDBG-DR funds are available to help your state or community
address disaster recovery needs, it is critically important to plan procurement for goods and
services with the following high-level requirements in mind:

      e   At minimum, grantees must understand and adhere to the current regulations and
          associated advisories governing procurement when utilizing CDBG-DR funds.




                                                                                        Chapter 1 - 2
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery


   e   When state and local procurement requirements exceed the minimum provisions for
       CDBG-DR procurement — the grantee should comply with the more stringent state or
       local procurement standards.

   e   The grantee should understand any additional requirements established through the
       appropriations act associated with each grant of CDBG-DR funds.

Appropriations acts funding CDBG-DR grants often provide HUD with broad powers to waive
certain regulations that may impede recovery efforts. In other cases, such as with PL 113-2 for
Sandy-related recovery efforts and subsequent appropriations acts, additional — unwaivable —
procurement requirements were enacted. For example, PL 113-2 included the following
requirements relating to procurement:


 Provided further, That as a condition of making any grant, the Secretary shall certify in
 advance that such grantee has in place proficient financial controls and procurement
 processes and has established adequate procedures to prevent any duplication of benefits as
 defined by section 312 of the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance
 Act (42 U.S.C. 5155), to ensure timely expenditure of funds, to maintain comprehensive
 websites regarding all disaster recovery activities assisted with these funds, and to detect and
 prevent waste, fraud, and abuse of funds:


 Provided further, That the Secretary shall provide grantees with technical assistance on
 contracting and procurement processes and shall require grantees, in contracting or procuring
 these funds, to incorporate performance requirements and penalties into any such contracts or
 agreements: Provided further, That the Secretary shall require grantees to maintain on a
 public website information accounting for how all grant funds are used, including details of
 all contracts and ongoing procurement processes:


While this Public Law stresses that procurement requirements must be met and requires an
enhanced transparency of the process and results through a public website, it also provided for
additional resources via technical assistance to support procurement. Over the years, HUD has
provided guidance on procurement through webinars, memoranda, toolkits and technical
assistance on a broad range of issues associated with the use CDBG-DR funds for disaster
recovery.

Notice that for HUD to be able to certify to the proficiency of a Grantee’s financial controls and
procurement processes, the Grantee must demonstrate to HUD that its controls and processes are
in fact proficient. This means that the responsibility for having proficient financial controls and
procurement processes ultimately lies with the Grantee.

Updates that Streamline and Consolidate.       In recent years, Federal administrative
requirements and cost principals governing grants — including procurement requirements— was
consolidated and codified at 2 CFR Part 200.   As a result, CDBG-DR     guidance issued prior to


                                                                                     Chapter 1 - 3
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery

the issuance of Part 200 reference regulations and OMB circulars that have been superseded by
Part 200. The vast majority of the requirements of prior regulations and circulars were fully
incorporated into Part 200 — but a few important changes were made.


1.4       Howto      Use This Toolkit

This Toolkit reviews procurement regulations, processes, and documentation and organized into
four sections:

      e   Section I offers a basic introduction to procurement, and includes the following chapters:

          Chapter 1: Introduction
          Chapter 2: Procurement Basics and Specific Methods

      e   Section I discusses the basic procurement issues in the following chapters:

          Chapter 3: Pricing, the Contract, Executing and Making Payments
          Chapter 4: Prohibited Practices
          Chapter 5: Procurement Road Map

      e   Section II provides detailed information on specific procurement methods in the
          following chapters:

          Chapter   6: Micro Purchases
          Chapter   7: Small Purchase
          Chapter   8: Sealed Bids
          Chapter   9: Competitive Bids
          Chapter   10: Non-Competitive Proposals

      e   Section IV contains an appendix, which lists an annotated version of Part 200 of the
          regulations, offering plain language explanations and cross-referencing prior regulations
          that Part 200 superseded.

          Appendix: 2 CFR    Part 200: Text and Guidance

Grantees may read this Toolkit from front to back, but the organization of the document is meant
to help readers find those sections that are most relevant and valuable to their procurement
issues. At a minimum, readers should read the introductions (Chapters 1-2), the basic elements
of procurement (Chapters 3-5) and the procurement method(s) chapter(s) that pertain to their
specific situation and become familiar with contract administration and documentation (Chapters
6-10).

Finally, this Toolkit provides resources to assist with procurement, but it does not substitute for
the regulations. The Appendix gives Grantees some additional information, but when in doubt,
they should consult the regulations directly.


                                                                                        Chapter 1 - 4
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery


1.5    Quick Resource List

HUD has many existing resources in place to help understand CDBG-DR laws, regulations and
practices. Below is a quick listing of resources that are accessible, relevant, and valuable

                           PowerPoint Presentations and Webinar Slides

        CDBG-DR Resources                         URL links to CDBG-DR       Resources

 Framework for CDBG         funds in     https://portal.hud.gov/hudportal/documents/huddoc?id=
 disaster relief efforts                 cdbe training 2 2 13.pdf

 CDBG-DR Program Overview                https://www.hudexchange.info/course-content/2016-
                                         overview-of-cdbg-dr-webinar/2016-Overview-CDBG-
                                         DR-Webinar-Slides-2016-03-15.pdf

 CDBG-DR Procurement                     https://www.hudexchange.info/onecpd/assets/File/2015
 Requirements                            -CDBG-DR-Training-Procurement-Requirements.pdf

 CDBG-DR Subrecipient and                https://www.hudexchange.info/course-content/2016-
 Recordkeeping                           cdbg-dr-subrecipient-management-and-recordkeeping-
                                         webinar/2016-CDBG-DR-Subrecipient-Management-
                                         and-Recordkeeping-Webinar-Slides-2016-05-16.pdf

 Uniform Administrative                  https://www.hudexchange.info/resource/4444/notice-
 Requirements, Cost Principles,          sd201501-transition-to-2-cfr-part-200-uniform-
 and Audit Requirements for              administrative-requirements-cost-principles-and-audit-
 Federal Awards                          requirements-for-federal-awards-final-guidance/

 Additional Transition and               https://www.hudexchange.info/resource/4990/notice-
 Implementation Guidance on 2            cpd-16-04-additional-transition-and-implementation-
 CFR 200                                 guidance-for-recipients-of-community-planning-and-
                                         development-cpd-funds-for-2-cfr-part-200-uniform-
                                         administrative-requirements-cost-principles-and-audit-
                                         requirements-for-federal-award/

 Federal Register regarding              https://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/FR-2015-12-
 various regulations that have           07/pdt/2015-29692.pdf
 changed for HUD programs

 Uniform Administrative                  https://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkeg/FR-2013-12-
 Requirements, Cost Principles           26/pdf/2013-30465.pdf
 and Audit Requirements for
 Federal Awards, Final Rule




                                                                                   Chapter 1 - 5
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery


     Chapter 2: Procurement Basics and Specific Methods

This Toolkit is based upon federal regulations in 2 CFR Part 200. The Appendix lists these
regulations in detail, and offers “plain English” interpretations to help clarify the technical
language for readers. While the Toolkit uses the federal regulations as its base, the information
contained herein is written in a certain sequence and with highlighting to express the concepts
clearly and to guide Grantees from pre-award through post-award, and reporting and
administration.

So, before buying goods and services with CDBG-DR funds to assist in recovery efforts,
Grantees should keep the following in mind:

       Uses of funds must respond to need

       Grantees must first identify and document a need for goods and services before
       undertaking procurement. CDBG-DR Grantees need to make clear the connection
       between disaster relief, recovery and related investments in housing, infrastructure and
       those made to businesses in support of the local economy.

       Price and Cost Analysis

       Grantees should also conduct a price and/or cost analysis to make sure that costs are
       reasonable and necessary. States must follow their own guidelines that ensure full and
       open competition, or they may follow the Federal guidelines in 2 CFR Part 200.

       Written system of contract administration

       Grantees must have a system of contract administration in place, which will be based
       upon the management of federal funds, but may reflect additional state and local laws and
       regulations.

       Is there a list of prequalified contractors/vendors?

       Preferably, Grantees have created these lists prior to any CDBG-DR appropriation to
       accelerate procurement. The Grantee should open the list again when the Grantee has
       notice of CDBG-DR appropriations to allow additional qualified vendors to join the list.
       Even with such a list, the non-Federal entity must accept proposals from qualified bidders
       not listed.

       Disaster Recovery Reporting

       Grantees report CDBG-DR funds through the Disaster Recovery Grant Reporting
       (DRGR) system, which is different from the Information Disbursement Information
       System (IDIS) used to manage regular CDBG funds. HUD grantees should have staff
       trained on DRGR prior to managing CDBG-DR funds.


                                                                                     Chapter 2 - 6
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery
ee



      e    Federal Appropriations

           The Federal government awards CDBG-DR funds through congressional appropriations.
           In addition to setting award amounts, those appropriations impose additional
           requirements or conditions on awardees using CDBG-DR funds. Grantees and
           subrecipients receiving CDBG-DR funds should review and understand the relevant
           appropriations to make sure they understand any additional requirements, including any
           procurement-related waivers or alternative requirements established by HUD in a Federal
           Register Notice.


2.1        State Grantees of CDBG-DR           funds

CDBG disaster recovery funds are subject to the State CDBG regulations unless HUD provides a
waiver or alternative requirement by Federal Register Notice. The State CDBG regulations on
procurement are found at 24 CFR Part 570.489(g).


  §570.489(g) Procurement. When procuring property or services to be paid for in whole or in
  part with CDBG funds, the state shall follow its procurement policies and procedures. The
  state shall establish requirements for procurement policies and procedures for units of general
  local government, based on full and open competition. Methods of procurement (e.g., small
  purchase, sealed bids/formal advertising, competitive proposals, and noncompetitive
  proposals) and their applicability shall be specified by the state. Cost plus a percentage of
  cost and percentage of construction costs methods of contracting shall not be used. The
  policies and procedures shall also include standards of conduct governing employees
  engaged in the award or administration of contracts. (Other conflicts of interest are covered
  by § 570.489(h).) The state shall ensure that all purchase orders and contracts include any
  clauses required by Federal statutes, executive orders and implementing regulations. The
  State shall make subrecipient and contractor determinations in accordance with the standards
  in 2 CFR 200.330.



This is fundamentally different from the requirements placed upon local governments that are
CDBG-DR Grantees such as County or local governments, which must follow 2 CFR 200.318-
200.326.

Because states are required to establish policies and procedures that are based on full and open
competition, for themselves and for their subgrantees, they may demonstrate compliance with
this requirement through one of the following options, as documented in their policies and
procedures:

      1.   Follow the existing procurement requirements of their state

      2.   Adopt some but not all procurement requirements in 2 CFR 200.318-200.326, effectively
           creating a new set of procurement criteria which combine State and Federal regulations

                                                                                     Chapter 2 - 7
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery
ee



      3.   Adopt 2 CFR 200.317 to apply all of the procurement requirements in 2 CFR 200.318-
           200.326 to itself and its subgrantees.

As stated above, the State should review the relevant Federal Register Notice to determine which
procurement requirements they must follow and include it within their policies and procedures.

This Toolkit primarily focuses on the procurement requirements in 2 CFR Part 200. It does not
address individual State procurement laws, and all their variations, and includes the following
reminder throughout:


  REMINDER: States may choose to adopt 2 CFR Part 200 or to follow their own State laws
  and regulations regarding procurement. This Toolkit is based upon 2 CFR Part 200 and
  related Federal regulations. The Toolkit thus applies to Grantees (who must use 2 CFR Part
  200) and States which have adopted these federal regulations.



2.2        Understanding the Basics
Chapters 3 through 5 cover the basics of procurement.

           Chapter 3 discusses fair and reasonable practices, providing details on themes of cost and
           price analysis, as well as contract documentation.

           Chapter 4 presents “prohibited practices.” Here, the Toolkit concentrates on areas of
           practice where past Grantees have often had trouble.

           Chapter 5 offers a road map and where Grantees sometimes detour.

The Toolkit uses text boxes and color highlights to emphasize certain themes for readers.


2.3        Procurement Methods

Chapters 6 through 10 discuss the individual procurement methods to be used with CDBG-DR:

           Chapter 6 - Micro Purchases

           Chapter 7 - Small Purchase

           Chapter 8 - Sealed Bids

           Chapter 9 - Competitive Bids

           Chapter 10 - Non-Competitive Proposals



                                                                                       Chapter 2 - 8
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery

The following “scenario planning” diagram offers a way of thinking about the different
procurement methods and the questions to ask in order to sort through procurement options. The
diagram is meant to guide, and not to dictate. Hopefully, as readers consult the below diagram,
they will then be able to refer to the particular chapter on the specific procurement method.




                                                                                  Chapter 2 - 9
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery


                                                                         METHODS OF PROCUREMENT—SCENARIO PLANNING
     1, Are the products/services to be procured                               No          Document the need for products/services as they
       necessary for disaster recovery?                                                    relate directly to disaster recovery. Go to 2.
                                        Yes                                .                                                                                                                Undertake procurement for Archi-
                                                                                                                                                                                   >|       tectural and Engineering Services.
 E     Is there a written scope of work            for services                | No        Create a written scope of work or product list.                     Go                           Competitive Procurement—Chp, 9
  and/or product fist of items to be procured?                                             to 3.                                                                           "
                                                                                                                                                                               o

                                        Yes                                                             7. Construction Services—Scope of Services
                                                                                      IA                A. is there a weil-detailed set of drawings and specifications?
                                    =                                                 a                                                                                                           Determine if the estimate
  3, Description of Product/Service                                                                                           Yes                                                                 can be performed in-house.
  A. Construction                                                                                                        x                                                                        If not, look to procure   out-
  B. Architectural/Engineering/Consulting Services                                                      8. Construction Services—Cost Estimates                                         | No -    side professionals.   Go to Box
  C. Other                                                                                              A. Has there been a cost estimate prepared?                                     |      a4

                          {                                          i                                                   4    Yes

                      fC                                            if B                                 9. What is the amount of the cost estimate?                                                     | Micropurchase—Chp. 6
                  a           ae                                     1                                   A.       Less than $5,000
                                                                                                         B.       Between $5,000 and $150,000
                                   Competitive    Procurement              —Chp.9      /@                C.       Over       $150,000                                                                     Small Purchase-—Chp.     7



  4.    if Other, undertake a                                                                                                                 '
        rough cost estimate?                     TA!                                                                                        HEC |
  A.    Less than $5,000                                    &       Micropurchase      —Chp. 6                                                |
  B. Between $5,000 and                                ',
        $150,000                              'fB!              ¢                                                               Sealed   Bids-—Chp.        8
  C.    Over $150,000                         —                     Small Purchase-—Chp.           7


                              HC                                                                        ITA   |
                      .
             5.   Character of Procurement: Scope of services or product description...
             A.   Contains great detail and precise specifications such that price will be the determining factor in an
                  award?
             B.   Provides for flexibility in the approach, method and/or materials to be delivered by the offeror.

                                                                                                                                                      L_        No    Competitive Procurement —Chp. 9°
         6. Are the products/services available only from one source, had competition been determined
         inadequate after soliciting proposals, or is there a public emergency with no time for competitive                                                     ves
         bidding?                                                                                                                                                     Non-Competitive—Chp.          10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Chapter 2 - 10
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery

In any given situation, a Grantee may find itself using more than one of these methods.
Therefore, it is important to become familiar with all of them. Each chapter in the section on
procurement will follow the same outline:

   e   Definition and explanation

   e   Process

   e   Pre-Award Cost/Price Analysis

   e   Post-Award Issues

   e   Documentation

The following page also contains a table comparing each of the methods of procurement, as a
reference tool. The table can be used in conjunction with the above diagram to help guide readers
to the relevant chapters in this Toolkit.




                                                                                   Chapter 2 - 11
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery

                                                      METHODS   OF PROCUREMENT

    Procurement         Cost Methodology       Contract Type     Solicitation           Applications           Dollar Thresholds if applicable
        Type             Reasonableness                            Method


 Micro Purchases        e Price Analysis     e Fixed Order      e No               e Supplies                    Under $2,000 for construction
                                             e Fixed Price        solicitation     e Produced items             Under $3,500 for all other
                                                                  required         e Single-task service        purchases



 Small Purchase         e Price Analysis     e Fixed Order      e Quotations       e Produced Items              $150,000 or less for produced
                                             e Fixed Price      e Submitted        e Single-task Service         items
                                                                  Bids             e Supplies                 ¢ $150,000 or less for non-
                                                                                                                 construction services

 Sealed Bid             e Price Analysis     e Fixed Price      e Submitted        e Construction Items       e All construction contracts-
                        e Cost Analysis                           Bids             e Produced or                 including less than $150,000
 Formal Advertising                                                                  Designed Items           e Produced or designed items
                                                                                                                over $150,000

 Competitive            e Price Analysis     e Cost             e Submitted        e Professional Services   | e Professional Services and/or;
 Proposals              e Cost Analysis        Reimbursement      Proposals        e Multi-Task Services         Multi-task Services over
                                             e Fixed Price                         e Designed Items              $150,000
                                             e Time &                                                         e Designed Items over $150,000
                                               Materials                                                         when Sealed Bid is not
                                                                                                                 appropriate

 Non-competitive      | e Cost Analysis    | ¢ Cost           e Submitted        | e Produced Items           e No particular threshold, but
 Proposals                                     Reimbursement | Proposals           e Single-task Service        may only be used when
                                             e Fixed Price                         e Professional                other methods are not
                                             e Time &                                Services                    feasible
                                               Materials                           e Multi-task Services
                                                                                   e Designed Item



                                                                                                                               Chapter 2 - 12
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery


      Chapter 3: Pricing the Contract, Executing and Making
                             Payments

One of the key requirements for ensuring CDBG funds are utilized appropriately is to follow
procedures that result in the purchase of goods and services at a fair and reasonable price.
Failure to complete cost and price analysis and failure to document cost and price analysis are
the most common audit findings of CDBG-DR grantees. This is true for small purchases like
hand tools and for large construction contracts. Keeping this principal in mind and following
written procurement procedures will ensure that federal funds are used appropriately and
minimize questions after the purchase. However, the effort put into cost and price analysis will
vary based on the size of the purchase and the method of procurement - the larger the purchase,
typically the more up front analysis needs to be undertaken. The regulations governing Cost and
Price Analysis are found at 2 CFR 200.323.


3.1       State Procurement
The rules are different for states receiving CDBG-DR funds directly from HUD, compared with
the rules for local governments receiving their funds directly from HUD; however, the
overarching principals of ensuring full and open competition remain the same. States must
follow the same procedures they use for other procurements in a written Procurement Policy.
States must also establish procurement policies and procedures for their local governments and
ensure their compliance. In addition, if a State is utilizing its existing procurement policies, it
must ensure that all procurements follow those procedures.

Ata minimum, State procurement policies and procedures must include these principles:          (see 24
CFR 570.489(g) and 24 CFR 570.489(h):

      e   Ensure open and full competition;

      e   Not utilize cost plus a percentage of cost method of contracting;

      e   Not utilize a percentage of construction costs methods of contracting;

      e   Include any clauses required by Federal statutes, Executive orders, and implementing
          regulations;

      e   Include standards of conduct for employees;

      e   Prohibit conflicts of interest;

      e   Obtain certification from any transaction participant that neither it nor its principals are
          currently debarred, suspended, proposed for debarment, declared ineligible or voluntarily
          excluded from participation.


                                                                                       Chapter 3 - 13
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery

The remaining part of this chapter addresses the rules governing grantees receiving their CDBG-
DR funds directly from HUD or for local governments and subgrantees receiving their funds
from a state grantee that has established policies and procedures implementing 2 CFR Part 200
procurement standards.


3.2        Local Government Procurement

Local government grantees receiving CDBG-DR funds directly from HUD must follow the
requirement detailed in 2 CFR Part 200 which include developing and following written
procurement policies and procedures which meet applicable state or local laws and regulations.




3.3.       Contract Administration

When considering any procurement, the grantee should keep in mind that using public funds
subjects the procurement to added scrutiny. Purchases must be made using an effective, efficient
and fair process that is documented from the identification of the need, through final payment for
the goods or services. Whether purchasing occasional office supplies or contracting for large
construction projects, the requirements governing the purchasing process are designed to ensure
that grantees:

       e   Follow a full and open competitive process in securing those products or services.

       e   Properly document purchasing activities and decisions.

       e   Observe the special rules for particular kinds of purchases (micro-purchases, small
           purchases, competitive sealed bids, competitive proposals, and sole source procurements)

In addition to price, the grantee must consider contractor responsibility, as with all methods of
procurement. That is, contractors must have the ability to perform successfully under the terms
and conditions of the proposed procurement. Consideration should be given to such matters as
contractor integrity, compliance with public policy, record of past performance, and financial
and technical resources.


3.4        Cost/Price Analysis

The following information is provided from the HUD Guide Quick Analysis to Cost and Price
Analysis for HUD Grantees and Funding Recipients and updated to reflect the changes found in

                                                                                      Chapter 3 - 14
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery

2 CFR Part 200. Cost or Price Analysis is required when procuring goods or services with
federal funds in excess of the Simplified Acquisition Threshold, including contract
modifications. An independent cost estimate serves as a yardstick for evaluating the
reasonableness of the contractor’s proposed costs or prices. An independent cost analysis
consists of evaluating the separate elements (for example, labor, materials, etc.) that make up a
contractor’s total cost proposal to determine whether they are allowable, directly related to the
requirement, and reasonable.

      e   Price Analysis — Price analysis is essentially price comparison. It is the evaluation of a
          proposed price (1.e., total sum) without analyzing any of the separate cost elements.

      e   Cost Analysis - Cost analysis is the evaluation of the separate elements (e.g., labor,
          materials, profit, etc.) that make up a contractor’s total cost proposal or price to determine
          if they are allowable, directly related to the requirements and ultimately, reasonable.
          Cost Analysis should apply to both new contracts and contract modifications or change
          orders.

The basic document in the grantee’s efforts to evaluate cost and price is an “independent
analysis” based on the procedures described below. The “independent analysis” can be done by
grantee staff, by third party consultants, or by examination of existing price lists and product
catalogs, but it is not based on bids received. The analysis is done prior to receipt of bids or
review of proposals. This is the area where most findings have occurred historically, because the
analysis was not independent or it was not documented prior to receipt of bids or proposals.


3.5       Types of Procurement

While the method and degree of analysis depends on the facts surrounding the particular
procurement, the following illustrates some of the cost and price analyses that may be performed
in certain procurement situations.

      e   Micro Purchases — Micro purchases require simple price analysis prior to receiving bids
          or proposals. They do not require a cost analysis.

      e   Small Purchases — For routine commercial purchases, comparing price or rate quotes
          obtained from an adequate number of vendors is a sufficient form of price analysis. If the
          Small Purchase is for professional or technical services, or the grantee needs to evaluate
          factors other than price, then a limited cost analysis would be appropriate. In either case,
          the grantee should review the proposed prices from offerors to prices paid for the same or
          similar services. Catalog or market prices of products sold to the general public can
          suffice for cost estimates for equipment and supply purchases.

      e   Sealed Bid — Formal advertising for the purchase of goods or services is the preferred
          method for the purchase of equipment and construction services. However, the grantee
          should always prepare their own cost estimate and compare it to the low competitive bid



                                                                                        Chapter 3 - 15
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery

        received. If they are significantly different, the grantee will need to evaluate its initial
        estimate, compare it to the bids received, and identify the appropriate price.

    e   Competitive Proposals —This method is typically used to contract for professional
        consulting, architectural or engineering services. To determine the reasonableness of
        proposed costs, the grantee will need to obtain cost breakdowns showing all the elements
        of the scope of work and perform a cost analysis using the appropriate set of principles.

    e   Non-competitive Proposals (Sole Source) -Non-competitive proposals are appropriate
        only if one of the following situations exists:

        e   The item is available only from a single source;

        e   The disaster emergency will not permit a delay resulting from competitive
            solicitation;

        e   The Federal agency or pass-through entity expressly authorizes noncompetitive
            proposals in response to a written request from the Grantee; or

        e   After solicitation of a number of sources, competition is determined inadequate.

Grantees should obtain a breakdown of proposed costs and perform a cost analysis on those
costs.

The following are special circumstances involving contracts and Cost Analysis requirements:

    e   Cost Reimbursement Contracts — A Cost Analysis using cost principles must be
        performed on a Cost Reimbursement Contract.

    e   Architecture and Engineering Contracts - Cost Analysis is required in determining if the
        cost portion of an A/E contract is fair and reasonable.

    e   Construction Contracts — Construction contracts awarded using Sealed Bids do not
        require Cost Analysis.   However, an estimate of market costs should be made prior to
        awarding the contract. Construction Contracts awarded using any other method of
        procurement require Cost Analysis. Some grantees will contract out cost analysis to
        independent architect or engineering firms. Other grantees have used costing programs
        like Marshall and Swift, RSMeans, Xactimate, or similar products.

In addition, changes to the contract will require cost analysis in the following situations:

    e   Contract Modifications — If a grantee is negotiating a modification or change order to a
        contract that changes the scope and/or impacts the price or estimated cost, the grantee
        should perform further cost analysis. The only exception to this is if the modification is
        based on pricing already established in the contract. A contract where the scope is
        reduced and the contract price remains the same, will still require further cost analysis to
        determine that the change is fair and reasonable.

                                                                                       Chapter 3 - 16
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery


      e   Contract Terminations — If a grantee terminates a contract for convenience, the grantee
          must use cost analysis and the appropriate cost principles, to negotiate the final amount of
          termination settlement. If the grantee is terminating a cost re-imbursement contract for
          cause, the grantee should use cost analysis and the appropriate cost principles to negotiate
          the final amount of termination settlement.

In addition, contracts must include termination language in the contract when they are over
$10,000, as described in Appendix II of 2 CFR Part 200.


3.6       Price Analysis

Micro Purchase and Small Purchase procurement methods require Price Analysis when selecting
vendors and suppliers. There are a variety of ways of analyzing price, some of which are
illustrated below, but the method and degree of analysis grantees used is dependent on the facts
surrounding the particular procurement situation. Price Analysis should be documented in the
procurement file.

      e   Compare competitive prices received in response to the solicitation to each other.

      e   Compare proposed prices to prices on existing contracts or contracts proposed in the
          recent past. Be sure to factor in any changing conditions, including market, inflation,
          material price changes.

      e   Apply rough approximations and review significant inconsistencies, which may require a
          deeper look at prices to determine if the items are truly comparable. The types of
          approximations might include price per pound, per square foot, per hour or other typical
          unit pricing mechanism.

      e   Review price lists, catalogs or market prices of similar products to determine the market
          prices generally available to the public.


3.7       Cost Analysis

Cost Analysis includes the review and evaluation of the separate cost elements, including labor,
supplies, equipment, profit, overhead and general conditions. Grantees should prepare an
independent Cost Analysis before receiving bids, proposals and contract modifications. The
method and degree of analysis is dependent on the facts surrounding the particular procurement
situation.

An independent estimate must be made before receiving bids or proposals if one of the following
applies:

      e   When evaluating competitive proposals

      e   When there is a sole source or non-competitive proposal

                                                                                      Chapter 3 - 17
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery


   e   When only one bid is received after soliciting bids, the grantee does not have enough data
       to establish cost reasonableness and the grantee is considering awarding the contract to
       the single bidder.

   e   When negotiating modifications to contracts that impact the price or estimated cost.

   e   When terminating a contract and the contractor is entitled to payment of reasonable costs
       incurred.

   e   When awarding a cost-reimbursement contract.

The major categories of costs include both direct costs (direct labor, equipment, supplies, travel
and per diem, subcontractors and other direct costs) and indirect costs (overhead, general and
administrative expenses and profit). In the process of analyzing costs, profit should be analyzed
separately, based on complexity of the work, risk to the contractor, investment required, amount
of subcontracting involved, and typical profit in the industry.

The process for completing a Cost Analysis includes verifying cost data and evaluating the
elements of the project as described below. Costs that can be charged against the award are the
allowable direct costs and the allocable indirect costs, less any applicable credits.

   e   Allowable.    (2 CFR 200.403)    Costs must meet the following general criteria to be
       Allowable:

       e   Be necessary and reasonable (see further definition of Reasonable below);

       e   Meet the requirements of the Federal award;

       e   Beconsistent with Policies and Procedures and applied uniformly to purchases made
           from Federal and non-Federal funding;

       e   Be determined in accordance with Generally Accepted Accounting Principles
           (GAAP), except for state and local governments and Indian tribes, where exceptions
           have been made in 2 CFR Part 200;

       e   Not be included as a cost, cost sharing or matching of any other federally funded
           project; and

       e   Be adequately documented.

   e   Reasonable.    (2 CFR 200.404)    For a cost to be allowable, it must also be reasonable.
       This term is generally defined as what a prudent business would pay in a competitive
       marketplace. A cost can be allowable and allocable, and still not be what a prudent
       businessperson would pay (e.g., $100 for a standard hammer).       When determining what is
       a reasonable cost, the following issues should be considered:




                                                                                     Chapter 3 - 18
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery
ee



       e   Is the cost ordinary and necessary for completion of the activity?

       e   What are the current market prices for the good or service in the area?

       e   Are there any restraints or requirements that impact pricing, such as sound business
           practices, governmental requirements, arm’s length bargaining or the terms of the
           federal award?

       e   Has the staff exercised sound judgement in making the purchase?

       e   Are the same procedures followed for Federally funded and non-Federally funded
           procurement?

   e   Allocable. (2 CFR 200.405) The costs should be related to, or required for the
       performance of the contract. Many costs may be allowable but not related to the work
       required under the contract, and therefore not allocable.

       e   Is the cost incurred specifically for the CDBG-DR grant?

       e   Does the cost incurred benefit both the CDBG-DR project and other projects and can
           the cost be allocated pro-rata across the relevant funding sources?

       e   Has an indirect cost plan been approved to allocate indirect costs?

The process for applying cost and price analysis should include the following due diligence
review.

   e   Check the accuracy of the cost and pricing information submitted, and evaluate:

       e   The necessity for proposed cost items. A cost may be allowable under the cost
           principles and even allocable to the type of work to be performed, but still not be
           necessary for the specific contract.

       e   The application of audited or pre-negotiated indirect cost rates, labor and fringe
           benefit rates, or other factors.

       e   The effect of the vendor's bid approach on potential future costs. Does the vendor
           have a track record of containing costs (completing contracts at or "under cost")? Do
           they frequently have cost overruns?

       e   The projection of the vendor's cost trends. Is there any indication that the vendor’s
           costs are likely to increase or decrease over the life of the contract?

   e   Compare costs proposed by the vendor with:




                                                                                     Chapter 3 - 19
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery


          e   Actual costs previously incurred by the same contractor for the same or similar work.
              Apply any appropriate inflation factors for past work.

          e   Actual costs of the same or similar work performed by other contractors.

          e   Previous cost estimates from the vendor or others for the same or similar items.

          e   The methods proposed by the vendor with the requirements of the solicitation (i.e., do
              the costs reflect the technical approach proposed and the work required?).

          e   The grantee's independent cost estimate, either created by grantee staff or for the
              grantee by an independent architect, engineer, appraiser, etc.

      e   Verify that the vendor's cost submissions comply with the appropriate set of cost
          principles.


3.8       Contract Award and Execution

      e   Separation of Duties - One method for minimizing the potential for fraud and abuse in the
          procurement process is to have different individuals handling different parts of the
          process. For example, where one individual awards the contract or orders the goods or
          services, a separate individual will review the goods or services for performance and/or
          delivery. An easy guide for compliance is that employees who handle the money, the
          mail or the goods purchased should be different from employees managing the
          bookkeeping and financial accounts. This practice can be difficult in small cities, small
          departments or organizations with few employees, but a method of oversight should be
          established to avoid fraud and unnecessary purchases.

      e   Documentation - Each step in the procurement process should be documented, from the
          initial decision to purchase through final inspection of goods and services and final
          payment.   The records should include, but are not limited to, files on the rationale for
          selecting the methods of procurement used, selection of contract type, the contractor
          selection/rejection process, and the basis for the cost or price of a contract. The records
          should also include a justification for lack of competition when competitive bids or offers
          are not obtained, and the basis for the award cost or price.

          Documentation does not end at contract signing, but should continue through the delivery
          of goods and services to record payments, inspection, change orders and cost/price
          analysis of the change order. Monitoring the performance of the vendor should be
          documented through inspections and review of performance and delivery. Reports should
          include:




                                                                                        Chapter 3 - 20
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery
ee



       e   A spending map, a periodic plan for what is to be purchased.

       e   A contracts register of vendors, contractors, and subcontractors by date and type of
           procurement (micro purchases, small purchases, requests for proposals, and sole-
           source and competitive bids), funding source, and amount of the contract, along with
           a brief description. This register should be available on the website for the Disaster,
           which may be required by the specific Disaster appropriation.

       e   A Summary of change orders by contract.

       e   A report that cross-checks vendor addresses and phone numbers with those of
           employees.

       e   A report of any purchases lacking invoices.

       Records relating to the procurement of goods and services must be maintained for a
       minimum of three years from the date of final closeout of the CDBG-DR award.

   e   Checklist - Developing a Contract Checklist in the Procurement Policies and Procedures
       is a useful tool, to avoid mistakes in the procurement process. The checklist should cover
       all of the stages in the process, including:

       e   Identification of Need and description of goods and/or services to be procured

       e   Cost/price analysis

       e   Documentation of Type of Procurement anticipated

       e   Bid, Requests for Proposals, Requests for Qualifications      documents and process

       e   Documentation of contractor eligibility

       e   Contract documents, including relevant clauses

       e   Contract Execution

       e   Contract change orders and cost/price analysis

       e   Project completion and inspection

       e   Payment tracking and invoicing management

       Included in the Sample Documents are a contract checklist and a list of the required
       contract clauses. Each contract will follow different procedures, based on the type of
       procurement (micro purchase, sealed bid, etc.) and the type of service (construction,
       architectural services, etc.). In addition, not every contract will require all of the clauses
       because some are required only under specific circumstances- for example the Davis

                                                                                      Chapter 3 - 21
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery

       Bacon clauses that are required for construction and machinery and equipment
       installation.

   e   Contract Monitoring and Payment - Most of the grantee’s administrative work takes place
       prior to purchasing goods and/or services and prior to executing the contract. However,
       sound financial management also requires the grantee to review the purchases and
       document the purchase prior to making payment. Contracts should include performance
       requirements for timing of delivery, quality of work, payment of subcontractors (and
       related lien waivers if appropriate), and delivery of reports. This review forms part of the
       procurement process and should be carried out prior to payment made to the vendor.
       Receiving and filing documentation of the work performed (invoices, pay requests,
       inspections) is part of the procurement and financial management record keeping process.




                                                                                   Chapter 3 - 22
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery


                                Chapter 4: Prohibited Practices

CDBG procurement regulations identify explicitly prohibited procurement practices, such as
“cost plus a percentage of cost” and “percentage of construction costs” methods of contracting.
Grantees should not carry out these methods of procurement with their CDBG-DR grant funds.




4.1             Prohibition on Cost Plus a Percentage of Cost (CPPC) Pricing
The regulation 2 CFR 200.323 addresses “Contract cost and price” requirements and specifically
prohibits CPPC pricing. The regulation 2 CFR 200.323(d) provides:


  (d)   The cost plus a percentage of cost and percentage of construction cost methods of
  contracting must not be used.


Federal procurement requirements do allow for Time and Material (T&M) type contracts — but
only after a defensible and properly documented determination has been made that:

      e         No other contract is suitable; and,

      e         The contract includes a ceiling price that the contractor exceeds at its own risk.

Specifically, Section 2 CFR 200.318G) provides:


  (j) (1) The non-Federal entity may use time and material type contracts only after a
  determination that no other contract is suitable and if the contract includes a ceiling price that
  the contractor exceeds at its own risk. Time and material type contract means a contract
  whose cost to a Grantee is the sum of:
          (i)      The actual cost of materials; and
          (ii)     Direct labor hours charged at fixed hourly rates that reflect wages, general and
                   administrative expenses, and profit.

  (2) Since this formula generates an open-ended contract price, a time-and materials contract
  provides no positive profit incentive to the contractor for cost control or labor efficiency.
  Therefore, each contract must set a ceiling price that the contractor exceeds at its own risk.


                                                                                             Chapter 4 - 23
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery

  Further, the non-Federal entity awarding such a contract must assert a high degree of
  oversight in order to obtain reasonable assurance that the contractor is using efficient
  methods and effective cost controls.



4.2     Prohibition on Practices that Restrict Full and Open Competition

2 CFR 200.319 identifies a range of prohibited practices that can unacceptably restrict full and
open competition. The regulation provides:


  § 200.319 Competition.

  (a) All procurement transactions must be conducted in a manner providing full and open
  competition consistent with the standards of this section. In order to ensure objective
  contractor performance and eliminate unfair competitive advantage, contractors that develop
  or draft specifications, requirements, statements of work, and invitations for bids or requests
  for proposals must be excluded from competing for such procurements. Some of the
  situations considered to be restrictive of competition include but are not limited to:
      (1) Placing unreasonable requirements on firms in order for them to qualify to do
      business;
      (2) Requiring unnecessary experience and excessive bonding;
      (3) Noncompetitive pricing practices between firms or between affiliated companies;
      (4) Noncompetitive contracts to consultants that are on retainer contracts;
      (5) Organizational conflicts of interest;
      (6) Specifying only a ““brand name’’ product instead of allowing “‘an equal’’ product to
      be offered and describing the performance or other relevant requirements of the
      procurement; and
      (7) Any arbitrary action in the procurement process.
  (b) The non-Federal entity must conduct procurements in a manner that prohibits the use of
      statutorily or administratively imposed state or local geographical preferences in the
      evaluation of bids or proposals, except in those cases where applicable Federal statutes
      expressly mandate or encourage geographic preference. Nothing in this section preempts
      state licensing laws. When contracting for architectural and engineering (A/E) services,
      geographic location may be a selection criterion provided its application leaves an
      appropriate number of qualified firms, given the nature and size of the project, to
      compete for the contract.



While the regulation clearly states that there can be situations other than those listed that can be
restrictive of competition, the following section breaks down each the provisions of 200.319(a)
and (b) and provides examples for each:




                                                                                      Chapter 4 - 24
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery


   e   Prohibition: § 200.319(a) Contractors that develop or draft specifications, requirements,
       statements of work, and invitations for bids or requests for proposals must be excluded
       from competing for such procurements.
   e   Rationale / Examples:
       e A contractor with knowledge of forthcoming a bid solicitation, gained through a role
           in preparing the solicitation, has an unfair advantage over other bidders in terms of
           time to prepare a response and familiarity with the associated specifications and
           requirements with the solicitation.

   e   Prohibition: § 200.319(a)(1) Placing unreasonable requirements on firms in order for
       them to qualify to do business.
   e   Rationale / Examples:
       e To ensure that the pool of eligible bidders is as broad as possible, placing unnecessary
           restrictions is not allowed.
       e Example: The City of Lakeside has completed three housing rehabilitation projects
           with CDBG funds using the same firm and publishes an RFP that seeks “A firm with
           10 permanent employees that has previously worked with the City of Lakeside to
           administer no less than three housing rehabilitation projects with CDBG funds.”

   e   Prohibition: § 200.319(a)(2) Requiring unnecessary experience and excessive bonding;
   e   Rationale / Examples
       e Unnecessary Experience Requirements: The experience level required of bidders
           should match the type of work described in the RFP. For example, the local
           government should not require a contractor to have $100 million in commercial
           construction experience when the RFP is for the repair of 10 single-family homes.
       e Excessive Bonding Requirements: The purpose of bid, performance and payment
           bonds is as follows:
           e The Bid Bond reduces the participation of frivolous bidders in procurement
               processes. The successful bidder enters into a contract and provides the required
               performance and payment bonds. If the bidder fails to honor its commitments, the
               grantee, entitlement or subrecipient is protected, up to the amount of the bid bond
               - usually for the difference between the low bid and the next higher responsive
               bid.
           e The Performance Bond secures the contractor’s promise to perform the contract
               in accordance with its terms and conditions, at the agreed upon price, and within
               the time allowed.
           e The Payment Bond protects certain laborers, material suppliers and
               subcontractors against nonpayment.

       Section 200.325 governs bonding requirements, including minimum bonding:



                                                                                   Chapter 4 - 25
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery



Section 200.325 - Bonding Requirements.

For construction or facility improvement contracts or subcontracts exceeding the Simplified
Acquisition Threshold, the Federal awarding agency or pass-through entity may accept the
bonding policy and requirements of the non-Federal entity provided that the Federal awarding
agency or pass-through entity has made a determination that the Federal interest is adequately
protected. If such a determination has not been made, the minimum requirements must be as
follows:

    (a) A bid guarantee from each bidder equivalent to five percent of the bid price. The *“bid
        guarantee’’ must consist of a firm commitment such as a bid bond, certified check, or
        other negotiable instrument accompanying a bid as assurance that the bidder will, upon
        acceptance of the bid, execute such contractual documents as may be required within the
        time specified.

    (b) A performance bond on the part of the contractor for 100 percent of the contract price. A
        **performance bond’’ is one executed in connection with a contract to secure fulfillment
        of all the contractor’s obligations under such contract.

    (c) A payment bond on the part of the contractor for 100 percent of the contract price. A
        ‘‘payment bond’’ is one executed in connection with a contract.


    e      Prohibition: § 200.319(a)(3) Noncompetitive pricing practices between firms or between
           affiliated companies.
    e      Rationale / Examples: The goal of this regulation is to prevent CDBG-DR
           procurements from allowing two or more firms to coordinate the bid (..e. “bid rigging”)
           through noncompetitive pricing practices.

    e      Prohibition: § 200.319(a)(4) Noncompetitive contracts to consultants that are on retainer
           contracts.
    e      Rationale / Examples: These noncompetitive contracts are awarded without going
           through full and open competition and therefore are restrictive or competition.
           Additionally, the number of consultants and firms interested and qualified to deliver the
           required services may differ substantially at the time the CDBG-DR procurement is
           authorized compared to when the grantee first entered into the noncompetitive retainer
           contract.




                                                                                      Chapter 4 - 26
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery

       § 200.319(d) requires the following:


 The non-Federal entity must ensure that all prequalified lists of persons, firms, or products
 which are used in acquiring goods and services are current and include enough qualified
 sources to ensure maximum open and free competition. Also, the non-Federal entity must not
 preclude potential bidders from qualifying during the solicitation period.


   e   Prohibition: § 200.319(a)(5) Organizational conflicts of interest;
       Rationale / Examples: Procurement regulations require that local governments and
       subrecipients maintain written standards of conduct covering conflicts of interest and
       governing the performance of its employees engaged in the selection, award and
       administration of contracts. 2 CFR 200.318(c)(2) provides the following regarding
       organizational conflicts of interest:


 If the non-Federal entity has a parent, affiliate, or subsidiary organization that is not a state,
 local government, or Indian tribe, the non-Federal entity must also maintain written standards
 of conduct covering organizational conflicts of interest. Organizational conflicts of interest
 means that because of relationships with a parent company, affiliate, or subsidiary
 organization, the non-Federal entity is unable or appears to be unable to be impartial in
 conducting a procurement action involving a related organization.




                                              Example

 For example, the City of Lakewood has received a CDBG-DR grant and has identified the
 Lakewood Housing Authority, an affiliate organization of the City, as a sub-recipient. The
 Lakewood Housing Authority must also have a conflict of interest policy in the award of
 contracts utilizing the CDBG-DR funds.


   e   Prohibition: § 200.319(a)(6) Specifying only a ‘‘brand name’’ product instead of
       allowing ‘‘an equal’’ product to be offered and describing the performance or other
       relevant requirements of the procurement.
   e   Rationale / Examples:     A brand name description is a title, term, symbol, design, or any
       combination thereof used to describe a product and its producer by a unique identifier.
       The use of brand name descriptions have the advantage of reducing the time needed to
       develop specification, clearly communicate what the solicitor is seeking and allows for
       the standardization of items like vehicles, power equipment, etc. — they typically overly
       restrict competition. The specification of only a brand name product — without allowing


                                                                                       Chapter 4 - 27
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery

       for equivalent items — can result in the unfair exclusion of alternative brands and
       increased costs for necessary goods.


       § 200.319(c)(1) and (2) require Grantees to have written procedures for procurement
       transactions to ensure that all solicitations:

       (1) Incorporate a clear and accurate description of the technical requirements for the
       material, product, or service to be procured. Such description must not, in competitive
       procurements, contain features which unduly restrict competition. The description may
       include a statement of the qualitative nature of the material, product or service to be
       procured and, when necessary, must set forth those minimum essential characteristics and
       standards to which it must conform if it is to satisfy its intended use. Detailed product
       specifications should be avoided if at all possible. When it is impractical or uneconomical
       to make a clear and accurate description of the technical requirements, a ‘“brand name or
       equivalent’ description may be used as a means to define the performance or other
       salient requirements of procurement. The specific features of the named brand which
       must be met by offers must be clearly stated; and

       (2) Identify all requirements which the offerors must fulfill and all other factors to be
       used in evaluating bids or proposals.


   e   Prohibition: § 200.319(a)(7) Any arbitrary action in the procurement process.
   e   Rationale / Examples: This clause is the catchall for any arbitrary actions in
       procurement that would end up giving priority to a specific bidder. Some of the things
       that are not mentioned specifically, but are not good practices include:
            o Awarding a contract without requiring compliance with advertised requirements,
               specifications, etc.
           o   Acceleration of bid or proposal submission times and dates
           o   Allowing a single bidder additional time to submit their response and not allowing
               all bidders the same additional time.
           o   Announcing the lowest bidder without a public opening of the bids

   e   Prohibition: § 200.319(b) The grantee entity must conduct procurements in a manner
       that prohibits the use of statutorily or administratively imposed state or local geographical
       preferences in the evaluation of bids or proposals, except in those cases where applicable
       Federal statutes expressly mandate or encourage geographic preference. Nothing in this
       section preempts state licensing laws. When contracting for architectural and engineering
       (A/E) services, geographic location may be a selection criterion provided its application
       leaves an appropriate number of qualified firms, given the nature and size of the project,
       to compete for the contract.




                                                                                     Chapter 4 - 28
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery


   e   Rationale / Examples:
       e To ensure that the pool of eligible bidders is a broad as possible, geographic
           restrictions on eligible bidders are generally not allowed.
       e However, there are exceptions to this prohibition. For example, given the nature and
           size of the project, solicitations for A/E services can be restricted to firms in a specific
           state or in a designated multi-state metropolitan area, but not if this eliminates all but
          one or two eligible firms and excludes multiple firms with appropriate licenses from
          just across a river or state line.




                                                                                      Chapter 4 - 29
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery


                       Chapter 5: Procurement Road Map

5.1       Procurement Policy
The first step in managing the procurement process is developing and implementing a written
Procurement Policy. A Procurement Policy must meet federal guidelines, but also meet state and
local policy as well, where they exceed federal minimum requirements. The requirements for
state grantees is different from that of units of local governments that receive funding directly
from HUD, as described below. However, the essence of “good procurement” for all grantees
can be summarized as follows:

      e   Identify and clearly specify standards for the goods or services the grantee or subrecipient
          wants to obtain;

      e   Seek competitive offers to obtain the best possible quality at the best possible price;

      e   Use a written agreement that clearly states the responsibilities of each party;

      e   Ensure the fair and equitable treatment of all bidders and potential bidders;

      e   Keep good records; and

      e   Have a quality assurance system that helps the grantee or subrecipient get what it pays
          for.

A Procurement Policies and Procedures manual should be adopted prior to soliciting bids or
pricing, incurring costs and entering into any contracts.


5.2       Differences between State and Entitlement Grantees




As with all CDBG regulations, states are allowed “maximum feasible deference” in the
implementation of their program. As discussed previously, one of the way in which a state may
demonstrate compliance with the procurement requirement, is to utilize the states own policies
and procedures. Minimum standards must include the following:

      e   Promote full and open competition.



                                                                                          Chapter 5 - 30
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery


       e   Specify the types of procurement allowed and procedures that are followed. Cost plus
           percentage of costs and percentage of construction cost methods is NOT ALLOWABLE.

       e   Include standards of conduct for employees engaged in award or administration of state
           CDBG-funded contracts.

       e   Ensure that all purchase orders and contracts include any clauses required by Federal
           statutes, Executive orders, and implementing regulations, and the authorities listed in
           Appendix II of 2 CFR Part 200.

       e   Make subrecipient and contractor determinations in accordance with the standards in 2
           CFR 200.330.

       e   Obtain certification from any transaction participant that neither it nor its principals are
           currently debarred, suspended, proposed for debarment, declared ineligible or voluntarily
           excluded from participation.

Depending on the relevant appropriations act, Grantees may be required to submit their
Procurement Policies to HUD for review as a condition of receiving a CDBG-DR grant.


5.3.       Full and Open Competition
A Procurement Policy should provide for full and open competitions among prospective vendors
and bidders. Competition should ensure that the pricing is fair and the Grantee is getting a
reasonable price for the goods or services procured. In addition, free and open competition
should reduce the potential for conflicts of interest and collusion on bids between potential
bidders and the Grantee.


5.4        Documentation

Each step in the procurement process should be documented, from the initial decision to
purchase through final inspection of goods and services and final payment. The records should
include, but are not limited to, files on the rationale for selecting the methods of procurement
used, selection of contract type, the contractor selection/rejection process, and the basis for the
cost or price of a contract. The records should also include a justification for lack of competition
when competitive bids or offers are not obtained, and the basis for the award cost or price.

Documentation does not end at contract signing, but should continue through the delivery of
goods and services to record payments, inspections, change orders and cost/price analysis of the
change order. Monitoring the performance of the vendor should be documented through
inspections and review of performance and delivery. Reports should include:

       e   A spend map (a periodic plan for what is to be bought).



                                                                                        Chapter 5 - 31
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery


      e   A register of procurements using CDBG-DR that includes the name of the vendor,
          contractor, and/or subcontractor, the date and type of procurement (micro purchases,
          small purchases, requests for proposals, and sole-source and competitive bids), funding
          source, amount of the contract and a brief description of the procured goods or services.
          This register should be available on the grantee’s website for the Disaster, which may be
          required by the specific Disaster appropriation. (See Contract Template found in the
          Sample Documents)

      e   Asummary of change orders by contract.

      e   A report that crosschecks vendor addresses and phone numbers with those of employees.

      e   A report of any purchases lacking invoices.

Records relating to the procurement of goods and services must be maintained for a minimum of
three years from the date of final closeout of the CDBG-DR award.


                                   Example of Poor Record Keeping

 A state receiving CDBG-DR funds failed to follow Federal regulations in its procurement
 and contracting for services in selecting a firm to market the state to bring tourism back to
 pre-storm levels. The state has adopted 2CFR Part 200.317-326 for its procurement policies
 for disaster procurement. The state selected a contractor following acceptable procurement
 procedures through a competitive bid process, but did not maintain adequate documentation
  of cost/price analysis. In addition, the state did not request from the contractor timesheets as
  evidence of the work done by staff of the contractor. In addition, the contract required the
  contractor to seek bids for advertising time from radio, television and other media services.
  The state had the authority to waive this bidding requirement, but failed to document the
 waiver in the contract. As a result, the Office of the Inspector General questioned $23
 million in services and contractor labor, which were procured inappropriately or not
 adequately documented.



5.5       Bonding and Insurance
For construction or facility improvement contracts or subcontracts exceeding the Simplified
Acquisition Threshold, the Federal awarding agency or pass-through entity may accept the
bonding policy and requirements of the Grantee provided that the Federal awarding agency or
pass-through entity has made a determination that the Federal interest is adequately protected. If
such a determination has not been made, the minimum requirements are:

      e   A bid guarantee from each bidder equivalent to 5 percent of the bid price. The “bid
           guarantee” must be a firm commitment in the form of a bid bond, certified check, or other
           negotiable instrument as assurance that the bidder is prepared to execute a contract within
           the time specified for the bid amount.

                                                                                      Chapter 5 - 32
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery


      e    A performance bond from the (sub)contractor for 100 percent of the contract price to
          secure the (sub)contractors’ fulfillment of all obligations under the contract.

      e   A payment bond from the (sub)contractor for 100 percent of the contract price to assure
          payment of all persons supplying labor and materials under the contract.

Note: if state or local procurement policies require higher or additional bonding and insurance
requirements — they must be followed for CDBG-DR procurement.


5.6       Utilize Local Businesses and Small, Minority Contractors
Grantees should make every effort to include local business firms and contract with small,
minority-owned and/or women-owned businesses in the procurement process. Steps that will
facilitate contracting with small and minority contractors include adding these businesses to
solicitation lists, sizing (splitting, dividing, etc.) contracts so that smaller businesses can
participate and utilizing organizations that work with minority and woman owned businesses and
labor surplus firms. These methods should also be required of prime contractors.

Specifically, a grantee is encouraged to take affirmative steps to use small firms, minority-owned
firms, women-owned firms, or “labor surplus area” firms in its CDBG-financed activities. The
efforts include the following suggestions:

      e   Incorporating such businesses in solicitation lists whenever they are potential sources.
          Solicitation lists should be kept current and updated on a periodic basis.

      e   Using organizations such as the Minority Small Business Development Agency, the
          Small Business Administration, or other similar organizations to assist in development of
          a solicitation list.

      e   Ensuring that these businesses are solicited when identified as potential sources.

      e   Dividing procurement requirements, when economically feasible, to permit maximum
          participation of these businesses.

      e   Requiring prime contractors, when subcontracts are solicited, to take affirmative steps to
          select these firms.


In addition, Section 3 of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1968, requires to the
greatest extent feasible, contracts be awarded to eligible business concerns located in or owned
by residents of the target area. Section 3 was enacted to ensure that the employment and other
economic opportunities generated by Federal financial assistance for housing and community
development programs shall, to the greatest extent feasible, be directed toward low- and very
low-income persons, particularly those who are recipients of governmental assistance for
housing.


                                                                                      Chapter 5 - 33
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery

Included in the Sample Documents section are examples of Procurement Procedures that will
increase participation to meet the Section 3 requirements.


5.7.       Dealing with Subrecipients

CDBG-DR grantees may carry out activities through their staff or they may utilize a subrecipient
to carry out those activities. Generally, a subrecipient is a public or private nonprofit agency,
authority, or organization that administers an activity on behalf of the grantee. A contractor is not
considered a subrecipient. For state grantees, the state is funding local governments and will
monitor compliance of the local government entity. The local government that is a subgrantee of
a state may use a subrecipient to implement the activity for which they applied for funding. For
entitlement cities, the city could awards funds to a nonprofit and that nonprofit operates the
program or project. The Grantee and the subrecipient jointly share the responsibility for carrying
out the program, and the Grantee is responsible for reporting to HUD.

Even if a Grantee uses a subrecipient, the Grantee is ultimately responsible for ensuring that
CDBG-DR funds are used in accordance with all program requirements, including procurement.
The use of designated subrecipients does not relieve the grantee of this responsibility. The
grantee is also responsible for determining the adequacy of performance under subrecipient
agreements (and procurement contracts) and for taking appropriate action when performance
problems arise.

Subrecipients can be selected by a variety of methods, including:

       e   A formal application process, where applications are evaluated according to specific
           criteria.

       e   A limited application process where the Grantee is often more involved in shaping the
            project and revising project details.

       e   A Request for Qualifications (RFQ) from qualified organizations.

       e   Allowing for unsolicited applications throughout the year.

       e   A combination of some of the above approaches.


5.8        Separation of Duties
One of the checks and balances to limit fraud in procurement is through the separation of duties
of staff. The person delegated to order the goods or manage the procurement process should be
different from the person receiving and accepting the goods and the person paying for the order.
When this is not possible due to the limited size of staff, additional rules should be used, such as
limiting dollar authorizations and periodic reviews by an independent individual. The grantee
should ensure that only designated individuals have the authority to make binding contracts. If


                                                                                     Chapter 5 - 34
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery

the grantee or subrecipient has a small staff, another method must be developed to provide for
independent oversight. The procurement procedures should outline:

      e   The positions involved in the procurement process and the responsibilities of each
          person.

      e   A formal system of authorization and review

      e   Separation of duties

The rule of thumb should be that if an employee touches the money, mail, or goods purchased,
he or she should not touch the books.


5.9       Conflict of Interest

HUD requires that a written code of standards be included in the grantee’s procurement
policy, and many State and local governments also have conflict of interest requirements for
their staff. The procedures should require that the grantee bar those in positions of trust
from personally gaining from transactions and that the procurement process is fair to all
seeking to do business with the grantee or subrecipient. A common problem is the lack of
understanding of what constitutes an “appearance of conflict.” Too often, managers believe
that indirect or noncash gifts are not considered a conflict of interest. However, vendor or
contractor donations to employee fund-raising drives, event tickets, meals, or gifts could be
considered potential conflicts of interest.


5.10      Debarred Contractor Review

Grantees must not make any award to any contractor or organization which is debarred or
suspended or is otherwise excluded from participation in Federal assistance programs. The
Grantee must comply with all requirements relating to debarments and suspensions codified
in 2 CFR Parts 180 and 2424. The General Services Administration maintains a list of all
debarred contractors through the System Award Management (SAM). This applies to
CDBG-assisted contracts at any tier in the process. To determine if a proposed contractor is
debarred, Grantees can check the federal SAM database at https://www.sam.gov. In
addition to checking the name of the contracting firm, the name of the president and owner
of the firm should also be checked. Staff should also review any state and local debarment
lists. Website printouts should be placed in the file to document compliance.


5.11      Contract Administration

Most of the Grantee’s administrative work takes place prior to purchasing goods and/or services
and prior to executing the contract. However, sound financial management also requires the

                                                                                    Chapter 5 - 35
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery

grantee to review the purchases and document the purchase prior to making payment. Contracts
should include performance requirements for timing of delivery, quality of work, payment of
subcontractors (and related lien waivers, if appropriate), and delivery of reports. This review
forms part of the procurement process and should be carried out prior to payment being made to
the vendor. In addition, all invoices should include sufficient detail that allows the grantee to
determine if the work performed conforms to the terms of the executed contract. Receiving and
filing documentation of the work performed (invoices, pay requests, inspections) is part of the
procurement and financial management record keeping process.

The need for procuring goods and services, especially after a disaster, can change over time.
Frequently, a grantee may not know the full extent of damage to facilities until a re-construction
project is underway. Because of this and other factors, the work that was originally described in
a Scope of Work, may need to be modified. This will either require a change order to the
contract or, in some cases, the revised project must be procured again because of substantial
changes to the scope. A change order requires that cost/price analysis be performed again to
identify reasonable costs for the type of work to be performed or the good procured.

In some disaster declarations, grantees are required to maintain a contract template and make
public all solicitations and public procurement actions. HUD has developed a Contract Template
and a copy of the template has been included in the Sample Documents.


5.12    Public Website

In recent appropriations acts, Congress has required that a website be developed and maintained
that provides information to the public on proposed purchasing with CDBG-DR funds and the
status of those actions. This provides transparency to the public and allows for maximum
accountability on the work performed, contractor selected and status of the work. The types of
information that should be available on the website include:

    e   The grantees procurement policies

    e   The status of procurements projected, underway and completed

    e   Acopy of the solicitation

    e   Acopy of the executed contract that grantees have procured directly

    e   The contract template described above is a good tool to maintain and keep current on the
        public website.


5.13.   Wrong Turns Off the Road to Good Procurement (Common Pitfalls in
the Procurement Process)

Grantees that follow the Road Map outlined at the beginning of this section — and the regulations
and requirements discussed throughout this Toolkit - should be able to avoid wrong turns that

                                                                                   Chapter 5 - 36
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery

can lead to adverse audit findings and even the repayment of CDBG-DR funds.       These wrong
turns can categorized as follows:

   e   Use of Prohibited Cost Plus Percentage of Cost Contracting

       e   Cost Plus Percentage of Cost (CPPC) contracts are not allowed at any time for any
           reason when using CDBG-DR funds. This applies to States, Entitlements and Sub-
           Recipients.

       e   See 2 CFR 200.323 and discussion in Chapter 4 — Prohibited Practices.

   e   Failure to prepare independent cost estimates prior to receiving bids or proposals

       e   Planning to use the bids to establish the estimate is unacceptable. What does not work
           with this approach is that estimate cannot be prepared PRIOR to receiving the bids if
           they — the estimates and bid - are treated as the same thing. Moreover,
           INDEPENDENT         should always be interpreted to mean independent from the
           bidders.

       e   See 2 CFR 200.323(a) and discussion on Cost and Price Analysis in Chapter 3.

   e   Failure to conduct and document a cost or price analysis

       e   A lack of familiarity with how to conduct and document a cost and/or price analysis
            for each procurement, if the purchase is in excess of the Simplified Acquisition
            Threshold, is not an excuse for not meeting this requirement.

       e   See 2 CFR 200.323(a) and discussion on Cost and Price Analysis in Chapter 3.

   e   Failure to review contract modifications or change orders for cost and price analysis

       e   Even if the original procurement for a good or service complied with this
           requirement, the same analysis and documentation is required for contract
           modifications and/or change orders to the original procurement and associated
           agreement.

       e   See 2 CFR 200.323(a) and discussion on Cost and Price Analysis in Chapter 3.

   e   Inclusion of non-competitive practices/requirements in procurement documents

       e   This chapter opens with a reminder that a primary goal of all procurement policies
           should be to promote fair and open competitions among prospective vendors and
           bidders. Chapter 4 of this Toolkit explores prohibited, anti-competitive practices —
           such as most geographic restrictions on bidders, excessive bonding requirements, etc.
           — in greater depth.



                                                                                   Chapter 5 - 37
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery
OO                                                               —SCSCSC‘C‘C‘(CCCCOC(és



       e   See 2 CFR 200.319(a) and (b).

   e   Understanding differences between procurement requirements for states, local
       governments, and subrecipients

       e   As discussed above in this chapter, local governments can and often do set higher
           standards (e.g., competitive bidding for construction required for contracts over
           $20,000 rather than the Simplified Acquisition Threshold), and in these cases, the
           higher standards must be applied for CDBG-DR procurement as well. Where Federal
           requirements do not apply to them, States may set their own standards, which may or
           may not exceed Federal requirements.

   e   Inadequate monitoring of sub-recipients

       e   As pointed out early in this chapter, grantees — whether a State or Entitlement - and
           its subrecipients often jointly share the responsibility for carrying out disaster
           recovery programs. Nevertheless, the grantee is ultimately responsible for ensuring
           that the subrecipient’s procurement actions comply with federal requirements and the
           grantees procurement policies. Only through sustained and adequate monitoring can
           the grantee ensure that procurements are compliant.

   e   Reliance on “emergency services” language to expand contract scope without following
       requirement procurement requirements

       e   Disasters are, by definition, emergencies for the states and communities that they
           devastate. However, expanding the scope and compensation of a contract for goods
           or services executed before the disaster is not an allowable short cut if CDBG-DR
           grant funds are involved.

       e   Follow the Procurement Decision Tree in Chapter Two to determine how best to start
           a fresh procurement action for the needed products and services consistent with your
           procurement plan.

Given the urgency of disaster recovery responsibilities and a lack of familiarity with minimum
federal procurement standards, HUD’s Office of Inspector General (OIG) has published audit
reports that have been critical of procurement practices using CDBG-DR funds. The following
table summarizes the findings of some of these audit findings and can provide all grantees with
examples of how to avoid similar mistakes.




                                                                                   Chapter 5 - 38
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery



5.14   Examples of Procurement Audit Findings

             Finding                       Audit Report                          Finding               Notes

 Missing — Improper                State of Texas, 2012-FW-1005   | Finding #1. “The State
 procurement method initially                                       improperly increased its project
 — or at the time of substantial                                    management services contract’s
 and/or material amendment                                          scope of services and cost
                                                                    when it entered into its fourth
                                                                    contract amendment.”

                                                                    “The State did not follow its
                                                                    own guidance when it executed
                                                                    this contract change. The
                                                                    Texas Contract Management
                                                                    Guide stated, “any contract
                                                                    amendments are required to be
                                                                    within the scope of the original
                                                                    contract and the competitive
                                                                   process underlying the original
                                                                   contract.”

                                                                    As the changes enacted were
                                                                   both material and substantial,
                                                                   the State could not provide
                                                                   assurance that it properly
                                                                   performed the $75.01 million
                                                                   contract amendment.




                                                                                                         Chapter 5 - 39
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery


           Finding                   Audit Report                       Finding                            Notes

Prohibited Cost Plus         State of Texas, 2012-FW-1005   #2. The State’s contracts and     HUD CDBG rules prohibit a
Percentage of Cost                                          contract amendments contained     _CPPC payment type:
Contracting                                                 ineligible cost plus a            570.489(g)
                                                            percentage of costs provisions.
                                                            The two contracts budgets
                                                            included a 10% mark-up on
                                                            direct expenses and
                                                            subcontractors costs.

Prohibited Cost Plus         Harris County Housing          #3. The Authority used a          24 CFR 85.36(f)(4) (now
Percentage of Cost           Authority, 2013-FW-1006        prohibited CPPC contract for      200.323(d)) prohibits grantees
Contracting                                                 its Cypresswood Estates           and subgrantees from using
                                                            housing development.              CPPC contracting methods.
                                                            According to the contract, the
                                                            Authority funded the
                                                            development with $5 million in
                                                            CDBG-DR program funds, $4
                                                            million in NSP funds and $1.9
                                                            million in non-Federal funds.

Failure to prepare           State of Texas, 2012-FW-1005   #1. Did not follow federal and    HUD Staff: “Many small
independent cost estimates                                  state requirements and its best   grantees believe — or justify
prior to receiving bids or                                  practices to ensure that it       errors on this regulation — with
proposals.                                                  procured its two professional     the explanation that the bids
                                                            services contracts at fair and    received provide them with the
                                                            reasonable prices. The Texas      estimate.”
                                                            Contract Management Guide
                                                            required that the State
                                                            adequately plan its
                                                            procurements and show how it
                                                            determined a fair and

                                                                                                              Chapter 5 - 40
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery


           Finding                   Audit Report                      Finding                           Notes

                                                          reasonable price before
                                                          performing the actual
                                                          procurement

Failure to prepare           City of New Orleans, 2015-   Finding #1: The City did not
independent cost estimates   FW-1002                      always prepare cost estimates
prior to receiving bids or                                or cost analyses...(for its
proposals.                                                demolition and grant contracts,
                                                          the City did not have
                                                          documentation showing that it
                                                          performed cost estimates
                                                          before the bidding process to
                                                          establish a basis for the
                                                          contract prices.

Failure to prepare           State of NJ, 2015-PH-1003    The State did not prepare an
independent cost estimates                                independent cost estimate and
prior to receiving bids or                                analysis before awarding the
proposals.                                                (disaster management) system
                                                          contract to the only responsive
                                                          bidder

Failure to prepare           State of NY, 2015-NY-1011    (State) executed a subrecipient    24 CFR 85.36(f)(1)
independent cost estimates                                agreement with DASNY to
prior to receiving bids or                                provide, either directly or
proposals.                                                through the agency’s
                                                          subrecipients or subcontractors,
                                                          inspection-related construction
                                                          management
                                                          services...(h)owever, neither
                                                          (the State) or DASNY

                                                                                                           Chapter 5 - 41
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery


            Finding                  Audit Report                      Finding                            Notes

                                                           conducted a cost analysis or
                                                           independent cost estimate for
                                                           the inspection-related
                                                           construction management and
                                                           environmental review services.

Failure to prepare           City of Minot, 2015-KC-1003   The City did not always            24 CFR 85.36(b-1)
independent cost estimates                                 prepare cost estimates before
prior to receiving bids or                                 receiving bids or proposals for
proposals.                                                 two grant administration and
                                                           project delivery services
                                                           contracts and the five
                                                           amendments to those contracts,
                                                           or for the change orders for
                                                           four construction projects

Failure to conduct and       City of New Orleans, 2015-    Finding #1: The City did not
document a cost or price     FW-1002                       always prepare cost estimates
analysis.                                                  or cost analyses...(for its
                                                           demolition contractor, the City
                                                           did not perform adequate cost
                                                           analyses for 10 of 41 properties
                                                           demolished.

Failure to conduct and       State of NJ, 2015-PH-1003     The State did not prepare an
document a cost or price                                   independent cost estimate and
analysis.                                                  analysis before awarding the
                                                           (disaster management) system
                                                           contract to the only responsive
                                                           bidder


                                                                                                            Chapter 5 - 42
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery


            Finding                  Audit Report                       Finding                           Notes

Failure to conduct and       State of NY, 2015-NY-1011     (State) executed a subrecipient
document a cost or price                                   agreement with DASNY to
analysis.                                                  provide, either directly or
                                                           through the agency’s
                                                           subrecipients or subcontractors,
                                                           inspection-related construction
                                                           management
                                                           services...(h)owever, neither
                                                           (the State) or DASNY
                                                           conducted a cost analysis or
                                                           independent cost estimate for
                                                           the inspection-related
                                                           construction management and
                                                           environmental review services.

Failure to conduct and       City of Minot, 2015-KC-1003   Regulations at 24 CFR 85.36(f)     24 CFR 85.36(f)
document a cost or price                                   and the City’s federal grant
analysis.                                                  program procurement policy
                                                           require a cost or a price
                                                           analysis in connection with
                                                           every procurement action,
                                                           including contract
                                                           modifications.

Failure to review contract   City of New Orleans, 2015-    Finding #2: Perform a cost         24 CFR 85.36(f)(1), and Quick
modifications or change      FW-1002                       analysis when negotiating a        Guide to Cost and Price
orders for cost and price                                  modification, including change     Analysis for HUD Grantees
analysis.                                                  orders, to any type of contract
                                                           if the modification the work
                                                           authorized under the contract
                                                           and the price or total estimated

                                                                                                            Chapter 5 - 43
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery
OO                                                                                                        —CSCSCSC‘C(C(CSCds



           Finding                     Audit Report                     Finding                           Notes

                                                           costs, either upward or
                                                           downward.

Inclusion of non-competitive   State of NY, 2015-NY-1011   Finding #3: Price and Adequate     24CFR 85.36(d)(3
practices/requirement in                                   Competition Not Considered
procurement documents.                                     When Procuring Contractors:
                                                           ... State agency selected 7
                                                           contractors from among 33
                                                           firms (before CDBG-DR grant
                                                           was executed) in accordance
                                                           with its own procurement
                                                           standards. These standards
                                                           were based up on qualification
                                                           factors with subsequent
                                                           negotiation of hourly labor
                                                           costs... However, regulations at
                                                           24CEFR 85.36(d)(3) and section
                                                           302(1)(f) of HTFC’s
                                                           procurement policy provide
                                                           that only architectural or
                                                           engineering professional
                                                           service contractors may be
                                                           selected on the basis of
                                                           qualification without regard to
                                                           price.   In addition, HUD
                                                           CDBG procurement guidelines
                                                           in Basically CDBG, dated July
                                                           2012, require that the full
                                                           request for proposal method be
                                                           used if an architectural or
                                                           engineering firm is hired to

                                                                                                            Chapter 5 - 44
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery


           Finding                    Audit Report                       Finding                              Notes

                                                             provide non-architectural or
                                                             non-engineering services.
                                                             Further, it specifically provides
                                                             that construction and grant
                                                             management services are not
                                                             considered architectural or
                                                             engineering services.

Understanding differences     Harris County Housing          Finding #2: The Authority did       Not a difference — applies to all
between requirements for      Authority, 2013-FW-1006        not have an adequate contract       levels/types of grantees and
state, state sub-recipient,                                  administration system in place.     subrecipients.
entitlement, and non-profit                                  Specifically, it did not
procurement.                                                 implement and maintain a
                                                             contract administration system
                                                             sufficient to record and tract
                                                             the significant history of each
                                                             procurement action as required
                                                             by federal and State
                                                             procurement requirements and
                                                             its own internal policies.

Understanding differences     CPD, Certification of State                                        Drives home the point that
between requirements for      Disaster Grantee Procurement                                       there really is only one set of
state, state sub-recipient,   Processes, 2016-PH-0005                                            minimum standards — and that
entitlement, and non-profit                                                                      the States have to document
procurement.                                                                                     equivalency when they do not
                                                                                                 adopt 84.36 or today —
                                                                                                 200.317-326.




                                                                                                                 Chapter 5 - 45
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery


            Finding                  Audit Report                     Finding               Notes

Inadequate monitoring of     State of NY, 2015-NY-1011   (State) executed a subrecipient
sub-recipients.                                          agreement with DASNY to
                                                         provide, either directly or
                                                         through the agency’s
                                                         subrecipients or subcontractors,
                                                         inspection-related construction
                                                         management
                                                         services...(h)owever, neither
                                                         (the State) or DASNY
                                                         conducted a cost analysis or
                                                         independent cost estimate for
                                                         the inspection-related
                                                         construction management and
                                                         environmental review services.




                                                                                              Chapter 5 - 46
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery


                          Chapter 6: Micro-Purchases

6.1    What are micro-purchases?
Micro-purchases are acquisitions of products or services where the aggregate acquisition price
does not exceed the micro purchase threshold. Micro-purchase is defined at 2 CFR 200.67 where
it is noted that the micro purchase threshold is set by the Federal Acquisition Regulation at 48
CFR Subpart 2.1 (Definitions) and is subject to change. For CDBG funds, including CDBG-DR
funds, that threshold is currently $3,500, except as otherwise discussed in 48 CFR Subpart 2.1.

If the acquisition is $3,500 or less, the Grantee may use the micro purchase method.

If the procurement is for construction and the amount surpasses the micro-purchase threshold,
the Grantee must follow wage requirements found in 40 U.S.C. chapter 31 subchapter IV where
prevailing wages are discussed. The micro-purchase threshold is currently $2,000.

The full regulation (§200.320(a)) for this section reads as follows:


  Procurement by micro-purchases.

  Procurement by micro-purchase is the acquisition of supplies or services, the aggregate dollar
  amount of which does not exceed the micro-purchase threshold ($200.67 Micro-purchase).
  To the extent practicable, the non-Federal entity must distribute micro-purchases equitably
  among qualified suppliers. Micro-purchases must be awarded without soliciting competitive
  quotations if the non-Federal entity considers the price to be reasonable.



6.2    Process




The micro purchases method does not require the solicitation of competitive bids or proposals.
The micro purchase process is designed to minimize the administration components and
paperwork. The Grantee may select a vendor/provider as long as the it considers the price to be
reasonable.




                                                                                  Chapter 6 - 47
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery

 As with all procurements, Grantees must take all necessary affirmative steps to assure that
minority businesses, women’s business enterprises, and labor surplus area firms are used when
possible.


6.3.   Price Reasonableness

Non-federal entities should plan and document how much or how many products (or services)
will be required prior to executing a procurement strategy. The failure to plan may result in
making multiple purchases of the same item, and exceeding the micro purchase threshold.

       e      Reasonable Prices

              Under the cost principle that must be used in determining the allowable costs of
              work performed by the non-Federal entity under Federal awards, a cost is
              reasonable if, in its nature and amount, it does not exceed that which would be
              incurred by a prudent person under the circumstances prevailing at the time the
              decision was made to incur the cost. A reasonable price is reflective of the market
              price, without special considerations, surge pricing or other premiums.
              Researching market prices to have two or more quotes before making a micro
              purchase will help assure that the acquisition price is reasonable.

              In some instances, such as purchasing a widely available product, the market
              research may be as simple as looking on the internet to compare prices from, for
              example, Costco, Walmart and Sam’s Club.      This is a little different than Price
              Analysis, which is the determination that a certain price is fair. While Grantees
              are required to undertake a price or cost analysis in connection with every
              procurement action in excess of the Simplified Acquisition Threshold including
              contract modifications, micro purchases fall below this threshold and neither a
              price nor a cost analysis is required.

               To the extent practical, non-Federal entities should distribute micro purchases
              equably among qualified distributors.

              Consolidating and Breaking out procurements

              Grantees must be careful of intentionally “splitting” larger purchases to
              circumvent the dollar threshold limitations just so they take advantage of
              streamlined procurement procedures under the micro purchase method of
              procurement. Grantees should, however, give consideration to consolidating or
              breaking out procurements to obtain a more economical purchase (2 CFR
              200.318(d)).   Additionally, Grantees must divide total requirements, when
              economically feasible, into smaller tasks or quantities to permit maximum
              participation by small and minority businesses, and women’s business enterprises
              (2 CFR 200.321(b)(3)).



                                                                                    Chapter 6 - 48
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery

               Nevertheless, micro purchase procurement tends to be for very small items such
               as office supplies or simple equipment.

       e       Section 3

               Section 3 of the Housing and Urban Development Act of 1968 and its
               implementing regulations at 24 CFR Part 135 apply to the use of CDBG-DR
               funds. Grantees must comply with these requirements, and they must ensure that
               employment and other economic opportunities generated by certain CDBG-DR
               funds shall, to the greatest extent feasible, and consistent with existing Federal,
               State and local laws and regulations, be directed to low- and very low-income
              persons, particularly those who are recipients of government assistance for
              housing, and to business concerns which provide economic opportunities to low-
              and very low-income persons. The application of Section 3 requirements is not
              limited to micro purchase nor CDBG-DR but to many different HUD funding
              sources. More information on Section 3 requirements is provided in Chapter 5,
              on pricing, executing and administering contracts.

       e       Micro Purchase for Construction

               The Micro-Purchase procurement method could theoretically be used for
               construction, but it is highly unusual for any construction project to be less than
               $3,500. When used for construction in cases where Davis-Bacon wages apply,
               the micro purchase threshold is currently $2,000.


6.4    Post-Award Issues
With micro-purchases, amendments, change orders, and other requests that might affect the
amount of the purchase are not expected. If circumstances require the purchase of additional
materials and services, subsequent micro-purchases may be used.


6.5    Documentation

Documentation is required, even for small acquisition dollar amounts, as under the micro
purchase method.

       e       Pre-Award

               e      Document the “Need” — that is, assure that the items or services to be
                      procured are actually needed for disaster recovery work, and not another
                      project or initiative.

               e      Document the rationale for the micro-purchase method of procurement.



                                                                                     Chapter 6 - 49
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery


            e       Document the market research or other means by which the prices were
                    determined to be reasonable.

            e       Document the efforts to distribute micro purchase contracts among
                    qualified suppliers.

            e       Document marketing and outreach efforts to include minority and women-
                    owned businesses among interested suppliers. (This initiative may be
                    broader than just for suppliers under the micro purchase method, and
                    should be for all disaster related procurement).

      e     Post-Award

            Post-Award documentation will depend on the administrative method for
            procurement (i.e. purchase order) and whether the micro procurement involved
            construction. Non-federal entities will also have locally established procedures
            for contract administration.

      e     Purchase of Items/Services Other Than Lowest Price

            If the non-Federal entity has purchased an item or services which does not reflect
            the lowest price among the researched items/services, it must document the
            reasons why it made this decision.

      e     Purchase Order

            The issuance of a Purchase Order (PO) by the non-Federal entity and its
            acceptance by the vendor (through either performance or signature on the PO)
            constitute a contract. For this reason it is critical that the PO clearly specify the
            item(s) or service(s) being purchased and the terms and conditions of the
            purchase.

            All federally funded contracts must contain the required federal clauses and
            certifications. Incorporation of required contract clauses can be in the form of
            reference or as an attachment to the contract. See Section 7.11.




                                                                                    Chapter 6 - 50
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery
ee




       e      Procurement    Cards

              Many government entities provide purchase or government sponsored credit cards
              to Procurement or Contracting Officers to simplify the paperwork and the process
              to acquire goods and services that fall below the micro purchase threshold.
              Making purchases with a procurement card still requires following CDBG-DR
              regulations. Instead of using a purchase order, the credit card statement showing
              the itemized procurement will become part of the documentation, as well as the
              documentation showing how the credit card bill is paid.




                                          Example #1

 City Y needs to buy two portable printer/copier machines to place in two mobile office
 trailers that are located on-site in a disaster area. They need to have “Wi-Fi” printing
 capability and handle high production copying. The machines should also be able to print
 color photos with reasonable quality. City Y has traditionally purchased Canon
 printer/copiers and learns that these are at comparable prices to other brands. City Y
 researches the kind of machines that have this functionality by looking at numerous
 electronics and office supplies websites, including Best Buy, Office Max, Staples, and a few
 others. City Y learns that that prices range from $300-400 dollars from different vendors.
 All this information is documented on a form created by City Y for micro purchases. City Y
 creates a Purchase Order, takes it to the vendor and buys the two copier machines. The City
 Y Procurement Office takes the Purchase Order and accompanying documentation and
 provides copies to the staff person responsible for documenting the procurement records.


             The micro-purchases method and documentation of price analysis applies even in
             those instances where a product had previously been procured, and more is needed.
             The example below illustrates this scenario:


                                          Example #2

 Staff in the Public Works Department from City Z have been installing plastic safety barrier
 fencing to seal off properties damaged and deemed unsafe from recent flooding. They have
  run out of fencing, but learned that it can be found inexpensively from local suppliers.
 Public Works determines how much more fencing is needed and checks prices at Home
 Depot, Lowe’s and several local hardware stores. It finds and documents the least
 expensive providers and buys $2,000 of additional materials to complete the fencing.




                                                                                 Chapter 6 - 51
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery


                           Chapter 7 — Small Purchase

7.1.   What Are Small Purchases?

Small purchases are acquisitions of products or services where the aggregate acquisition price
does not exceed the Simplified Acquisition Threshold, which is set by the Federal Acquisition
Regulation at 48 CFR Subpart 2.1 and in accordance with 41 U.S.C. 1908. For CDBG funds,
including CDBG-DR funds, that threshold is currently $150,000 for goods and services,
however, the threshold is periodically adjusted for inflation. Additionally, different federal
programs and departments may have different threshold amounts.




As with all CDBG-DR procurements, the procurement must be conducted in a manner providing
full and open competition consistent with the standards of §200.319(a). As with all
procurement, Grantees must take all necessary affirmative steps to assure that minority
businesses, women’s business enterprises, and labor surplus area firms are used when possible.

The full regulation (§200.320(b)) for this section reads as follows:



  Procurement by small purchase procedures. Small purchase procedures are those relatively
  simple and informal procurement methods for securing services, supplies, or other property
  that do not cost more than the Simplified Acquisition Threshold. If small purchase
  procedures are used, price or rate quotations must be obtained from an adequate number of
  qualified sources.




7.2    Process

The small purchase method requires price or rate quotations to be obtained from an adequate
number of qualified sources. Different from the micro purchase process where no solicitation is
required, the small purchase method, although a simple and relatively informal procedure,
requires the grantee to obtain price or rate quotations from qualifying companies. Using this
method, the grantee should document every step in the procurement process to show compliance
with federal regulations.




                                                                                  Chapter 7 - 52
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery
ee




   e   Pre-Award Cost Determination

       Grantees should plan and document how much or how many products (or services) will
       be required prior to executing a procurement strategy. The failure to plan may result in
       making multiple purchases of the same item, or the purchase may exceed the simplified
       acquisition threshold and thus be ineligible for the small purchase method.

   e   Use as many of the following techniques as applicable and appropriate:

           e   Compare competitive prices received in response to the solicitation to one
               another. This assumes you receive a large enough number of competitively priced
               offers from the current marketplace.

           e   Compare proposed prices with prices under existing contracts and with prices
               proposed in the past for the same or similar items/services. Be sure to factor in
               any market changes (e.g., commodity price changes) or other influences (e.g.,
               inflation).

           e   Apply rough yardsticks (e.g., dollars per pound, per square foot, per hour, etc.) to
               compare prices and highlight significant inconsistencies that warrant additional
               pricing inquiry.

           e   Compare competitive price lists, published catalog or market prices of
               commodities and products, similar indices and discount or rebate arrangements.

           e   Compare proposed prices with your independent (1.e., in-house) cost estimates

       While Grantees much still satisfy CDBG-DR requirements, and maintain records
       sufficient to detail the history of procurement, price or cost analyses are not required for
       procurements by small purchase procedures.



What is the Simplified Acquisition Threshold?



 From §200.88: Simplified acquisition threshold means the dollar amount below which a
 non-Federal entity may purchase property or services using small purchase methods. Non-
 Federal entities adopt small purchase procedures in order to expedite the purchase of items
 costing less than the simplified acquisition threshold. The simplified acquisition threshold is
 set by the Federal Acquisition Regulation at 48 CFR Subpart 2.1 (Definitions) and in
 accordance with 41 U.S.C. 1908. As of the publication of this part, the simplified acquisition
 threshold is $150,000, but this threshold is periodically adjusted for inflation.




                                                                                     Chapter 7 - 53
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery


7.3.   The Solicitation

The regulations at 2 CFR 200.320 do not mandate a specific method of obtaining price or rate
quotations, so quotations for small purchases may be obtained in writing (hard copy or email),
orally, by fax, via catalogs, by letter, through electronic means, e.g., the Internet, through paid
advertisement, or by displaying the solicitation in a public place. The grantee should document
its basis for determining that it has obtained quotations from an adequate number of qualified
sources. Often a grantee will request quotations from a list of pre-qualified vendors and the list
should be inclusive and up to date.

The method should be appropriate to the purchase (e.g., obtaining price quotes by phone for a
commercially available supply item). Grantees should establish in their written Procurement
Policies which methods are preferred and any other requirements for the use of written and oral
solicitations. Written solicitations are used when it is necessary to provide vendors with detailed
information that cannot be conveyed orally (e.g., by phone), or with detailed quotation
evaluation information.


7.4    Negotiation
Small purchases procedures are not sealed bidding.    Contracting Officers may negotiate price
and other terms of purchases where appropriate.


7.55   Environmental Assessment

Keep in mind that prior to beginning construction work with CDBG-DR, projects will require an
environmental assessment in keeping with the National Environmental Protection Act.


7.6    Breaking down larger contracts and consolidating work across
       jurisdictions
There are certain circumstances where a Grantee may break down a larger contract into smaller
quantities, or where Grantees may collaborate across political jurisdictions to take advantage of
scale and economy.   Grantees must divide total requirements, when economically feasible, into
smaller tasks or quantities to permit maximum participation by small and minority businesses,
and women’s business enterprises. Grantees are also encouraged to enter into state and local
intergovernmental agreements or inter-entity agreements where appropriate for procurement or
use of common or shared goods and services.




                                                                                     Chapter 7 - 54
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery



                                            EXAMPLE

  Following a large-scale disaster, security fencing is needed to protect real estate assets for a
  multitude of properties across many neighborhoods in a large city. The Grantee decides that
  expediency is important because it wants to start the work at the same time in all affected
  neighborhoods. It also decides that it will be economically feasible to break down the work
  into smaller components to enable the participation of small, minority and women owned
  enterprises. It records these decisions in meeting minutes. The Grantee then takes the scope
  of work and divides it into geographic sub-sections to help elicit bids from small, local
  contractors.




                                            EXAMPLE

 A tornado touched down several times over a 75-mile stretch in a single state, causing severe
 damage in II different cities and town, comprising three Grantee jurisdictions. Temporary
 construction work is needed to make sure roofs and walls that are compromised do not
 collapse, causing further damage. Grantees negotiate an inter-governmental agreement
 allowing them to coordinate the procurement process .




7.7    Post-Award Issues

With small purchases, amendments, change orders, cancellations and other requests might affect
the amount of the purchase. Grantees should be aware of circumstances which might cause the
total amount of the procurement to exceed the small purchase Simplified Acquisition Threshold.
If a contract modification causing the amount to exceed this threshold, the Grantee must perform
a cost or price analysis in connection with every procurement action in excess of the Simplified
Acquisition Threshold including contract modifications.

Grantees should also be prepared to provide documentation to HUD where such contract
modifications result in a total contract price which exceeds the Simplified Acquisition Threshold
(2 CFR 200.324(b)(5)).


7.8    Documentation

Documentation is required for all procurement under the small purchase method.




                                                                                    Chapter 7 - 55
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery
ee



   e   Pre-Award

           e   Document the rationale for the procurement method chosen.

           e   Document the “Need” — that is, assure that the items or services to be procured are
               actually needed for disaster recovery work, and not another project or initiative.

           e   Document the basis for the contract price.

           e   Document the basis for determining that price or rate quotations were obtained
               from an adequate number of qualified sources.

           e   Document efforts to solicit from minority and women’s business enterprises when
               they are potential sources.

           e   Document the process of soliciting bids and the vendors contacted through the
               solicitation

   e   Post-Award

       Post-Award documentation will depend on the administrative method for procurement
       (i.e. purchase order, construction contract, etc.).   Grantees will also have locally
       established procedures for contract administration.

   e   Purchase Order

       The issuance of a Purchase Order (PO) by the Grantee and its acceptance by the vendor
       (through either performance or signature on the PO) constitute a contract. For this reason,
       it is critical that the PO clearly specify the item(s) or service(s) being purchased and the
       terms and conditions of the purchase.

       All federally funded contracts must contain the required federal clauses and certifications.
       Incorporation of required contract clauses can be in the form of reference or as an
       attachment to the contract. SEE LIST OF CLAUSES AT SECTION 7.9.




                                                                                      Chapter 7 - 56
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery



                                        Example — City A

  The City of Whoville’s Office of Community Development (OCD) has determined that they
  need to purchase silt fencing to stabilize banks along the French Broad River that were
  recently damaged by Hurricane Patricia. Funding will come from the CDBG-DR and
  removing silt from the river will protect the City’s water source. OCD staff needed to
  contract with an outside vendor to purchase the materials that will be installed by City staff.
  Their review of pricing in the market has identified the price of materials at $50/100 linear
 feet, or an anticipated total price of $5,000, which meets the small purchase method of
 procurement. The City determines that they will need to purchase 10,000 linear feet. They
  have completed their review of prices from available price lists and catalogs. The City
  requests quotes by email from five local vendors having determined that this is an adequate
  number and received quotes from three firms, ultimately selecting the company that provided
  the best material at the lowest price.




7.9    Clauses to be Included in Small Purchase Contract

(i)     Contract provisions. A grantee's and subgrantee's contracts must contain provisions
covering the following, as applicable:

        (A) Contracts for more than the simplified acquisition threshold currently set at
        $150,000, which is the inflation adjusted amount determined by the Civilian Agency
       Acquisition Council and the Defense Acquisition Regulations Council (Councils) as
       authorized by 41 U.S.C. 1908, must address administrative, contractual, or legal
        remedies in instances where contractors violate or breach contract terms, and provide
       for such sanctions and penalties as appropriate.

       (B) All contracts in excess of $10,000 must address termination for cause and for
       convenience by the non-Federal entity including the manner by which it will be effected
       and the basis for settlement.

       (C) Equal Employment Opportunity. Except as otherwise provided under 41 CFR Part
       60, all contracts that meet the definition of “federally assisted construction contract” in
       41 CFR 60-1.3 must include the equal opportunity clause provided under 41 CFR 60-
       1.4(b), in accordance with Executive Order 11246, “Equal Employment Opportunity”
       (30 FR 12319, 12935, 3 CFR Part 1964-1965 Comp., p. 339), as amended by Executive
       Order 11375, “Amending Executive Order 11246 Relating to Equal Employment
       Opportunity, ” and implementing regulations at 41 CFR Part 60, “Office of Federal
       Contract Compliance Programs, Equal Employment Opportunity, Department of Labor.’
                                                                                                     ’




       (D) Davis-Bacon Act, as amended (40 U.S.C. 3141-3148). When required by Federal
       program legislation, all prime construction contracts in excess of $2,000 awarded by
       non-Federal entities must include a provision for compliance with the Davis-Bacon Act

                                                                                   Chapter 7 - 57
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery

      (40 U.S.C. 3141-3144, and 3146-3148) as supplemented by Department of Labor
     regulations (29 CFR Part 5, “Labor Standards Provisions Applicable to Contracts
      Covering Federally Financed and Assisted Construction”’). In accordance with the
     statute, contractors must be required to pay wages to laborers and mechanics at a rate
     not less than the prevailing wages specified in a wage determination made by the
     Secretary of Labor. In addition, contractors must be required to pay wages not less than
      once a week. The non-Federal entity must place a copy of the current prevailing wage
     determination issued by the Department of Labor in each solicitation. The decision to
     award a contract or subcontract must be conditioned upon the acceptance of the wage
     determination. The non-Federal entity must report all suspected or reported violations to
      the Federal awarding agency. The contracts must also include a provision for
      compliance with the Copeland “Anti-Kickback” Act (40 U.S.C. 3145), as supplemented
      by Department of Labor regulations (29 CFR Part 3, “Contractors and Subcontractors
      on Public Building or Public Work Financed in Whole or in Part by Loans or Grants
     from the United States”). The Act provides that each contractor or subrecipient must be
     prohibited from inducing, by any means, any person employed in the construction,
      completion, or repair of public work, to give up any part of the compensation to which he
      or She is otherwise entitled. The non-Federal entity must report all suspected or reported
     violations to the Federal awarding agency.

     (E) Contract Work Hours and Safety Standards Act (40 U.S.C. 3701-3708). Where
     applicable, all contracts awarded by the non-Federal entity in excess of $100,000 that
     involve the employment of mechanics or laborers must include a provision for
     compliance with 40 U.S.C. 3702 and 3704, as supplemented by Department of Labor
     regulations (29 CFR Part 5). Under 40 U.S.C. 3702 of the Act, each contractor must be
     required to compute the wages of every mechanic and laborer on the basis of a standard
     work week of 40 hours. Work in excess of the standard work week is permissible provided
     that the worker is compensated at a rate of not less than one and a half times the basic
     rate of pay for all hours worked in excess of 40 hours in the work week. The requirements
     of 40 U.S.C. 3704 are applicable to construction work and provide that no laborer or
     mechanic must be required to work in surroundings or under working conditions which
     are unsanitary, hazardous or dangerous. These requirements do not apply to the
     purchases of supplies or materials or articles ordinarily available on the open market, or
     contracts for transportation or transmission of intelligence.

      (F’) Rights to Inventions Made Under a Contract or Agreement. If the Federal award
      meets the definition of “funding agreement” under 37 CFR $401.2 (a) and the recipient
      or subrecipient wishes to enter into a contract with a small business firm or nonprofit
      organization regarding the substitution of parties, assignment or performance of
      experimental, developmental, or research work under that “funding agreement,” the
      recipient or subrecipient must comply with the requirements of 37 CFR Part 401, “Rights
      to Inventions Made by Nonprofit Organizations and Small Business Firms Under
      Government Grants, Contracts and Cooperative Agreements,” and any implementing
      regulations issued by the awarding agency.




                                                                                 Chapter 7 - 58
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery

      (G) Clean Air Act (42 U.S.C. 7401-7671q.) and the Federal Water Pollution Control Act
      (33 U.S.C. 1251-1387), as amended—Contracts and subgrants of amounts in excess of
      $150,000 must contain a provision that requires the non-Federal award to agree to
      comply with all applicable standards, orders or regulations issued pursuant to the Clean
      Air Act (42 U.S.C. 7401-7671q) and the Federal Water Pollution Control Act as amended
      (33 U.S.C. 1251-1387). Violations must be reported to the Federal awarding agency and
      the Regional Office of the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).

      (H) Debarment and Suspension (Executive Orders 12549 and 12689)—A contract award
      (see 2 CFR 180.220) must not be made to parties listed on the governmentwide
      exclusions in the System for Award Management (SAM), in accordance with the OMB
      guidelines at 2 CFR 180 that implement Executive Orders 12549 (3 CFR Part 1986
      Comp., p. 189) and 12689 (3 CFR part 1989 Comp., p. 235), “Debarment and
      Suspension.” SAM Exclusions contains the names of parties debarred, suspended, or
      otherwise excluded by agencies, as well as parties declared ineligible under statutory or
      regulatory authority other than Executive Order 12549.

     (1) Byrd Anti-Lobbying Amendment (31 U.S.C. 1352)—Contractors that apply or bid for
     an award exceeding $100,000 must file the required certification. Each tier certifies to
     the tier above that it will not and has not used Federal appropriated funds to pay any
     person or organization for influencing or attempting to influence an officer or employee
     of any agency, a member of Congress, officer or employee of Congress, or an employee
     of a member of Congress in connection with obtaining any Federal contract, grant or any
     other award covered by 31 U.S.C. 1352. Each tier must also disclose any lobbying with
     non-Federal funds that takes place in connection with obtaining any Federal award.
     Such disclosures are forwarded from tier to tier up to the non-Federal award.

      (J) See §200.322 Procurement of recovered materials.




                                                                                 Chapter 7 - 59
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery


                                Chapter 8 — Sealed Bids

8.1      What is the sealed bid procurement process?
In a sealed bid process, the Grantee publishes a detailed scope of work, inviting qualified
candidates to submit bids that are then publicly opened and announced with the award going to
the lowest priced, responsible bidder. This is the method most often used for construction
services. Because bid instructions often include very detailed scopes of work (for construction,
the design and specifications) the bid submissions do not generally vary on timing, quality of
materials, method of delivery and the like. Price then becomes the major factor determining
which contractor receives the award.

The full regulations concerning sealed bids has three subparts as follows:


§200.320(c). Procurement by sealed bids (formal advertising). Bids are publicly solicited and a
firm fixed price contract dump sum or unit price) is awarded to the responsible bidder whose
bid, conforming with all the material terms and conditions of the invitation for bids, is the lowest
in price. The sealed bid method is the preferred method for procuring construction, if the
conditions in paragraph (c)(1) of this section apply.

§200.320(c)(1).    In order for sealed bidding to be feasible, the following conditions should be
present:

(i)   A complete, adequate, and realistic specification or purchase description is available;

(ii) Two or more responsible bidders are willing and able to compete effectively for the business;
and

(111) The procurement lends itself to a firm fixed price contract and the selection of the successful
bidder can be made principally on the basis of price.

§200.320(c)(2).    If sealed bids are used, the following requirements apply:

(1) Bids must be solicited from an adequate number of known suppliers, providing them
sufficient response time prior to the date set for opening the bids, for local, and tribal
governments, the invitation for bids must be publicly advertised;

(ii) The invitation for bids, which will include any specifications and pertinent attachments, must
define the items or services in order for the bidder to properly respond;

(iii) All bids will be opened at the time and place prescribed in the invitation for bids, and for
local and tribal governments, the bids must be opened publicly;

(iv) A firm fixed price contract award will be made in writing to the lowest responsive and
responsible bidder. Where specified in bidding documents, factors such as discounts,

                                                                                       Chapter 8 - 60
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery

transportation cost, and life cycle costs must be considered in determining which bid is lowest.
Payment discounts will only be used to determine the low bid when prior experience indicates
that such discounts are usually taken advantage of; and

(v) Any or all bids may be rejected if there is a sound documented reason.



$.2     Process




The process in a sealed bid procurement involves a bit more work up front, as the goal is to
define the scope of work (or design and specifications in a construction job) in sufficient detail as
to leave little doubt to potential bidders about the Grantee’s request. The section under 2 CFR
200.320(c)(2)(11) states that “the invitation for bids, which will include any specifications and
pertinent attachments, must define the items or services in order for the bidder to properly
respond.”

For construction in particular, the initial step will likely be the procurement of an
architect/engineer to design the project, followed by the procurement of the contractor to build
the project. Keep in mind that architectural and engineering services are frequently secured
through the Competitive Procurement process.

If the undertaking is indeed a construction project, then the process of invoicing and payment
will also be different from a procurement involving the simple delivery of a manufactured
product, or a service whose scope is small enough that payment is made upon completion.
Contractors typically submit monthly requisitions, whose approval requires inspection of the
work performed by qualified professionals.


$8.3.   Price Reasonableness

Grantees should plan and document how much or how many products (or services) will be
required prior to executing a procurement strategy. For various kinds of construction projects,
this early work usually involves some kind of inspection of damaged sites and/or structures to
determine a basic scope of work. The challenge for construction work is that often before an
accurate cost/price analysis can be performed, the project must be designed. Note that in
§200.320(c)(2)(ii) the regulations make it clear that the invitation for bids “which will include
any specifications and pertinent attachments, must define the items or services in order for the
bidder to respond properly.” This essentially requires that professional design work precede
sealed bids for construction in all but simplest repair jobs.

                                                                                     Chapter 8 - 61
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery

The sealed bid process for awarding a construction contract does not require a price or cost
analysis, unless the procurement action is in excess of the Simplified Acquisition Threshold,
although it is a good idea for Grantees to undertake a cost estimate, to serve as a point of
reference against which the sealed bids could be compared, upon opening. There may also be
circumstances where a cost estimate is warranted. One instance might be when the Grantee has
limited CDBG-DR funds, and must “size” the project according to the funds available. In
another possible scenario, the Grantee may be evaluating options for construction, choosing
between simple repair, a larger replacement project or even an expansion, and thus would find it
helpful to have an estimate of costs.


8.4    The Invitation For Bids

The solicitation, or Invitation For Bids (IFBs), under a sealed bid procurement process has
special requirements, designed to promote transparency, participation and ensure fairness to all
bidders.

The regulation in 2 Part 200.320(c)(2)(1) states that: “Bids must be solicited from an adequate
number of known suppliers, providing them sufficient respond time prior to the date set for
opening the bids, for local, and tribal governments, the invitation for bids must be publicly
advertised.”

The regulations do not specify but many Grantees will typically publish an IFB in one or more
newspapers with distribution across the municipality, tribal lands or county as the case may be.
Some Grantees take this one step further by including the IFB in trade journals, community
newspapers and newsletters.

Oftentimes, the IFB publication runs at least once a week for two consecutive weeks. Grantees
should be sure to consult specific State and local laws which may have more detailed or more
extensive requirements.

Grantees should be sure to keep a list of qualified, responsible bidders on hand, and to distribute
notice of a Sealed Bid procurement to the list. Grantees must also accept bids from any qualified
and responsible bidder not on an existing pre-qualified list.


8.5     Pre-Bid Conference

Although not covered in 2 CFR 200, Grantees may choose to hold a pre-bid conference. After
the IFB is issued and before bids are due, the Contracting Officer may hold a pre-bid conference
with prospective contractors to discuss the project requirements and details of the IFB. The
conference should be attended by the Contracting Officer and supporting technical staff. A pre-
bid conference is normally conducted for large or complex procurements. Notice of any
scheduled conference should be included in the IFB. The timing of the conference should allow




                                                                                   Chapter 8 - 62
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery

bidders enough time to review the IFB before the conference and adequate time to prepare or
revise their bids before the bid opening. At the
conference, the Contracting Officer should state that       OOOO
nothing said at the conference will change any of the
terms of the IFB unless a subsequent written amendment            WHAT          IS MEANT
to the solicitation is issued. A written summary of the                 66                      99
conference should be made available to anyone                     BY         QUALIFIED
requesting it. The summary should also be provided to all               AND
those who submitted IFBs or solicitations, not just those         “RESPONSIBLE?”
who attended the pre-bid conference. Attendance by
offerors at the pre-bid conference, while desirable, should
                                                                “Qualified” and “responsible”
not be mandatory, and non-attendees should not be
                                                                generally means that the
deemed non-responsive.
                                                                contractor has the capacity to
                                                                complete the work and has
8.6    Handling the Bids                                        the availability to undertake
                                                                the construction in a timely
All bids received should be time and date stamped by the        and professional manner.
Grantee, to demonstrate that they were received prior to        Although Grantees have
deadline. Grantees should then keep bids in a lock box or       discretion as to what
other secure place to ensure that they are not opened or        constitutes qualified, they
mishandled before opening.                                      should document their
                                                                process and decisions.
Bids received after the deadline — as noted by the date
and time stamp - should be kept separate and unopened.          “Responsible” has a more
                                                                specific regulatory reference
                                                                to means     contractors
8.7.   Opening     the Bids                                     possessing the ability to
                                                                perform successfully under
Grantees should open bids in public at the time and place       the terms and conditions of a
as stated in the IFB, with anyone invited to attend. The        proposed procurement.
Grantee’s Contracting Officer should open the bids, note        Consideration will be given to
the name of the bidder and the price offered.   The             such matters as contractor
Grantee should not indicate at that time any commitment         integrity, compliance with
or statement regarding the award of the contract.               public policy, record of past
                                                                performance, and financial
The list of bidders and bid amounts should be recorded          and technical resources.
and made available to the public.


8.8    Reviewing the Bids

Bids must make clear the costs of materials and labor, as well as the amount of overhead and
profit. Bids should be in the form of a firm fixed price contract Jump sum or unit price).

The Grantee must review the bids to make sure the offerors did not make mistakes or omit
components from the scope of work.

                                                                                      Chapter 8 - 63
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery

Grantees must also ensure that the bid conforms to the material terms and conditions of the IFB.
It is unacceptable for the Grantee to accept from any bidder a substitute of alternative materials
or changes in design that differ from the IFB.

In general, bidders should not be permitted to change a bid after bid opening.

The Contracting Officer should produce a written review of each bid submitted, noting any
errors or omissions, or if the bid appears to be responsive and complete.


$.9    Withdrawal of a Bid

 A bidder may also be permitted to withdraw a low bid if the bidder submits written evidence
that clearly and convincingly demonstrates that a mistake was made.


$.10   Award of Contract

The Grantee must make a firm fixed price contract award in writing to the lowest responsive and
responsible bidder. Where specified in bidding documents, factors such as discounts,
transportation cost, and life cycle costs must be considered in determining which bid is lowest.
Payment discounts will only be used to determine the low bid when prior experience indicates
that such discounts are usually taken advantage of.

The Sealed Bid process is not subject to negotiation.     The Grantee should choose the lowest
responsive bid from a responsible bidder.


8.11   Environmental Assessment

Keep in mind that prior to beginning construction work with CDBG-DR, projects will require an
environmental assessment in keeping with the National Environmental Protection Act.


$.12   Post-Award Issues

With the Sealed Bid procurement, amendments to the contract, change orders, cancellations and
other requests might affect the amount of the purchase. Post award, any modification of the
contract should trigger a cost or price analysis if the procurement action is in excess of the
Simplified Acquisition Threshold. This includes a change order with an increase in construction
contract price, or a change order that removes elements of the project regardless of price change.




                                                                                    Chapter 8 - 64
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery


8.13.   Documentation

Documentation is required for all procurement methods.               ae
        Pre-Award
                                                                     IMPORTANT
                                                                      Documentation of each step
            e   Documentation how a determination was
                                                                      in the Sealed Bid process is
                made for the particular procurement method
                                                                      critical.
            e   Document the “Need” — that is, assure that
                the items or services to be procured are actually needed for disaster recovery
                work, and not another project or initiative.

            e   Document the drafting of the IFB, including participation from anyone other than
                Grantee staff

            e   If necessary, document the cost or price analysis.

            e   Document the efforts to publish the IFB

            e   Document efforts to solicit from minority and women’s business enterprises when
                they are potential sources.

            e   Document the process of receiving bids, opening bids, and a written review of
                each bid received.

        Post-Award

        Post-Award documentation will depend on the administrative method for procurement
        (i.e. purchase order, construction contract, etc.).   Grantees will also have locally
        established procedures for contract administration.

        Special Construction Issues

            e   Were price or rate quotations obtained from an adequate number of sources?

            e   Does the solicitation include Davis-Bacon determinations and clauses?

            e   Have the Copeland “Anti-Kickback” Act compliance clauses been included in the
                contracts?

            e   Does the contract include Section 3 clauses?




                                                                                       Chapter 8 - 65
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery


8.14     Contract Provisions Requirements

Appendix Il to Part 200 - Contract Provisions for Non-Federal Entity Contracts Under Federal
Awards

In addition to other provisions required by the Federal agency or non-Federal entity, all
contracts made by the non-Federal entity under the Federal award must contain provisions
covering the following, as applicable.

(A) Contracts for more than the simplified acquisition threshold currently set at $150,000, which
is the inflation adjusted amount determined by the Civilian Agency Acquisition Council and the
Defense Acquisition Regulations Council (Councils) as authorized by 41 U.S.C. 1908, must
address administrative, contractual, or legal remedies in instances where contractors violate or
breach contract terms, and provide for such sanctions and penalties as appropriate.

(B) All contracts in excess of $10,000 must address termination for cause and for convenience by
the non-Federal entity including the manner by which it will be effected and the basis for
settlement.

(C) Equal Employment Opportunity. Except as otherwise provided under 41 CFR Part 60, all
contracts that meet the definition of “federally assisted construction contract” in 41 CFR 60-1.3
must include the equal opportunity clause provided under 41 CFR 60-1.4(b), in accordance with
Executive Order 11246, “Equal Employment Opportunity” (30 FR 12319, 12935, 3 CFR Part
1964-1965 Comp., p. 339), as amended by Executive Order 11375, “Amending Executive Order
11246 Relating to Equal Employment Opportunity,” and implementing regulations at 41 CFR
Part 60, “Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs, Equal Employment Opportunity,
Department of Labor.”

(D) Davis-Bacon Act, as amended (40 U.S.C. 3141- 3148). When required by Federal program
legislation, all prime construction contracts in excess of $2,000 awarded by non-Federal entities
must include a provision for compliance with the Davis-Bacon Act (40 U.S.C. 3141- 3144) as
supplemented by Department of Labor regulations ( 29 CFR Part 5, “Labor Standards Provisions
Applicable to Contracts Covering Federally Financed and Assisted Construction”). In accordance
with the statute, contractors must be required to pay wages to laborers and mechanics at a rate
not less than the prevailing wages specified in a wage determination made by the Secretary of
Labor. In addition, contractors must be required to pay wages not less than once a week. The
non-Federal entity must place a copy of the current prevailing wage determination issued by the
Department of Labor in each solicitation. The decision to award a contract or subcontract must
be conditioned upon the acceptance of the wage determination. The non-Federal entity must
report all suspected or reported violations to the Federal awarding agency. The contracts must
also include a provision for compliance with the Copeland “Anti-Kickback”
                                                                       Act ( 40 U.S.C. 3145),
as supplemented by Department of Labor regulations (29 CFR Part 3, “Contractors and
Subcontractors on Public Building or Public Work Financed in Whole or in Part by Loans or

                                                                                   Chapter 8 - 66
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery


Grants from the United States”). The Act provides that each contractor or subrecipient must be
prohibited from inducing, by any means, any person employed in the construction, completion,
or repair of public work, to give up any part of the compensation to which he or she is otherwise
entitled. The non-Federal entity must report all suspected or reported violations to the Federal
awarding agency.

(E) Contract Work Hours and Safety Standards Act ( 40 U.S.C. 3701- 3708). Where applicable, all
contracts awarded by the non-Federal entity in excess of $100,000 that involve the employment
of mechanics or laborers must include a provision for compliance with 40 U.S.C. 3702 and 3704,
as supplemented by Department of Labor regulations ( 29 CFR Part 5). Under 40 U.S.C. 3702 of
the Act, each contractor must be required to compute the wages of every mechanic and laborer
on the basis of a standard work week of 40 hours. Work in excess of the standard work week is
permissible provided that the worker is compensated at a rate of not less than one and a half
times the basic rate of pay for all hours worked in excess of 40 hours in the work week. The
requirements of 40 U.S.C. 3704 are applicable to construction work and provide that no laborer
or mechanic must be required to work in surroundings or under working conditions which are
unsanitary, hazardous or dangerous. These requirements do not apply to the purchases of
supplies or materials or articles ordinarily available on the open market, or contracts for
transportation or transmission of intelligence.

(F) Rights to Inventions Made Under a Contract or Agreement. If the Federal award meets the
definition of “funding agreement” under 37 CFR § 401.2 (a) and the recipient or subrecipient
wishes to enter into a contract with a small business firm or nonprofit organization regarding
the substitution of parties, assignment or performance of experimental, developmental, or
research work under that “funding agreement,” the recipient or subrecipient must comply with
the requirements of 37 CFR Part 401, “Rights to Inventions Made by Nonprofit Organizations
and Small Business Firms Under Government Grants, Contracts and Cooperative Agreements,”
and any implementing regulations issued by the awarding agency.

(G) Clean Air Act ( 42 U.S.C. 7401- 7671q.) and the Federal Water Pollution Control Act ( 33
U.S.C. 1251- 1387), as amended - Contracts and subgrants of amounts in excess of $150,000
must contain a provision that requires the non-Federal award to agree to comply with all
applicable standards, orders or regulations issued pursuant to the Clean Air Act ( 42 U.S.C. 7401-
7671q) and the Federal Water Pollution Control Act as amended ( 33 U.S.C. 1251- 1387).
Violations must be reported to the Federal awarding agency and the Regional Office of the
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).

(H) Debarment and Suspension (Executive Orders 12549 and 12689) - A contract award (see 2
CFR 180.220) must not be made to parties listed on the governmentwide exclusions in the
System for Award Management (SAM), in accordance with the OMB guidelines at 2 CFR 180
that implement Executive Orders 12549 ( 3 CFR Part 1986 Comp., p. 189) and 12689 ( 3 CFR Part
1989 Comp., p. 235), “Debarment and Suspension.” SAM Exclusions contains the names of



                                                                                   Chapter 8 - 67
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery


parties debarred, suspended, or otherwise excluded by agencies, as well as parties declared
ineligible under statutory or regulatory authority other than Executive Order 12549.

(1) Byrd Anti-Lobbying Amendment ( 31 U.S.C. 1352) - Contractors that apply or bid for an award
exceeding $100,000 must file the required certification. Each tier certifies to the tier above that
it will not and has not used Federal appropriated funds to pay any person or organization for
influencing or attempting to influence an officer or employee of any agency, a member of
Congress, officer or employee of Congress, or an employee of a member of Congress in
connection with obtaining any Federal contract, grant or any other award covered by 31 U.S.C.
1352. Each tier must also disclose any lobbying with non-Federal funds that takes place in
connection with obtaining any Federal award. Such disclosures are forwarded from tier to tier
up to the non-Federal award.

(J) See § 200.322 Procurement of recovered materials.




                                                                                    Chapter 8 - 68
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery


                        Chapter 9 — Competitive Bids

9.1    What are competitive bids?
The competitive bid process invites the submission of proposals from applicants through a
Request for Proposals. Competitive bids differ from sealed bids in several important ways.      It
is important to note that:

The technique of competitive proposals is normally conducted with more than one source
submitting an offer, and either a fixed price or cost-reimbursement type contract is awarded.
It is generally used when conditions are not appropriate for the use of sealed bids (2 Part
200.320(d).

In the sealed bid process the Grantee publishes a detailed scope of work and requests bids that
are then opened publicly with the award going the lowest responsive and responsible bid.

Competitive bids must include price as a factor, with one exception, in the evaluation of
proposals. The Grantee may use competitive proposal procedures for qualifications-based
procurement of architectural/engineering (A/E) professional services whereby competitors'
qualifications are evaluated and the most qualified competitor is selected, subject to
negotiation of fair and reasonable compensation. The method, where price is not used as a
selection factor, can only be used in procurement of A/E professional services. Grantees
commonly use competitive bids to procure architectural and engineering professional services
where qualifications, as opposed to a specific designs or pricing, serves as the key factor to
determine an award. All other contracts procured by competitive proposals must be awarded
to the responsible firm whose proposal is most advantageous to the program, with price and
other factors considered. The procurement of a software product or license is an example of
competitive procurement where price should be among the evaluation criteria.

The regulations concerning competitive bids are as follows:


  §200.320(d) Procurement by competitive proposals. The technique of competitive
  proposals is normally conducted with more than one source submitting an offer, and either
  a fixed price or cost reimbursement type contract is awarded. It is generally used when
  conditions are not appropriate for the use of sealed bids. If this method is used, the
  following requirements apply:

  §200.320(d)(1) Requests for proposals must be publicized and identify all evaluation
  factors and their relative importance. Any response to publicize requests for proposals
  must be considered to the maximum extent practical;

  §200.320(d)(2) Proposals must be solicited from an adequate number of qualified sources;


                                                                                Chapter o-oo
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery
ee




  §200.320(d)(3) The non-Federal entity must have a written method for conducting
  technical evaluations of the proposals received and for selecting recipients;

  §200.320(d)(4) Contracts must be awarded to the responsible firm whose proposal is most
  advantageous to the program, with price and other factors considered; and

  §200.320(d)(5) The non-Federal entity may use competitive proposal procedures for
  qualifications-based procurement of architectural/engineering (A/E) professional services
  whereby competitors’ qualifications are evaluated and the most qualified competitor is
  selected, subject to negotiation of fair and reasonable compensation. The method, where
  price is not used as a selection factor, can only be used in procurement of A/E professional
  services. It cannot be used to purchase other types of services though A/E firms are a
  potential source to perform the proposed effort.




9.2    Process




 To determine that a competitive bid is the appropriate procurement method, the Grantee
should ensure that other methods do not apply. This resembles a process of elimination (See
Decision Tree in Chapter 2). Grantees should always consult their own written procurement
policies when moving through this process.

For procurement by competitive proposals, the Grantee must draft and publish a Request for
Proposals (“RFP”). The RFP, its publication and the process to ensure open and free
competition requires several steps, explained in the following sections.


9.3.   Pre-Award Cost/Price Analysis
Grantees should plan and document how much or how many products (or services) will be
required prior to executing a procurement strategy. The failure to plan may result in making
multiple purchases or having to modify an acquisition contract with modifications and cost
increases.




                                                                                 Chapter 9 - 70
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery

The grantee should prepare an estimate of costs to compare
to the bids submitted and maintain this documentation.
Grantees may need to determine prior to publishing an RFP                     NOTE:
whether they are capable of undertaking a cost estimate with
internal staff, or whether a contract is needed with a third-        Per 2 CFR 200.323(a),
party professional to generate a cost estimate. The                  Grantees “must perform a
following are a series of issues to consider when making             cost or price analysis in
that decision:                                                       connection with every
                                                                     procurement action in excess
      e   Does the Grantee have prior experience with this           of the Simplified
          scope of work?                                                    Ty
                                                                     Acquisition Threshold
      e   Can the Grantee draw upon previous contracts for           including contract
          similar work to help create a cost estimate?               modifications. The method
                                                                     and degree of analysis is
      e   Is the scope of work very technical and/or beyond          dependent on the facts
          the capacity of staff, such that an expert is necessary    surrounding the particular
          to evaluate costs?                                         procurement situation, but as
                                                                     a starting point, the non-
      e   Will hiring a third-party for a cost estimate lead to a    Federal entity must make
          refined RFP?                                               independent estimates before
                                                                     receiving bids or proposals.
As part of a cost analysis of an overall proposal, Grantees
may look at the price of certain commodities or products
within the proposal, but really that forms an element of the overall cost analysis.

The Grantee must award contracts to the responsible firm whose proposal is most
advantageous to the program, with price and other factors considered.

If the Grantee intends to use competitive procurement for qualifications-based procurement of
architectural/engineering (A/E) professional services whereby competitors’ qualifications are
evaluated and the most qualified competitor is selected, subject to negotiation of fair and
reasonable compensation, it does not have to use price as a selection factor.


9.4       The Solicitation

The contents of the RFP should incorporate a clear and accurate description of the technical
requirements for the material, product, or service to be procured. Such description must not, in
competitive procurements, contain features which unduly restrict competition. The description
may include a statement of the qualitative nature of the material, product or service to be
procured and, when necessary, must set forth those minimum essential characteristics and
standards to which it must conform if it is to satisfy its intended use. Detailed product
specifications should be avoided if at all possible. When it is impractical or uneconomical to
make a clear and accurate description of the technical requirements, a “brand name or
equivalent” description may be used as a means to define the performance or other salient
requirements of procurement. The specific features of the named brand which must be met by

                                                                                  Chapter 9 - 71
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery

offers must be clearly stated (2 CFR 200.319(c)).    Furthermore, the Grantee must identify all
requirements which the offerors must fulfill and all other factors to be used in evaluating bids
or proposals.

Prior to the publication of the RFP, Grantees “must ensure that all prequalified lists of
persons, firms, or products which are used in acquiring goods and services are current and
include enough qualified sources to ensure maximum open and free competition. Also, the
non-Federal entity must not preclude potential bidders from qualifying during the solicitation
period (2 CFR 200.319(d).”

The RFP should be published through widely subscribed or distributed media to ensure that an
adequate number of qualified sources are informed of the Grantee’s request.

The Grantee must publish its RFP through media with wide and thorough distribution. Like all
procurements subject to 2 CFR 200.319, the Grantee must ensure that the procurement is
conducted in a manner providing full and open competition. Grantees are encouraged give
ample time for the RFP to circulate and for proponents to assemble their submission — an RFP
that anticipates more detailed, collaborative, and lengthy proposals needs to make sure that the
RFP allows sufficient time to solicit proposals from an adequate number of qualified sources.
The RFP may ask for detailed breakdown on the cost components, where applicable. The
breakdown could include details for different staff members, fringe benefits, overhead and
profit so that the cost analysis can review all of the elements of the proposal.


9.5        The Proposal and its Evaluation
Grantees should request written proposals conforming to the format and substance as
published in the RFP, and any response to a publicized proposal must be considered to the
maximum extent practical. Proposals must be solicited from an adequate number of qualified
sources.


The Grantee’s RFP must identify all evaluation factors and their relative importance, and
contracts must be awarded to the responsible firm whose proposal is most advantageous to the
program, with price and other factors considered. For example, it might create a point or
scoring system such as follows:

      e    25 points - Overall Capacity of Firm

      e    25 points - Previous Experience with Specific Product/Service

      e    10 points - Price

      e    20 points - Proposed Method of Delivery

      e    20 points - Schedule for Delivery



                                                                                   Chapter 9 - 72
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery

The above scoring system is an example only and is meant as an illustration. If a Grantee uses
a scoring system, ideally each category will have detailed components. For example, under
the “Overall Capacity of Firm” section (valued at 25 points), perhaps the Grantee will break
that category into smaller components, each with its own points. For example:

      e   10 points - Experience of principals

      e   10 points — Experience of team assigned to Grantee

      e   5 points — Has this team worked together before (yes or no?)

The sum of these totals 25 points, the maximum awarded points for Overall Capacity of Firm.
Again, this is just an example. Each Grantee will have to configure its own evaluation criteria,
and scoring system, if it chooses to use that method depending on its priorities. The scoring
system helps to promote transparency in the procurement process. It also tilts the evaluation
toward a more quantitative approach, which is more readily understood by both participants
and outside observers. It may also be valuable when an evaluation committee has several
people, to establish a common, unified platform for the evaluation.

A scoring system may be more difficult to implement when the evaluation criteria are not
clear or the priorities of the Grantee are in flux.


9.6       Environmental Assessment

When Grantees use competitive procurement to hire architects and engineers, they should
keep in mind that prior to beginning construction work with CDBG-DR, projects will require
an environmental assessment in keeping with the National Environmental Protection Act. The
point about architects and engineering services is that the design work itself may depend upon
factors identified in the Environmental Assessment and so Grantees should keep this in mind
before design and engineering work is finalized.


9.7        Post-Award Issues

When a competitive procurement process leads to a contract based primarily on the
qualifications of the firm, and not on price or a specified product, Grantees should expect that
the scope of work will change as the work product or service itself becomes more defined.
For example, an architect hired through a competitive procurement will need to work with the
Grantee to gather information about the project to be designed — How large? What materials?
What programming? Until these elements are defined in greater detail, the scope of work for
an architect will be difficult to define.

In those instances where the work product/service needs to be further defined, but a Grantee
needs the input of a procured professional to create a complete scope, the Grantee can
segment or phase the work. This method will avoid the Grantee having to make large change
orders in a contract to expand the work to fit the newly defined scope.

                                                                                 Chapter 9 - 73
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery



                                           Example #1

 A tornado has destroyed the public marketplace in a Mid- Western town, and the municipal
 Grantee wants to rebuild the marketplace but also add several components to expand the
 project into a mixed-use development. It published an RFP following rules for competitive
 procurement to contract with an architect to help determine what the program of the
 rebuilt marketplace will contain and to create conceptual drawings. This initial RFP
 emphasized the experience of the firm in public marketplace design. The Grantee then
 obtained public input on the program that emphasized the residential and commercial uses
 as well and came to the conclusion that an architect with more experience in complex
 multi-use buildings would be preferable. The Grantee then issued a second RFP to
 complete design and supervise construction of the mixed-use project.


The phasing of a project can take many different forms. Projects may be divided according to
size and scope, necessary expertise, emergency work vs. permanent projects, among others.
Below is another example:


                                           Example #2

 A flood has severely damaged a long stretch of urban coastline. Buildings and
 infrastructure have collapsed and will need to be rebuilt. Much of the land belonged to the
 Grantee, who decides to use CDBG-DR funds to help create a new masterplan for the area.
 The Grantee uses competitive procurement to solicit architectural, engineering and
 planning services. The scope of work in the RFP refers to preliminary planning to locate
 and size infrastructure, building lots, and public spaces. Subsequent to this work the
 Grantee will create a new RFP for architectural and engineering work related to the
 construction of specific project components. The firm selected for the initial scope is not
 allowed to participate in the second RFP to eliminate an unfair competitive advantage.


It is not a reasonable practice to issue a competitive RFP for preliminary architectural and/or
engineering services and then create a change order in the contract to give the full scope of
design and specifications to the firm initially awarded.

Sometimes, changes in the scope of work do emerge from the process of working with a
vendor or service provider outside of architecture and engineering. Grantees may organize
contracts into phases to allow the work to proceed, with milestones and opportunities to
change, pause or cancel the contract.




                                                                                 Chapter 9 - 74
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery



                                             Example #3

 Through a competitive procurement, a Grantee selects a certain software provider to
 create a grants management program that will enable the Grantee to use CDBG-DR
 proceeds to make small business loans to those affected by a natural disaster. The Grantee
 structures the contract in several phases, each with a due date, deliverable and
 compensation amount. By working for several weeks with the software provider, the
 Grantee comes to realize that the program it needs will be three times as large and
 sophisticated as it had originally conceived, and as it had published in its RFP.
 Fortunately, because the Grantee organized the contract in phases, it has the software
 provider finish Phase One, deliver the report on the proposed software program. The
 Grantee also pays the software provider for Phase One and terminates that contract, per
 clauses that allow the Grantee to do so. The Grantee then issues a new RFP for the larger,
 more sophisticated and more defined software program that is needed. The initial contract
 recipient may submit a proposal, but the RFP is open again to all qualified firms, to
 promote fairness, transparency and competition          In the new RFP, the Grantee must ensure
  that the contractor on Phase One does not have an unfair competitive advantage over other
 firms.




9.8       Documentation

Documentation is required for all procurement under the competitive purchase method.

      e   Pre-Award

          e   Document the rationale for selected of the competitive procurement method.

          e   Document the “Need” — that is, assure that the items or services to be procured are
              actually needed for disaster recovery work, and not another project or initiative.

          e   If necessary, document the cost and price analysis process as relevant through
              independent analysis.

          e   Document the process of soliciting bids and the vendors contacted through the
              solicitation.

          e   Document efforts to solicit from minority and women’s business enterprises when
              they are potential sources.

          e   Document the evaluation criteria and process of contractor selection.

          e   Document the selection of contract type.



                                                                                    Chapter 9 - 75
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery
ee



   e   Award.

       e   Document the receipt of all proposals.

       e   Document evaluation according to the selection criteria.

       e   Document the cost analysis of the proposals, if required.

       e   Document any price negotiation with the winning proposer.

   e = Post-Award.

Grantees must have locally established procedures for contract administration that enable
them to maintain oversight to ensure that contractors perform in accordance with the terms,
conditions, and specifications of their contract or purchase orders. Grantees will typically use
fixed price or cost reimbursement contracts for competitively procured products/services. As
indicated above in the section on Post-Award issues, in many instances the full scope of work
and/or specifications have yet to be defined. In those cases, Grantees should consider how to
segment or phase work so that they can create an RFP and contract:

   e   To gain the input of contracted, experienced professionals to fully define the scope of
       work or product specifications, followed by a subsequent RFP which takes advantage
       of the full scope, or;

   e   Create an RFP and contract with milestones and deliverables which enable the Grantee
       to pause, modify or cancel the contract once the scope has been more fully understood.




                                                                                 Chapter 9 - 76
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery


                Chapter 10 — Non-Competitive Proposals

10.1    What are non-competitive proposals?
Procurement through non-competitive proposals occurs when the Grantee solicits proposals from
only one source. This method may be used only when one or more of the following
circumstances apply: (1) The item is available only from a single source; (2) The public exigency
or emergency for the requirement will not permit a delay resulting from competitive solicitation;
(3) The Federal awarding agency or pass-through entity expressly authorizes noncompetitive
proposals in response to a written request from the non-Federal entity; or (4) After solicitation of
a number of sources, competition is determined inadequate... Choosing to procure through a non-
competitive proposal does not relieve the Grantee from following the general procurement
standards (§200.318).   Furthermore some of the subparts in (§$200.319) on competition are still
relevant.

The regulations on non-competitive proposals follow:




                            Procurement by noncompetitive proposals. Procurement by
                            noncompetitive proposals is procurement through solicitation of a
                            proposal from only one source and may be used only when one or
                            more of the following circumstances apply:

                            The item is available only from a single source;

                            The public exigency or emergency for the requirement will not
                            permit a delay resulting from competitive solicitation;

                            The Federal awarding agency or pass-through entity expressly
                            authorizes noncompetitive proposals in response to a written request
                            from the non-Federal entity; or

                            After solicitation of a number of sources, competition is determined
                            inadequate.




                                                                                   Chapter 10 - 77
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery


10.2    Process




A Grantee may only use non-competitive procurement if one or more of the four circumstances
in §200.320(f) are met.   Proving that these circumstances exist requires extensive documentation.



  §200.320((1) The item is only available from a single source



Most products and services can be secured from more than one
source. A Grantee might find only one source if a Grantee:

    e   Needs a very specialized product to replace or repair a                     NOTE:
        technical piece of machinery or equipment
                                                                          $200.319(a)(6) states that
    e   Needs a custom built item within a narrow field of expertise      “specifying only a “brand
                                                                          name” product instead of
To substantiate that the product or service is only available from a      allowing “an equal” product
single source, the Grantee must document how it came to that              to be offered” is a prohibited,
conclusion and why factors it considered are relevant given the           non-competitive practice.
nature of the acquisition.

    e   What research was undertaken to locate sources?

    e   What communications were made to inquire about sources?

    e   What alternative products/services were investigated?

    e   Which experts were consulted to analyze the issue and
        determine what kind of product/service would be best
        suited to resolve or improve the situation?
                                                                                    NOTE:
                                                                          Grantees who use this
§200.320(f)(2) The public exigency or emergency for the                   regulation sub-part as a
requirement will not permit a delay resulting from competitive            shortcut to non-competitive
solicitation.                                                             procurement may have audit
                                                                          findings including the misuse
Following a disaster, Grantees are trying to recover as quickly as
                                                                          of federal funds.
possible.   However, this circumstance cannot be invoked without
due process and cause.


                                                                                 Chapter 10 - 78
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery
ee



What are the circumstances where there is “public exigency or emergency?” Imminent threat to:

   e   Human life

       e   Example: An earthquake has collapsed buildings and persons are trapped.
           Emergency services determines that specially trained dogs are needed immediately to
           help find victims. The Grantee solicits services from a single source which it knows
           can arrive on site within hours.

                                       or

   e   Extraordinary damage or destruction of property

       e   Example: A hurricane has severely damaged a large hydroelectric dam, and there are
           concerns that it will break, unleashing millions of gallons of water and destroying
           hundreds of homes. The Grantee procures engineering services to identify and make
           any emergency repairs. If possible, longer term and larger scale repairs will be
           procured competitively.

§200.320 (f)(3) The Federal awarding agency or pass-through entity expressly authorizes
noncompetitive proposals in response to a written request from the non-Federal entity.

Any Grantee that requests permission to use noncompetitive proposals should be prepared to
document why this method is preferred over other procurement methods; what information it
used to reach this conclusion; and how it will ensure that costs are reasonable and justifiable.

Requests to use noncompetitive proposals should be sent by the Grantee to the CPD
Representative and the assigned HUD Field Office.

§200.320()(4)   After solicitation of a number of sources, competition is determined inadequate.

This regulation means that the Grantee has undertaken other procurement methods and has
requested proposals or bids from multiple sources. If the Grantee determines that the
competition was inadequate, it is most likely because the Grantee issued an RFP at least two
times and received:

   e   A single response from the same provider in each and every occasion that proposals were
       submitted

   e   No responses




                                                                                   Chapter 10 - 79
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery


10.3.   Pre-Award Cost/Price Analysis
Grantees must have written procedures for all procurement transactions, including non-
competitive procurement. Cost analysis under this method should be the same as the other
procurement methods.

The grantee should prepare a scope of work as part of an RFP. With that scope, the Grantee
should prepare an estimate of costs. Prior to publishing an RFP, a Grantee may need to determine
whether they are capable of undertaking a cost estimate with internal staff, or whether a contract
is needed with a third-party professional to generate a cost estimate. Grantees should consider
the following items when selecting who will perform the cost estimate:

    e   Does the Grantee have prior experience with this scope of work?

    e   Can the Grantee draw upon previous contracts for similar work to help create a cost
        estimate?

    e   Is the scope of work very technical and/or beyond the capacity of staff, such that an
        expert is necessary to evaluate costs?

    e   Will hiring a third-party for a cost estimate lead to a refined RFP?

As part of a cost analysis of an overall proposal, Grantees may look at the price of certain
commodities or products within the proposal. However, that analysis is an element of the overall
cost analysis.

Even when the Grantee uses non-competitive procurement, the regulations from §200.319 on
competition apply, including the following:

    e   Any contractor involved in the RFP documents or process cannot submit a proposal

    e   Grantees cannot place unreasonable requirements (including unnecessary experience or
        excessive bonding) on firms in order for them to qualify to do business

    e   Grantees cannot award a contract to a consultant already on a retainer contract

    e   Grantees must avoid conflicts of interest

    e   Grantees must avoid geographical preference, except where Federally mandated


10.4    The Solicitation

With a non-competitive procurement, Grantees must prepare a scope of work and an RFP even
when they intend to offer the RFP to a single vendor.




                                                                                  Chapter 10 - 80
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery


10.5   Negotiation
Grantees should be prepared to negotiate cost in a non-competitive procurement, using the cost
analysis research conducted prior to the award as a framework for understanding reasonable
costs. The Grantee should document the negotiation details, including agreements that may
differ from the offeror’s proposal, and which lead to a final contract. Profit should always be
negotiated as a separate element.


10.6   Post Award
If a Grantee substantially modifies the scope of work in a non-competitive procurement post
award, the Grantee should cancel the contract and re-issue an RFP with the modified scope.


10.7   Documentation
Documentation under non-competitive procurement is similar to other procurement methods.

   e   Pre-Award.

       e   Document the rationale for selected of the competitive procurement method.

       e   Document the “Need” — that is, assure that the items or services to be procured are
           actually needed for disaster recovery work, and not another project or initiative.

       e   If necessary, document the cost and price analysis process as relevant through
           independent analysis.

       e   Document the process of soliciting bids and the vendors contacted through the
           solicitation.

       e   Document efforts to solicit from minority and women’s business enterprises when
           they are potential sources.

       e   Document the evaluation criteria and process of contractor selection.

       e   Document the selection of contract type.

   e   Award

       e   Document the receipt of all proposals, even if only one proposal is submitted.

       e   If applicable, document the evaluation of the proposal to determined that it meet the
           Grantee’s requirements.

       e   Document any price negotiation with the vendor.

                                                                                   Chapter 10 - 81
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery
ee




   e   Post-Award

       e   Grantees are encouraged have locally established procedures for contract
           administration that enable them to maintain oversight to ensure that contractors
           perform in accordance with the terms, conditions and specifications of their contracts
           or purchase orders (See   2 CFR 200.318(b)).   Grantees will typically use fixed price or
           cost reimbursement contracts for non-competitively procured products/services.




                                                                                  Chapter 10 - 82
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery




        Appendix — 2 CFR Part 200: Text and Guidance




                                                Chapter 10 - 83
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery

This appendix reviews 2 CFR 200.317-326. It provides the specific language from the regulation, an “interpretation” or simple
language version in the “What it means” section, and some important items to keep in mind.

Of note, the Appendix begins with 2 CFR 200.317 Procurement by States. In fact, however, 24 CFR Part 570.489(g) takes precedence
over Part 200. The regulation in 24 CFR 570.489(g) is found immediately below in the “Keep in Mind” section for 2 CFR 200.317.

                                                         §200.317 — Procurement by States
Regulations in this section note how states, separate from other non-Federal entities, must follow the procurement standards it uses for
non-Federal (i.e. State funded) awards.

                                                                      §200.317

 Previous Regulation / Circulars:        See 85.36(a).    Program Administrative Requirements for States 24 CFR 570.489 is still required.

 What it means: A State will follow its own established policies and procedures, which may not be exactly the same as the Federal
 regulations.     But all other public jurisdictions, such as Counties and Municipalities, must follow the Federal procurement standards.

 Keep in Mind:
 e When it comes to procurement with CDBG funds, States are subject to different regulations than Counties and Municipalities.
 e   States should have written policies.    Below is the citation from 24 CFR 489(g¢)
     ©     (g) Procurement. When procuring property or services to be paid for in whole or in part with CDBG funds, the State shall
           follow its procurement policies and procedures. The State shall establish requirements for procurement policies and procedures
           for units of general local government, based on full and open competition. Methods of procurement (e.g., small purchase,
           sealed bids/formal advertising, competitive proposals, and noncompetitive proposals) and their applicability shall be specified
           by the State. Cost plus a percentage of cost and percentage of construction costs methods of contracting shall not be used. The
           policies and procedures shall also include standards of conduct governing employees engaged in the award or administration of
           contracts. (Other conflicts of interest are covered by 24 CFR 570.489(h).) The State shall ensure that all purchase orders and
           contracts include any clauses required by Federal statutes, Executive orders, and implementing regulations. The State shall
            make subrecipient and contractor determinations in accordance with the standards in 2 CFR 200.330.
 e       CDBG program rules require that the State establish policies and procedures for fair and open competition
 e       State must ensure that all purchase orders and contracts include clauses required by Federal statutes, executive orders and
         implementing regulations (24 CFR 570.489(g))


                                                                                                                            Chapter 10 - 84
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery
ee



                                                                  §200.317

 e   State must obtain certification from any transaction participant that neither it nor its principals are currently debarred, suspended,
     proposed for debarment, declared ineligible or voluntarily excluded from participation (24 CFR 570.489())
 e   P.L. 113-2 created opportunities for grantees to petition HUD for waivers of regulations following Hurricane Sandy. The waivers
     granted, and published in the Federal Register, apply specifically and only to funds appropriated through P.L. 113-2 and
     supplementary appropriations, which altogether totaled over $13 billion.




                                                                                                                         Chapter 10 - 85
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery


                                             §200.318 — General Procurement Standards
This section presents regulations on general standards, noting the importance of written standards and a documentation of procurement
history; avoiding duplicative purchases; and issues regarding efficient practices and ensuring quality work.

                                                               §200.318

 General procurement standards.

 Previous Regulation / Circulars:

 1. Paragraphs (d), (e), and (f) require non-Federal entity’s procurement procedures to avoid duplicative purchases and encourage
    non-Federal entities to enter into inter-entity agreements for shared goods and services.
 2. Raises the threshold for small purchase procedures to $150,000 to be consistent with the simplified acquisition threshold in the
    Federal Acquisition Regulation (FAR).
 3. All A-110 language on procurement is replaced by A-102 section .36 Procurement, with the exception of A-102 section .36 (3)
    on Codes of conduct which is replaced by A-110 section .42 Codes of conduct.


                                                              §200.318(a)

 The non-Federal entity must use its own documented procurement procedures that reflect applicable State and local laws and
 regulations, provided that the procurements conform to applicable Federal law and the standards identified in this section.

 Previous Regulation / Circulars: See 85.36(b)

 What it means: States and municipalities must have their own written procurement procedures, and cannot simply rely on the
 Federal regulations.

 Keep in Mind: Some State and Local laws place additional requirements on the procurement process, and all three (Federal, State
 and Local) must be followed as applicable.




                                                                                                                       Chapter 10 - 86
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery


                                                              §200.318(b)

Non-Federal entities must maintain oversight to ensure that contractors perform in accordance with the terms, conditions, and
 specifications of their contracts or purchase orders.

Previous Regulation / Circulars: See 85.36(b)(2)

What it means: Grantee and subgrantees should have a system in place for supervising contractors

Keep in Mind:
e The system for overseeing contractors needs to be in place and staff need to be trained on its proper use. It may also be helpful
   to provide orientation to contractors, so they can provide the necessary information to conform to the requirements, and to be
   paid in an expedient manner.



                                                            §200.318(c)(1)

The non-Federal entity must maintain written standards of conduct covering conflicts of interest and governing the performance of
its employees engaged in the selection, award and administration of contracts. No employee, officer, or agent must participate in the
selection, award, or administration of a contract supported by a Federal award if he or she has a real or apparent conflict of interest.
Such a conflict of interest would arise when the employee, officer, or agent, any member of his or her immediate family, his or her
partner, or an organization which employs or is about to employ any of the parties indicated herein, has a financial or other interest
in or a tangible personal agreements or inter-entity agreements where appropriate for procurement or use of common or shared
goods and services.

Previous Regulation / Circulars: See 85.36(b)(3)

What it means: States and municipalities must have their own written policies governing conflicts of interest.

Keep in Mind:
 e States and municipalities may have additional requirements regarding real or perceived conflicts of interest, as well as their own
   penalties and sanctions for any violations.


                                                                                                                        Chapter 10 - 87
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery


                                                             §200.318(c)(1)

 e Making an award where there is a potential for conflict of interest:
   The municipality is in receipt of CDBG-DR funds and wants to award funds for reconstruction of a bridge. A potential
   contractor for this job has a senior employee who is the husband of one of the municipal’s city council members. That council
   member must recuse herself from all parts of the selection and administration of the award, if the contractor wishes to be eligible
   to submit a bid.



                                                             §200.318(c)(2)

If the non-Federal entity has a parent, affiliate, or subsidiary organization that is not a state, local government, or Indian tribe, the
non-Federal entity must also maintain written standards of conduct covering organizational conflicts of interest. Organizational
conflicts of interest means that because of relationships with a parent company, affiliate, or subsidiary organization, the non-Federal
entity is unable or appears to be unable to be impartial in conducting a procurement action involving a related organization.

Previous Regulation / Circulars: See 85.36(b)(3)(iv)

What it means: Just as conflicts of interest can arise when there are individual relationships between public officials or staff at the
non-Federal entity and employees or beneficiaries of an awarded contract entity, there is also potential for a conflict of interest
when the non-Federal entity has organizational links to potential awardees.

Keep in Mind:
 e Examples of organizations “related” to a non-Federal entity might be a local housing authority, a local or statewide economic
   development corporation, or an industrial development agency. If there is a relationship, it does not prohibit the non-Federal
   entity from contracting with the related entity, but there must be State and/or local policies which guide that decision.
 e [tis possible for the non-Federal entity to make an award to the related organization, so long as that process follows the written
   standards of conduct which the non-Federal entity adopts.




                                                                                                                         Chapter 10 - 88
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery


                                                            §200.318(d)

The non-Federal entity’s procedures must avoid acquisition of unnecessary or duplicative items. Consideration should be given to
consolidating or breaking out procurements to obtain a more economical purchase. Where appropriate, an analysis will be made of
lease versus purchase alternatives, and any other appropriate analysis to determine the most economical approach.

Previous Regulation / Circulars: See 85.36(b)(4)

What it means: Carefully plan what is needed for recovery. Understand what other federal resources/agencies will provide and
what is best suited for CDBG-DR. There may be various ways to organize procurement, so be flexible about how to proceed.

Keep in mind:
 e Different approaches to achieve greater economies:
   o Analyze the different components of what needs to be procured. Are they best packaged together? Separated into individual
       items? This will depend on the market and the components themselves. It may be that an exercise (documented for
       reporting and audit purposes) looking at various options will yield the best path forward.
   © Example where separation might be best: City Y is preparing a Bid package for inspection services. The City is seeking
       services for inspections of buildings to determine their code compliance, some for single family homes and some for historic
       buildings in the City’s downtown core. Specific skills and experience are needed for the work on historic properties that
       may not be needed on the single family homes and pricing would vary dramatically between these structural types. In this
       case separation of the RFQs may result in the best approach.
   © Example where consolidation might be best: City Z needs to purchase a front end loader and pallet fork. The City may
       chose to consolidate these items because often the vendor will give a better price when the items are purchased together.




To foster greater economy and efficiency, and in accordance with efforts to promote cost-effective use of shared services across the
Federal government, the non-Federal entity is encouraged to enter into state and local intergovernmental agreements or inter-entity
agreements where appropriate for procurement or use of common or shared goods and services.




                                                                                                                     Chapter 10 - 89
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery




Previous Regulation / Circulars: See 85.36(b)(5)

What it means: Consider the region affected by the disaster and those recovery issues that run across the region, as opposed to
isolated items that are geographically (and politically) limited to a single non-Federal entity. Look at neighboring states, counties
and municipalities and look to where an inter-entity agreement could results in scaled purchases and savings.

Keep in Mind:
 e What recovery items/issues might run across political boundaries?
   o Damage to roads and highways caused by floods, tornadoes or hurricanes
   o Damage to bridges/tunnels shared by municipalities or under control of a multi-jurisdictional authority (e.g. NY/NJ Port
       Authority)
   © Shorefront beach and coastal damage
   o Utilization of a regional landfill for demolition waste may be more cost effective than developing a separate facility for a
       single unit of local government.




                                                                                                                        Chapter 10 - 90
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery


                                                             §200.318(f)

The non-Federal entity is encouraged to use Federal excess and surplus property in lieu of purchasing new equipment and property
whenever such use is feasible and reduces project costs.

Previous Regulation / Circulars: See 85.36(b)(6)

What it means:    Check if there are federal resources deemed excess or surplus before buying new equipment or property.

Keep in Mind:
 e  Where do you find out about excess/surplus Federal property or equipment?
     o The General Services Administration oversees surplus real and personal property. Typically, non-federal entities may
        obtain properties before they are made available to the public. The main website is https://www.gsa.gov/gsaxcess.



                                                             §200.318(g)

The non-Federal entity is encouraged to use value engineering clauses in contracts for construction projects of sufficient size to
offer reasonable opportunities for cost reductions. Value engineering is a systematic and creative analysis of each contract item or
task to ensure that its essential function is provided at the overall lower cost.

Previous Regulation / Circulars: See 85.36(b)(7)

What it means: Draft language to insert into every construction contract where the contractor must participate in value-engineering
exercises to attempt to secure lower cost items with the same necessary and sufficient functionality as higher costs products.

Keep in Mind:
e The scope of work and the design/specifications of the project will determine how much flexibility there will be for value
   engineering.
e Sometimes value engineering is used to conform a project to a specific budget. Other times, project managers use it simply to
   achieve cost savings measures with contractors.



                                                                                                                       Chapter 10 - 91
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery
OO                                                                                                                       —CSCSCSC‘C(C(CSCds



                                                                §200.318(g)

 e   Items that are out of sight may not need to be aesthetically pleasing. Items that are used infrequently or places that are accessed
     only by limited personnel (1.e. attics, basements, and storage) may be candidates for value-engineering.




The non-Federal entity must award contracts only to responsible contractors possessing the ability to perform successfully under the
terms and conditions of a proposed procurement. Consideration will be given to such matters as contractor integrity, compliance
with public policy, record of past performance, and financial and technical resources.

Previous Regulation / Circulars: See 85.36(b)(8)

What it means: Awards must consider multiple factors beyond price. Track record, quality of product/service, and financial
capacity should be considered as well.

Keep in Mind:
e This regulation speaks directly to the RFQ/RFP process and document.
    e The RFQ/RFP must indicate that consideration for awards will not be based solely on price, but may consider other critical
       factors.
     e   The RFQ/RFP should be specific as to what other factors will be evaluated, what the minimum thresholds will be, how much
         weight different factors will be given, and the process for selecting the contractor.



                                                                §200.318()

The non-Federal entity must maintain records sufficient to detail the history of procurement. These records will include, but are not
necessarily limited to the following: rationale for the method of procurement, selection of contract type, contractor selection or
rejection, and the basis for the contract price.




                                                                                                                         Chapter 10 - 92
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery




Previous Regulation / Circulars: See 85.36(b)(9)

What it means:     Document every step of procurement from deciding upon the method of procurement to the selection/rejection of
the contractor.

Keep in Mind: Documentation may consist of meeting minutes, resolutions from governing bodies, publications of RFPs and
RFQs, as well as internal documents such as ranking and scoring sheets. Anticipate that everything will be made public, and then
transparency becomes paramount.



                                                             §200.318G)(1)

The non-Federal entity may use time and material type contracts only after a determination that no other contract is suitable and if
the contract includes a ceiling price that the contractor exceeds at its own risk. Time and material type contract means a contract
whose cost to a non-Federal entity is the sum of:



                                                            §200.318G@)()@)
                                                            §200.318G) (1) Gi)

 (i) The actual cost of materials; and

 Gi) Direct labor hours charged at fixed hourly rates that reflect wages, general and administrative expenses, and profit.




                                                                                                                         Chapter 10 - 93
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery


                                                             §200.318(G)(2)

Since this formula generates an open-ended contract price, a time-and materials contract provides no positive profit incentive to the
contractor for cost control or labor efficiency. Therefore, each contract must set a ceiling price that the contractor exceeds at its own
risk. Further, the non-Federal entity awarding such a contract must assert a high degree of oversight in order to obtain reasonable
assurance that the contractor is using efficient methods and effective cost controls.

Previous Regulation / Circulars: See 85.36(b)(10)(i-i1)

What it means: Time and material contracts are the last option. Even with this contract, there must be an upper limit where if the
contractor finds it takes longer or materials were more expensive than budgeted, the contractor runs the risk, and cannot file for a
change order.

Keep in Mind:
 e Before choosing this kind of contract, non-Federal entities should document the process by which they determined that a time
   and materials contract was the only choice.
 e The cost of materials, as well as the fixed hourly rates should be checked against estimates and market rates to determine their
   reasonableness.
 e It may be effective to break down larger tasks/projects into smaller pieces once a non-Federal entity determines that the time and
   materials contract is the only form available because it may be easier to monitor contractors and help ensure the most efficient
   methods and processes.



                                                              §200.318(k)

The non-Federal entity alone must be responsible, in accordance with good administrative practice and sound business judgment,
for the settlement of all contractual and administrative issues arising out of procurements. These issues include, but are not limited
to, source evaluation, protests, disputes, and claims. These standards do not relieve the non-Federal entity of any contractual
responsibilities under its contracts. The Federal awarding agency will not substitute its judgment for that of the non-Federal entity
unless the matter is primarily a Federal concern. Violations of law will be referred to the local, state, or Federal authority having
proper jurisdiction.


                                                                                                                         Chapter 10 - 94
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery




Previous Regulation / Circulars: See 85.36(b)(11)(12)G-i1)
What it means: Any interpretation and application of Federal laws for issues of procurement are the responsibility of the non-
Federal entity. The non-Federal entity cannot shift responsibility to the Federal government for any of its contractual issues.
Keep in Mind: Recipients of federal funds are responsible to the Federal government for the eligible and proper use of those funds,
including when funds are passed through to subrecipients. Contractual disputes that lead to delays or improper use of funds are the
responsibility of the non-Federal entity, even if the subrecipient may be a source of the dispute.




                                                                                                                    Chapter 10 - 95
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery


                                                        §200.319 — Competition
This section of the regulations provides elements to be incorporated into the protocols and procedures used to create a competitive
procurements process. It discusses conflicts of interest, consultants currently on contract who compete for further work, preferential
treatment and other areas that might impede fair and open competition.

                                                                §200.319

 Competition.
 Where there is a conflict between state or tribal law and this guidance as implemented in regulation with respect to the
 administration of a Federal award, this Federal guidance prevails
 Previous Regulation / Circulars:

 What it means: Federal statute and law prevail over State and Tribal law for administration of Federal funds.

 Keep in Mind:    State and Tribal Law may place additional requirements on top of Federal law, but they cannot be in conflict with
 Federal law.



                                                              §200.319(a)

 All procurement transactions must be conducted in a manner providing full and open competition consistent with the standards of
 this section. In order to ensure objective contractor performance and eliminate unfair competitive advantage, contractors that
 develop or draft specifications, requirements, statements of work, and invitations for bids or requests for proposals must be excluded
 from competing for such procurements. Some of the situations considered to be restrictive of competition include but are not limited
 to:

 Previous Regulation / Circulars: See 85.36(c)(1)

 What it means: Any contractor involved in helping in developing the process or the documents for procurement cannot compete
 for any such procurements.




                                                                                                                       Chapter 10 - 96
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery


                                                             §200.319(a)

Keep in Mind:
e [tis important to communicate this issue up front to be clear with any contractor that volunteers, is hired, or otherwise
   participates in the process of developing procurement processes and documents that s/he may not be able to compete.
e This situation extends to contractors who may sit on boards of other organizations or committees where such organization is
   participating to organize a procurement process.
   o For example: A contractor sits on the Mayor’s Emergency Taskforce which is helping to determine how best to prioritize
       certain recovery tasks. That contractor must recuse him/herself from participating in any discussion of procurement if s/he
       wishes to compete for such procurement.



                                                            §200.319(a)(1)

Placing unreasonable requirements on firms in order for them to qualify to do business;

Previous Regulation / Circulars: See 85.36(c)(1)()

What it means: Qualifications and requirements cannot be so strict as to favor some firms or limit competition.

Keep in Mind: What may be reasonable in some circumstances may not be reasonable in others. Some contracting scopes of work
require a technical expertise that few contractors possess (i.e. repairing damage to nuclear reactors). Consult with persons with field
expertise about what requirements would be reasonable. Requirements should not allow only one brand of product to steer the
contract to a specific vendor when multiple brands would be equally effective.



                                                            §200.319(a)(2)

Requiring unnecessary experience and excessive bonding;




                                                                                                                       Chapter 10 - 97
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery


                                                            §200.319(a)(2)

Previous Regulation / Circulars: See 85.36(c)(1)(i)

What it means: Require necessary experience and link it to the scope of work. Bonding can be expensive and needs to reflect the
scale and complexity of the work.

Keep in Mind:
e Note the phrase “excessive bonding.”     This does not mean that no bonding is required, but that it should be appropriate to the
     work.
 e   States and municipalities may have laws about bonded contractors conducting public work — check on this before determining
     bond requirements.



                                                            §200.319(a)(3)

Noncompetitive pricing practices between firms or between affiliated companies;

Previous Regulation / Circulars: See 85.36(c)(1)(ii)

What it means: Two companies, related or not, cannot communicate with each other to plan to submit noncompetitive proposals or
bids that otherwise do not reflect what they would submit independently.

Keep in Mind: Coordination of services between or among companies which then submit a single competitive proposal would be
allowed.



                                                            §200.319(a)(4)

Noncompetitive contracts to consultants that are on retainer contracts;



                                                                                                                       Chapter 10 - 98
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery


                                                          §200.319(a)(4)

Previous Regulation / Circulars: See 85.36(c)(1)(v)

What it means: A consultant that is already on a retainer contract with a non-Federal entity which then has its work extended or
scope amended to include recovery work would not be allowed.

Keep in Mind: A consultant on retainer would have to submit a separate competitive proposal, evaluated against others given the
same opportunity.



                                                          §200.319(a)(S)

Organizational conflicts of interest;

Previous Regulation / Circulars: See 85.36(c)(1)(v)

What it means: An organization which has a relationship with the non-Federal entity cannot compete for procurement if its
participation conflicts with its existing relationship.

Keep in Mind:
e Organizational conflicts of interest exist when work performed by a contractor may: (a) result in an unfair competitive advantage
   for the contractor; or (b) impair the contractor’s objectivity in performing federal contract work.
e The Contracting Officer of the Non-Federal Entity is responsible for identifying and resolving potential conflicts of interest.



                                                          §200.319(a)(6)

Specifying only a “‘brand name”’ product instead of allowing ‘‘an equal’’ product to be offered and describing the performance or
other relevant requirements of the procurement; and



                                                                                                                    Chapter 10 - 99
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery


                                                          §200.319(a)(6)

Previous Regulation / Circulars: See 85.36(c)(1)(v1)

What it means: Non-Federal entity cannot insist a contractor use or provide a brand name product.

Keep in Mind:
e Proposals may include references to brand name products, but the evaluation of such products should must refer to the relevant
   requirements and scope of work, and not rely on the brand name.
e A contractor who proposes a brand name product, is selected for a contract, may substitute the brand named product so long as
   the contract allows for it, and that the substitute product will perform equally as well at the same or lower cost.


                                                          §200.319(a)(7)

Any arbitrary action in the procurement process.

Previous Regulation / Circulars: See 85.36(c)(1)(vii)

What it means: Procurement decisions should not be deemed “arbitrary” under any circumstances. Contracting Officers must use
common sense and sound judgment as they making procurement decisions, which should be transparent and documented.

Keep in Mind: A planned and documented process for procurement will typically avoid “arbitrary” decisions.




                                                                                                                  Chapter 10 - 100
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery


                                                            §200.319(b)

The non-Federal entity must conduct procurements in a manner that prohibits the use of statutorily or administratively imposed state
or local geographical preferences in the evaluation of bids or proposals, except in those cases where applicable Federal statutes
expressly mandate or encourage geographic preference. Nothing in this section preempts state licensing laws. When contracting for
architectural and engineering (A/E) services, geographic location may be a selection criterion provided its application leaves an
appropriate number of qualified firms, given the nature and size of the project, to compete for the contract.

Previous Regulation / Circulars: See 85.36(c)(2)

What it means: Non-Federal entities cannot impose geographical preferences that limit competition, except where the Federal
government dictates otherwise.

Keep in Mind: There may be circumstances where urgent responses and mobilization are needed, and firms with a local or regional
presence will have an advantage because of their proximity.



                                                            §200.319(c)

The non-Federal entity must have written procedures for procurement transactions. These procedures must ensure that all
solicitations:

Previous Regulation / Circulars: See 85.36(c)(3)




                                                                                                                   Chapter 10 - 101
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery


                                                             §200.319(c)(1)

Incorporate a clear and accurate description of the technical requirements for the material, product, or service to be procured. Such
description must not, in competitive procurements, contain features which unduly restrict competition. The description may include
a statement of the qualitative nature of the material, product or service to be procured and, when necessary, must set forth those
minimum essential characteristics and standards to which it must conform if it is to satisfy its intended use. Detailed product
specifications should be avoided if at all possible. When it is impractical or uneconomical to make a clear and accurate description
of the technical requirements, a ““brand name or equivalent’’ description may be used as a means to define the performance or other
salient requirements of procurement. The specific features of the named brand which must be met by offers must be clearly stated;
and


Previous Regulation / Circulars: See 85.36(c)(3)()

What it means: Describe the product or service needed in detail, but avoid product specifications which may limit contractors
choices or otherwise limit competition.

Keep in Mind: If the product specification is written so narrowly that only a select few providers offer it, this write-up would limit
the competition and thus be disallowed. For example, a Request for Proposals that details specifications for the purchase of a 40 hp
tractor to include the paint color of the item so that only one vendor is qualified would violate this regulation.



                                                             §200.319(c)(2)

Identify all requirements which the offerors must fulfill and all other factors to be used in evaluating bids or proposals

Previous Regulation / Circulars: See 85.36(c)(3)(i)

What it means: Describe clearly all the components of a proposal, and the factors or scoring criteria that will be used to evaluate
proposals.

Keep in Mind:
e Even when non-Federal entities put detailed scoring criteria in place, some judgment will have to be exercised.

                                                                                                                        Chapter 10 - 102
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery


                                                             §200.319(c)(2)

 e Having scoring criteria will be helpful, but does not eliminate the need to have evaluators who have experience with the
   particular scope of work and/or products and services.
 e The group of persons which evaluated the procurement proposals should be identified as having the requisite experience and
   knowledge to perform their task.




The non-Federal entity must ensure that all prequalified lists of persons, firms, or products which are used in acquiring goods and
services are current and include enough qualified sources to ensure maximum open and free competition. Also, the non-Federal
entity must not preclude potential bidders from qualifying during the solicitation period.

Previous Regulation / Circulars: See 85.36(c)(4)

What it means: If there is a prequalified list, the list has to be current and large enough to enable competition.   Potential bidders
need to be allowed to qualify during the solicitation.

Keep in Mind:
e Even though bidders may qualify during the solicitation, it may still be a good idea to have a prequalified list to ensure that
   during solicitation there are enough qualified bidders.




                                                                                                                        Chapter 10 - 103
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery
OO                                                                                                                      —CSCSCSC‘C(C(CSCds




                                           §200.320 — Methods of Procurement to be Followed
This section of the regulations details the different methods of procurement that may be utilized, including micro-purchases (under
$3,000), small purchases ($3,000-$149,999), sealed bid, competitive proposals, and sole source procurement. This section follows the
format of the tables above, but note that Section 3-7 below provide more detail on each of these procurement methods. For that
reason, the Keep in Mind items are brief here, but expanded later.

                                                                 §200.320

 Methods of procurement to be followed.

 The non-Federal entity must use one of the following methods of procurement.


                                                               §200.320(a)

 Procurement by micro-purchases. Procurement by micro-purchase is the acquisition of supplies or services, the aggregate dollar
 amount of which does not exceed $3,000 (or $2,000 in the case of acquisitions for construction subject to the Davis-Bacon Act). To
 the extent practicable, the non-Federal entity must distribute micro-purchases equitably among qualified suppliers. Micro-purchases
 may be awarded without soliciting competitive quotations if the non-Federal entity considers the price to be reasonable.

 Previous Regulation / Circulars: New form of procurement

 What it means:
 e   If the total amount of the acquisition is $3,000 or less ($2,000 for construction related work subject to Davis-Bacon), the micro
   purchase method may be chosen.
 e Non-Federal entity must make an effort to distribute contract for micro-purchases among qualified suppliers.
 e Competitive proposals are not required.
 Keep in Mind:
 e The Non-Federal Entity should have an estimate of costs (see chapters on cost and price analysis) and high levels of confidence
    that the acquisition will be under the appropriate threshold to enact the micro-purchase approach.
 e Taking larger services and breaking them into smaller pieces so that they might qualify under the micro-purpose approach is not
    an allowable procurement practice.

                                                                                                                        Chapter 10 - 104
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery


                                                             §200.320(b)

Procurement by small purchase procedures. Small purchase procedures are those relatively simple and informal procurement
methods for securing services, supplies, or other property that do not cost more than the Simplified Acquisition Threshold. If small
purchase procedures are used, price or rate quotations must be obtained from an adequate number of qualified sources.

Previous Regulation / Circulars: See 85.36(d)(1)

What it means: The small purchase procedure can be used when the amount of the products or services falls below the Simplified
Acquisition Threshold.

Keep in Mind:
e The Simplified Acquisition Threshold (SAT) amounts are different depending on what products or services are being procured.




Procurement by sealed bids (formal advertising). Bids are publicly solicited and a firm fixed price contract (ump sum or unit price)
is awarded to the responsible bidder whose bid, conforming with all the material terms and conditions of the invitation for bids, is
the lowest in price. The sealed bid method is the preferred method for procuring construction, if the conditions in paragraph (c)(1)
of this section apply.

Previous Regulation / Circulars: See 85.36(d)(2)

What it means: This is the traditional sealed bid method often used for construction contracting.    The contract is awarded to the
lowest priced, qualified bidder meeting all the required terms and conditions.

Keep in Mind:
e For this procurement method, it is critical that the scope of work and, particularly for construction, the design and specifications
   are as detailed and complete as possible. By publishing incomplete or cursory information on which contractors are to bid, non-
   Federal entities can open themselves to change orders, significant increases in the contract amounts, and claims from contractors
   not selected. See below 200.320(c)(1).


                                                                                                                      Chapter 10 - 105
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery
OO                                                                                                                      —CSCSCSC‘C(C(CSCds



                                                              §200.320(c)

 e Sealed bid procurement is the most typical means of securing contractors for construction work.
 e Procurement using sealed bids must follow all of the requirements detailed below.



                                                             §200.320(c)(1)

In order for sealed bidding to be feasible, the following conditions should be present: (1) A complete, adequate, and realistic
specification or purchase description is available; (41) Two or more responsible bidders are willing and able to compete effectively
for the business; and (111) The procurement lends itself to a firm fixed price contract and the selection of the successful bidder can be
made principally on the basis of price.

Previous Regulation / Circulars: See 85.36(d)(2)(i)(A-C)

What it means:    Straightforward — see above

Keep in Mind: The seal bid works when contractors can reliably complete the scope of service without modifications, which
enables the non-Federal entity to concentrate on price as the key factor in making an award. If there needs to be flexibility in the
scope, or specifications, a sealed bid does not work well.




                                                                                                                       Chapter 10 - 106
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery


                                                              §200.320(c)(2)

If sealed bids are used, the following requirements apply:

(i) The invitation for bids will be publicly advertised and bids must be solicited from an adequate number of known suppliers,
providing them sufficient response time prior to the date set for opening the bids;

 Gi) The invitation for bids, which will include any specifications and pertinent attachments, must define the items or services in
order for the bidder to properly respond;

 (ii) All bids will be publicly opened at the time and place prescribed in the invitation for bids;

 (iv) A firm fixed price contract award will be made in writing to the lowest responsive and responsible bidder. Where specified in
bidding documents, factors such as discounts, transportation cost, and life cycle costs must be considered in determining which bid
is lowest. Payment discounts will only be used to determine the low bid when prior experience indicates that such discounts are
usually taken advantage of; and

 (v) Any or all bids may be rejected if there is a sound documented reason.

Previous Regulation / Circulars: See 85.36(d)(2)(ii)(A-E)

What it means: Straightforward — See above

Keep in Mind:
e From §200.320(c)(2), an “adequate number” of known suppliers means at least two. In practice, non-Federal entities should
   strive to have more than two bidders.
e See below Section for information on payment discounts, transportation costs, and life cycle costs.
e A sound reason for rejecting all the bids may be that through the submission of proposals, the non-Federal entity realizes that
   significant modifications to the scope of work are necessary.




                                                                                                                       Chapter 10 - 107
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery


                                                             §200.320(d)

Procurement by competitive proposals. The technique of competitive proposals is normally conducted with more than one source
submitting an offer, and either a fixed price or cost reimbursement type contract is awarded. It is generally used when conditions are
not appropriate for the use of sealed bids. If this method is used, the following requirements apply:

Previous Regulation / Circulars: See 85.36(d)(3)

What it means:   Competitive proposals are an alternative to sealed bids.

Keep in Mind: Non-federal entities should document the meeting minutes and series of decisions taken to choose the method of
procurement.



                                                           §200.320(d)(1)

Requests for proposals must be publicized and identify all evaluation factors and their relative importance. Any response to
publicized requests for proposals must be considered to the maximum extent practical;

Previous Regulation / Circulars: See 85.36(d)(3)()

What it means: The RFP and the evaluation factors must be published, and all responses must be given consideration.

Keep in Mind: Often an evaluation system that uses points to score responses can reduce the occasions when respondents challenge
the awards.



                                                           §200.320(d)(2)

Proposals must be solicited from an adequate number of qualified sources;



                                                                                                                     Chapter 10 - 108
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery


                                                          §200.320(d)(2)

Previous Regulation / Circulars: See 85.36(d)(3)(ii)

What it means: At least two and preferably more proposals must be solicited.

Keep in Mind: Researching and identifying potential qualified sources can take time. Non-Federal entities should preferably have
a list on hand prior to any disaster taking place, or as soon as possible thereafter.



                                                          §200.320(d)(3)

The non-Federal entity must have a written method for conducting technical evaluations of the proposals received and for selecting
recipients;

Previous Regulation / Circulars: See 85.36(d)(3)(ii1)

What it means: Straightforward

Keep in Mind: The non-Federal entity must then follow its own written method.



                                                          §200.320(d)(4)

Contracts must be awarded to the responsible firm whose proposal is most advantageous to the program, with price and other factors
considered; and

Previous Regulation / Circulars: See 85.36(d)(3)(iv)

What it means: Selection must use price and other factors to consider which proposal is best.




                                                                                                                  Chapter 10 - 109
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery
OO                                                                                                                   —CSCSCSC‘C(C(CSCds



                                                           §200.320(d)(4)

Keep in Mind: The other factors which are considered in selection will vary according to the product or service procured.



                                                           §200.320(d)(5)

The non-Federal entity may use competitive proposal procedures for qualifications-based procurement of architectural/ engineering
(A/E) professional services whereby competitors’ qualifications are evaluated and the most qualified competitor is selected, subject
to negotiation of fair and reasonable compensation. The method, where price is not used as a selection factor, can only be used in
procurement of A/E professional services. It cannot be used to purchase other types of services though A/E firms are a potential
source to perform the proposed effort.

Previous Regulation / Circulars: See 85.36(d)(3)(v)

What it means: It is possible to procure an architectural or engineering firm based upon its qualifications, without taking into
consideration what the cost of the work will be, as long as the negotiated compensation is fair and reasonable. No other services
may be procured without price as a selection factor.

Keep in Mind: Competition for architectural and engineering services are often a product of the size (and cost) of the project.



                                                             §200.320(e)

 [Reserved |




                                                                                                                     Chapter 10 - 110
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery


                                                             §200.320(f)

Procurement by noncompetitive proposals. Procurement by noncompetitive proposals is procurement through solicitation of a
proposal from only one source and may be used only when one or more of the following circumstances apply:

Previous Regulation / Circulars: See 85.36(d)(4)(i)

What it means: One of more of the below conditions must be met in order to procure without an open competition.

Keep in Mind:    Conditions below must be met, and documented.




                                                           §200.320(H(1)

The item is available only from a single source;

Previous Regulation / Circulars: See 85.36(d)(4)(i)(A)

What it means: Straightforward

Keep in Mind: Rarely will an item or a service be available from a single source. If this justification is used, documentation must
be maintained that there is only one source available.



                                                           §200.320(f)(2)

The public exigency or emergency for the requirement will not permit a delay resulting from competitive solicitation;

Previous Regulation / Circulars: See 85.36(d)(4)G)(B)

What it means: Straightforward


                                                                                                                    Chapter 10 - 111
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery
OO                                                                                                                   —CSCSCSC‘C(C(CSCds



                                                           §200.320(f)(2)

Keep in Mind: The urgent nature of disaster recovery is a given.   Non-Federal entities cannot invoke this regulation as the reason
for choosing a non-competitive procurement method.



                                                           §200.320()(3)

The Federal awarding agency or pass-through entity expressly authorizes noncompetitive proposals in response to a written request
from the non-Federal entity; or

Previous Regulation / Circulars: See 85.36(d)(4)(i)(C)

What it means: Straightforward

Keep in Mind: There must be compelling reasons to make a request for noncompetitive proposals.



                                                           §200.320(1)(4)

After solicitation of a number of sources, competition is determined inadequate.

Previous Regulation / Circulars: See 85.36(d)(4)()(D)

What it means: Inadequate competition may mean a sole qualified proposal or perhaps none.

Keep in Mind: Typically, a Grantee must contact multiple sources to try and secure competitive bids. Only after several attempts
can the Grantee declare competition to be inadequate. Documentation will be key to substantiate this claim.




                                                                                                                     Chapter 10 - 112
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery




This section of the regulations requires grantees and subrecipients to take action to assure that Minority Businesses, Women
Businesses and Labor Surplus Firms are utilized in contracts when possible. Steps that will facilitate include adding these businesses
to solicitation lists, sizing contracts so that smaller businesses can participate and utilizing organizations that work with minority and
woman owned businesses and labor surplus firms. These methods should also be passed on to prime contractors.



 Contracting with small and minority businesses, women’s business enterprises, and labor surplus area firms.


                                                                §200.321(a)

 The non-Federal entity must take all necessary affirmative steps to assure that minority businesses, women’s business enterprises,
 and labor surplus area firms are used when possible.

 Previous Regulation / Circulars: See 85.36(e)(1)


                                                                §200.321(b)

 Affirmative steps must include:

 Previous Regulation / Circulars: See 85.36(e)(2)



                                                              §200.321(b)(1)

 Placing qualified small and minority businesses and women’s business enterprises on solicitation lists;

 Previous Regulation / Circulars: See 85.36(e)(2)()


                                                                                                                         Chapter 10 - 113
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery


                                                             §200.321(b)(1)

What it means: Straightforward

Keep in Mind:    Solicitation lists should be developed prior to the disaster and kept current.



                                                             §200.321(b)(2)

Assuring that small and minority businesses, and women’s business enterprises are solicited whenever they are potential sources;

Previous Regulation / Circulars: See 85.36(e)(2)(1i)

What it means: Straightforward

Keep in Mind: The non-Federal entity should make a point of noting those instances when small and minority businesses, and
women’s business enterprises would not be potential sources. Otherwise, they should be solicited.



                                                             §200.321(b)(3)

Dividing total requirements, when economically feasible, into smaller tasks or quantities to permit maximum participation by small
 and minority businesses, and women’s business enterprises;

Previous Regulation / Circulars: See 85.36(e)(2)(1i1)

What it means: If there are not economies of scale that would result in less expensive unit costs, or more efficient delivery of
services, then non-Federal entities should look to break down tasks or quantities into amounts that would enable small businesses to
compete for contracts.

Keep in Mind: Examples of products and services where breaking down tasks or quantities may make sense:
e Boarding up of abandoned houses, broken down geographically into smaller quantities

                                                                                                                    Chapter 10 - 114
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery
OO                                                                                                                    —CSCSCSC‘C(C(CSCds



                                                            §200.321(b)(3)

 e Splitting demolition contracts into single family residential and larger structures, assuming smaller contractors would not have
   the heavy equipment necessary for larger buildings.



                                                            §200.321(b)(4)

Establishing delivery schedules, where the requirement permits, which encourage participation by small and minority businesses,
and women’s business enterprises;

Previous Regulation / Circulars: See 85.36(e)(2)(iv)

What it means: As above, examine the service delivery schedule for ways to make it easier for small businesses to compete.

Keep in Mind: This may applicable in a scenario when a non-Federal entity can allow the work to be carried out over a longer
period of time, so small contractors can complete the services with their existing workforce.



                                                            §200.321(b)(5)

Using the services and assistance, as appropriate, of such organizations as the Small Business Administration and the Minority
Business Development Agency of the Department of Commerce; and

Previous Regulation / Circulars: See 85.36(e)(2)(v)

What it means: Straightforward

Keep in Mind:
e Small Business Development Centers and Minority Business Development Centers often have relationships with minority owned
   small businesses.


                                                                                                                     Chapter 10 - 115
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery
OO                                                                                                                        —CSCSCSC‘C(C(CSCds



                                                             §200.321(b)(5)

 e SBA is one of several Federal agencies with resources specific to disaster recovery.     See https://www.sba.gov/loans-grants/see-
   what-sba-offers/sba-loan-programs/disaster-loans

                                                             §200.321(b)(6)

Requiring the prime contractor, if subcontracts are to be let, to take the affirmative steps listed in paragraphs (1) through (5) of this
section.

Previous Regulation / Circulars: See 85.36(e)(2)(v1)

What it means: Straightforward

Keep in Mind: Construction work beyond basic repair will likely involve the use of subcontractors.




                                                                                                                         Chapter 10 - 116
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery
OO                                                                                                                      —CSCSCSC‘C(C(CSCds




                                            §200.322 — Procurement of Recovered Materials
This section requires state and local governments to encourage the purchase of materials that maximize the use of recovered and
recycled materials. In addition, the procurement of waste disposal services should maximize energy and material recovery.

                                                                 §200.322

 Procurement of recovered materials.

 A non-Federal entity that is a state agency or agency of a political subdivision of a state and its contractors must comply with section
 6002 of the Solid Waste Disposal Act, as amended by the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act. The requirements of Section
 6002 include procuring only items designated in guidelines of the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) at 40 CFR part 247 that
 contain the highest percentage of recovered materials practicable, consistent with maintaining a satisfactory level of competition,
 where the purchase price of the item exceeds $10,000 or the value of the quantity acquired by the preceding fiscal year exceeded
 $10,000; procuring solid waste management services in a manner that maximizes energy and resource recovery; and establishing an
 affirmative procurement program for procurement of recovered materials identified in the EPA guidelines.

 Previous Regulation / Circulars:
 Reiterates non-Federal entities’ obligations under section 6002 of the Solid Waste Disposal Act, as amended by the Resource
 Conservation and Recovery Act.

 What it means: Generally, the non-Federal entity must seek waste management services that maximize the use of recycled materials
 and have processes to recycle sold waste where appropriate and practical.

 Keep in Mind: The technical references for the Solid Waste Disposal Act and the guidelines of the EPA are found respectively at:
 https://environmental.ksc.nasa.gov/EMS/documents/6002RCRA.pdf

 https://www.law.cornell.edu/cfr/text/40/part-273




                                                                                                                       Chapter 10 - 117
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery


                                                 §200.323 — Contract Cost and Price
Prior to any procurement, the contracting entity must review the goods and/or services to be procured and estimate cost based on
market prices and independent estimates if the purchase is in excess of the Simplified Acquisition Threshold. In addition, the
contracting agency should perform a cost analysis for any change orders or modifications to the contract. In cases where there has not
been a price competition, profit must be negotiated with the contracting agency. Cost plus a percentage of cost is not allowed for
construction contracts.



 Contract cost and price.




 The non-Federal entity must perform a cost or price analysis in connection with every procurement action in excess of the
 Simplified Acquisition Threshold including contract modifications. The method and degree of analysis is dependent on the facts
 surrounding the particular procurement situation, but as a starting point, the non-Federal entity must make independent estimates
 before receiving bids or proposals.

 Previous Regulation / Circulars: See 85.36(f)(1)

 What it means: When the non-Federal entity expects the procurement amount be above the Simplified Acquisition Threshold, it
 must undertake cost and/or price estimates of products and/or services to be procured.

 Keep in Mind:
 e The non-Federal entity will obtain price or cost estimates based on the type of procurement used.
 e Businesses contracted to provide estimates may not compete for the contracts where they provided such estimates.




                                                                                                                     Chapter 10 - 118
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery


                                                              §200.323(b)

The non-Federal entity must negotiate profit as a separate element of the price for each contract in which there is no price
competition and in all cases where cost analysis is performed. To establish a fair and reasonable profit, consideration must be given
to the complexity of the work to be performed, the risk borne by the contractor, the contractor’s investment, the amount of
subcontracting, the quality of its record of past performance, and industry profit rates in the surrounding geographical area for
similar work.

Previous Regulation / Circulars: See 85.36(f)(2)

What it means:    Profit must be negotiated where price was not a factor in contractor selection.

Keep in Mind:
e This regulation may seem to conflict with §200.323(d) which states that cost plus percentage of cost contracts are not permitted.
   This regulation applies where there is no price competition, whereas the majority of construction contracts will be based in part
   upon price.
e Professional services of architects and engineers may be secured without price competition.
e Below is a link toa HUD webpage on price and cost analysis:
       https://portal.hud.gov/hudportal/HUD?src=/program_offices/cpo/grantees/cstprice



                                                              §200.323(c)

Costs or prices based on estimated costs for contracts under the Federal award are allowable only to the extent that costs incurred or
cost estimates included in negotiated prices would be allowable for the non-Federal entity under Subpart E—Cost Principles of this
part. The non-Federal entity may reference its own cost principles that comply with the Federal cost principles.

Previous Regulation / Circulars: See 85.36(f)(3)

What it means: A separate section of 2 CFR 200, Subpart E covers Cost Principles which must be followed by non-Federal
entities.



                                                                                                                     Chapter 10 - 119
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery




Keep in Mind:    The link to 2 CFR 200 is found below:
https://www.epo.gov/fdsys/pke/CFR-2014-title2-voll/pdt/CFR-2014-title2-vol1-part200-subpartE.
                                                                                           pdf




The cost plus a percentage of cost and percentage of construction cost methods of contracting must not be used.

Previous Regulation / Circulars: See 85.36(f)(4)

What it means: Straightforward

Keep in Mind: Profit can be a portion of a contractor’s bid, but profit should be negotiated with the bidder.   The level of profit will
vary based on the size, risk and complexity of the project.




                                                                                                                      Chapter 10 - 120
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery
OO                                                                                                                      —CSCSCSC‘C(C(CSCds




                                 §200.324 — Federal Awarding Agency or Pass-through Entity Review
This section covers the review of the contracting process by HUD, to determine if goods and/or services acquired by the grantee are
necessary, are reasonable in cost and have been acquired in a process that allows for open competition. To avoid federal review of the
technical aspects of procurement prior to acquisition of the goods or services, the non-Federal Agency can either submit their
procurement policies to HUD for approval or they can self-certify that their policies meet the required standards. It also lists instances
when HUD may identify non-compliance or a questionable practice and request procurement documents.

                                                                 §200.324

 Federal awarding agency or pass-through entity review.


                                                               §200.324(a)

 The non-Federal entity must make available, upon request of the Federal awarding agency or pass-through entity, technical
 specifications on proposed procurements where the Federal awarding agency or pass-through entity believes such review is needed
 to ensure that the item or service specified is the one being proposed for acquisition. This review generally will take place prior to
 the time the specification is incorporated into a solicitation document. However, if the non-Federal entity desires to have the review
 accomplished after a solicitation has been developed, the Federal awarding agency or pass-through entity may still review the
 specifications, with such review usually limited to the technical aspects of the proposed purchase.

 Previous Regulation / Circulars: See 85.36(g)(1)

 What it means: Non-Federal entities must respond to requests from HUD or other Federal agencies for technical specifications on
 procurements prior to solicitation.

 Keep in Mind: If the non-Federal entity has a complicated situation or is otherwise unsure of its procurement of a particularly
 technical service or product, it should take advantage of Federal resources to review any concerns prior to the solicitation.




                                                                                                                        Chapter 10 - 121
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery


                                                            §200.324(b)

The non-Federal entity must make available upon request, for the Federal awarding agency or pass-through entity pre-procurement
review, procurement documents, such as requests for proposals or invitations for bids, or independent cost estimates, when:

Previous Regulation / Circulars: See 85.36(g)(2)


                                                          §200.324(b)(1)

The non-Federal entity’s procurement procedures or operation fails to comply with the procurement standards in this part;

Previous Regulation / Circulars: See 85.36(g)(2)()

What it means: Straightforward


                                                          §200.324(b)(2)

The procurement is expected to exceed the Simplified Acquisition Threshold and is to be awarded without competition or only one
bid or offer is received in response to a solicitation;

Previous Regulation / Circulars: See 85.36(g)(2)(i1)

What it means: Straightforward


                                                          §200.324(b)(3)

The procurement, which is expected to exceed the Simplified Acquisition Threshold, specifies a ““brand name’’ product;




                                                                                                                   Chapter 10 - 122
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery


                                                          §200.324(b)(3)

Previous Regulation / Circulars: See 85.36(g)(2)(i11)

What it means: Straightforward


                                                          §200.324(b)(4)

The proposed contract is more than the Simplified Acquisition Threshold and is to be awarded to other than the apparent low bidder
under a sealed bid procurement; or

Previous Regulation / Circulars: See 85.36(g)(2)(iv)

What it means: Straightforward


                                                          §200.324(b)(5)

A proposed contract modification changes the scope of a contract or increases the contract amount by more than the Simplified
Acquisition Threshold.

Previous Regulation / Circulars: See 85.36(g)(2)(v)

What it means: Straightforward



                                                           §200.324(c)

The non-Federal entity is exempt from the pre-procurement review in paragraph (b) of this section if the Federal awarding agency
or pass-through entity determines that its procurement systems comply with the standards of this part.



                                                                                                                  Chapter 10 - 123
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery


                                                           §200.324(c)

Previous Regulation / Circulars: See 85.36(g)(3)

What it means: Straightforward

Keep in Mind: A non-Federal entities must make the assessment that its policies and practices are in compliance before making the
determination not to request a pre-procurement review. That assessment should be in writing.



                                                          §200.324(c)(1)

The non-Federal entity may request that its procurement system be reviewed by the Federal awarding agency or pass-through entity
to determine whether its system meets these standards in order for its system to be certified. Generally, these reviews must occur
where there is continuous high-dollar funding, and third party contracts are awarded on a regular basis


Previous Regulation / Circulars: See 85.36(g¢)(3)()

What it means: A non-Federal entity may request a review. HUD may, at its discretion, call for a review where the non-Federal
entity manages a large quantity of federal funds and regularly procures products and services from third parties.

Keep in Mind: Where possible, non-Federal entities may choose to request a HUD review at the beginning of disaster recovery to
prevent questions or possible compliance issues further into the recovery process.




                                                                                                                  Chapter 10 - 124
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery


                                                           §200.324(c)(2)

The non-Federal entity may self-certify its procurement system. Such self-certification must not limit the Federal awarding
agency’s right to survey the system. Under a self-certification procedure, the Federal awarding agency may rely on written
assurances from the non-Federal entity that it is complying with these standards. The non-Federal entity must cite specific policies,
procedures, regulations, or standards as being in compliance with these requirements and have its system available for review.


Previous Regulation / Circulars: See 85.36(¢)(3)(i1)

What it means: Self-certification is possible but the non-Federal entity is still open to HUD review. To self-certify, the non-
Federal entity must prepare a package of materials demonstrating that it is in compliance and will remain so.

Keep in Mind: Many non-Federal entities will have additional procurement requirements in addition to the Federal requirements.
It may be helpful to have counsel review any package of materials intended to provide support for self-certification, to ensure
compliance with Federal law and any applicable State or local laws.




                                                                                                                     Chapter 10 - 125
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery


                                                  §200.325 — Bonding Requirements
This section of the regulations covers the type and amount of bonding requirements required for construction projects. There are two
ways to meet the bonding requirements: either by following the regulations cited in Section 200.325 or by HUD approval of the Local
Government’s, Indian Tribe’s, Insular Area or Sub-Recipient’s bonding procedures.

                                                                §200.325

 Bonding Requirements

 For construction or facility improvement contracts or subcontracts exceeding the Simplified Acquisition Threshold, the Federal
 awarding agency or pass-through entity may accept the bonding policy and requirements of the non-Federal entity provided that the
 Federal awarding agency or pass through entity has made a determination that the Federal interest is adequately protected. If such a
 determination has not been made, the minimum requirements must be as follows:

 Previous Regulation / Circulars: See 85.36(h)

 What it means: Straightforward



                                                               §200.325(a)

 (a) A bid guarantee from each bidder equivalent to five percent of the bid price. The ‘bid guarantee’’ must consist of a firm
 commitment such as a bid bond, certified check, or other negotiable instrument accompanying a bid as assurance that the bidder will,
 upon acceptance of the bid, execute such contractual documents as may be required within the time specified.

 Previous Regulation / Circulars: See 85.36(h)(1)

 What it means: This bid guarantee means that the contractor will honor the bid price and take the job if selected.

 Keep in Mind:    There are various financial instruments to accomplish this requirement.   Bid guarantees are returned to those bidders
 not selected.


                                                                                                                      Chapter 10 - 126
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery


                                                              §200.325(b)

 (b) A performance bond on the part of the contractor for 100 percent of the contract price. A ““performance bond’’ is one executed in
 connection with a contract to secure fulfillment of all the contractor’s obligations under such contract.


Previous Regulation / Circulars: See 85.36(h)(2)

What it means: A performance bond is a surety such that if the contractor fails to perform or finish the job, the non-Federal entity
can make a claim against the performance bond and require the surety company to finish the work.

Keep in Mind: Smaller contractors may have difficulty securing performance bonds if they are “stretching” to bid for work beyond
their typical job size. Performance bonds add cost to the overall budget, but provide important protection.




(c) A payment bond on the part of the contractor for 100 percent of the contract price. A ““‘payment bond”’ is one executed in
connection with a contract to assure payment as required by law of all persons supplying labor and material in the execution of the
work provided for in the contract.

Previous Regulation / Circulars: See 85.36(h)(3)

What it means: A payment bond refers to payment by the contractors to sub-contractors and materials suppliers. The non-Federal
entity may make a claim against the payment bond to ensure all subcontractors and material suppliers are paid, to avoid any liens
against the project.

Keep in Mind: Payment and performance bonds are often paired, and supplied from the same surety company.




                                                                                                                     Chapter 10 - 127
BUYING RIGHT
CDBG-DR and Procurement: A Guide to Recovery
ee




                                                  §200.326 — Contract Provisions
This section of the regulations covers the contract provisions that must be included with each contract for goods or services. The
provisions may not be required for contracts under a certain contract amount, which varies by different federal provision. The
provisions cover a wide range of federal requirements, including Davis Bacon, Equal Opportunity, legal remedies and environmental
regulations. Copies of the required provisions are included in the section on Model Documents.

                                                               §200.326

 Contract provisions.

 The non-Federal entity’s contracts must contain the applicable provisions described in Appendix II to Part 200— Contract Provisions
 for non-Federal Entity Contracts Under Federal Awards.

 Previous Regulation / Circulars: See 85.36()(1-13)

        What it means: The non-Federal entity must check the Federal list of debarred contractors (24 CFR 570.489(1)).   The General
 Services Administration maintains a list of debarred all contractors through the System Award Management (SAM)
 Keep in Mind: The link to the SAM program is https://www.sam.gov




                                                                                                                  Chapter 10 - 128
