Oregon Department of Land Conservation
          and Development

       Affirmative Action Plan

         2025-2027 Biennium
                                         Department of Land Conservation and Development
                                                                                    Director’s Office
                                                                     635 Capitol Street NE, Suite 150
                                                                          Salem, Oregon 97301-2540
                                                                                Phone: 503-373-0050
                                                                                   Fax: 503-378-5518
                                                                             www.oregon.gov/LCD


                  Oregon Department of Land Conservation and Development

                     Affirmative Action Plan
                                   2025-27 biennium


Department of Land Conservation and Development is working in concert with the
Governor’s Office in leading efforts to dismantle the legacy of racism in Oregon. This
report aims to show progress and further these goals. The plan contains:

    1. An evaluation of management personnel and their effectiveness in achieving
       affirmative action objectives as a key consideration of their performance.
    2. A description of agency performance during the current and next biennium.
    3. Information concerning DLCD’s awards of construction, services, and personal
       service contracts awarded to minority businesses.


This plan serves to enhance DLCD’s commitment to Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion
(DEI) and support the agency strategic plan, which also serves as the agency’s DEI
Plan.




_________________________________                              July 24, 2024
                                                              _______________
Brenda Bateman, Ph.D., Director                                      Date




                                                                                  2|Page
Table of Contents
Letter from the Director ..……………………………………………………………………………………………2
Agency Overview…………………………………………………………………………………………………….4
Key Employees to Agency DEI Work………………………………………………………………………………5
Organizational Chart…………………………………………………………………………………………………6
Affirmative Action Statement .………………………………………………………………………………………6
Diversity and Inclusion Statement …………………………………………………………………………………6
Responsibilities and Accountability ..………………………………………………………………………………7
Training, Education, and Development ...…………………………………………………………………………9
Internship, Mentorship, and Outreach Programs…………………………………………………………………9
Employment and Retention ...………………………………………………………………………………………9
Progress Made ……………………………………………………………………………………………………..10
Incorporation of DEI plan, Strategic Plan, and Affirmative Action Plan ………………………………………10
Leadership Development and Evaluation ...……………………………………………………………………..11
2025-2027 Goals ………………………………………………………………………......………………………11
Complaint Options………………………………………………………………………………………………….13
Succession Plan ……………………………………………………………………………………………………13
Contracting/COBID ………………………………………………………………………………………………...14
Appendix ….……………………………………………………………………………………………………...…14




                                                                              3|Page
Who We Are
The Oregon Department of Land Conservation and Development (DLCD) works in
partnership with local governments and state and federal agencies to address the land use
needs of the public, communities, regions, and the state. The Land Conservation and
Development Commission (LCDC) provides policy direction for the land use planning
program and oversees DLCD operations. The department is organized into four program
divisions, with regional offices around the state.

What We Do
We help carry out the vision and legacy of Senate Bill 100, which for 50 years has
contributed to the quality and character of the natural and built environment of the state.
The program has been charged by the Legislature with managing urban growth; protecting
farm and forest lands, coastal areas, and natural resource lands; and providing for safe,
livable communities in concert with the vision of the local communities.
Under the statewide land use planning program, each city and county is called upon to
adopt and maintain a comprehensive plan and an implementing zoning code consistent
with 19 statewide planning goals. Recognizing that each city and county has unique values
and aspirations, our job is to provide planning guidance and technical assistance to help
communities plan for their future while considering the needs of the region and the state.
Helping cities and counties address these functions in the context of a wide range of state
and local interests requires that we be problem solvers. The department’s mission reflects
this active role.

DLCD Mission
The Department of Land Conservation and Development’s mission is to help communities
plan for, protect, and improve the built and natural systems that provide a high quality of
life. In partnership with Oregonians and local governments, we foster sustainable and
vibrant communities and protect our natural resources legacy.

DLCD Values
DLCD's work is:
• Adaptive                       • Holistic                       • Resourced
• Collaborative                  • Inclusive                      • Service-focused
• Equitable                      • Professional                   • Stewardship-focused




                                                                                   4|Page
Key Employees to Agency DEI Work
Brenda Ortigoza Bateman, Ph.D., Director
635 Capitol Street NE, Suite 150
Salem, OR 97301-2540
Brenda.O.Bateman@dlcd.oregon.gov

Kirstin Greene, AICP, Deputy Director, Tribal Liaison
635 Capitol Street NE, Suite 150
Salem, OR 97301-2540
Kirstin.Greene@dlcd.oregon.gov

Josh Hardage, Chief Operating Officer
635 Capitol Street NE, Suite 150
Salem, OR 97301-2540
Josh.C.Hardage@dlcd.oregon.gov

Karin Power, Natural Resources and Climate Policy Advisor
900 Court St NE, Suite 254 OR Salem
Salem, OR 97301-2540
Karin.Power@oregon.gov

Tyler Potter, Human Resources Manager, Affirmative Action Representative
635 Capitol Street NE, Suite 150
Salem, OR 97301-2540
Tyler.G.Potter@DLCD.oregon.gov

Tabatha Hoge, Designated Procurement Officer, Lead COBID Contractor
635 Capitol Street NE, Suite 150
Salem, OR 97301-2540
Tabatha.Hoge@dlcd.oregon.gov




                                                                           5|Page
DLCD Organizational Chart
By Department




Affirmative Action Plan
Affirmative Action Statement
The purpose of DLCD’s Affirmative Action Plan is to establish the department’s policies
of nondiscrimination and equal employment opportunity. DLCD commits to establishing
and maintaining a workforce reflective of the diverse population within Oregon. DLCD
has an affirmative action program that provides equal opportunities for all persons
regardless of race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, national
origin, marital status, age, disability, or other protected class under applicable law. We
believe in all persons' equal rights to work and advancement based on individual merit.
We support the initiatives of DLCD’s internal Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion Committee
and work within our program areas of planning, community services, ocean and coastal
management, housing services and administrative services to advance the priorities
outlined in the State’s DEI Action Plan.

Diversity and Inclusion Statement
DLCD strives to represent the diversity of the communities we serve by fostering a
diverse, equitable, and inclusive culture for employees, the public, and the local
governments we serve. Our vision for diversity exists across the breadth (functions) and
depth (hierarchy) of government. DLCD responds with enthusiasm to Strategy 8
included in the State of Oregon Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion Action Plan. This
includes:


                                                                                 6|Page
   • Review and update position descriptions to include state equity vision, values,
      and goals and use gender neutral language.
   • Review and update recruitment, hiring, retention, and succession planning
      processes and policies.
   • Create an inclusive and belonging workplace culture and environment.
   • Provide trainings and professional development opportunities to diversify
      leadership pipeline and for agency succession planning.
   • Develop and provide DEI trainings to align agencies to standardized and
      inclusive processes.
   • Promote equal employment opportunities and pay equity in the workplace.
The DLCD DEI Committee works to integrate best practices for diversity, equity, and
inclusion into agency policies and programs. The Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion
Committee serves as an advisory body to the DLCD Management and Policy Teams.
The Committee provides research, recommendations, event support, and policy
guidance to DLCD leadership as requested and as outlined in its work plan.

Responsibilities & Accountability
Director
The director, deputy director, and chief operating officer have overall responsibility for
compliance with policy and achievement of the Affirmative Action goals to which the
Department of Land Conservation and Development is committed. They provide
leadership to managers, monitor progress toward meeting the Affirmative Action Plan's
goals and objectives; and ensure compliance with applicable federal and state laws,
rules, regulations, and executive orders. In evaluating agency managers' performance,
the director, deputy director, and COO shall ensure that their work performance reviews
include an assessment of their affirmative action efforts and accomplishments.
The Director’s Office is committed to ensuring the agency plan, targets, and goals are
followed, implemented, and achieved.

Managers/Supervisors
Division managers and supervisors have responsibility for the following:
   • Foster and promote to employees the importance of a diverse workforce free of
       discrimination, harassment, and hostility to staff;
   • Apply the precepts of affirmative action in their day-to-day work and their
       relations with co-workers, job applicants, and the general public;
   • Attend equal opportunity, affirmative action, and diversity-related training to be
       informed of current Affirmative Action laws and issues and develop knowledge
       and skill for working with a diverse workforce;
   • Report barriers to affirmative action and harassment incidents in compliance with
       DLCD’s complaint procedures to the Affirmative Action Representative.


                                                                                 7|Page
Affirmative Action Representative:
The human resources manager is assigned the duties of the Affirmative Action
Representative. They are responsible for:
   • Ensuring agency recruitments comply with Affirmative Action and Equal
      Employment Opportunity goals and are free from barriers to employment and
      advancement of minority, women, disabled, and older applicants;
   • Disseminating affirmative action information through orientation, training, and
      management consultation;
   • Ensuring new employees receive an orientation on the agency’s Affirmative
      Action goals and responsibilities to understand their responsibility for promoting
      diversity and a harassment-free environment;
   • Developing the department’s Affirmative Action Plan and having electronic copies
      of the department’s Affirmative Action Policy Statement and Plan available for
      review by all managers and employees.
   • Coordinating activities to implement the Affirmative Action Plan and monitor
      progress toward the goals;
   • Developing and communicating agency-wide policies and procedures related to
      Affirmative Action and Equal Employment Opportunity;
   • Encouraging managers to provide career development opportunities through job
      rotation and developmental assignments;
   • Informing all employees of department recruiting announcements and ensuring
      employees know about career development opportunities and how to meet
      qualifications for promotional or career opportunities through experience and
      education;
   • Training managers on the discriminatory selection, hiring procedures, and
      identifying and mitigating for implicit bias;
   • Ensure interview panels represent a diverse workforce;
   • Conducting training for staff on Affirmative Action and Equal Employment
      Opportunity issues, workplace harassment, and cultural competence;
   • Receiving and investigate discrimination complaints by the DLCD’s complaint
      procedures and make recommendations to the director or deputy director for
      appropriate action; and
   • Conducting exit interviews. Conducting an investigation and taking appropriate
      action if it appears discrimination or harassment was a factor in employee
      separation.

Non-Management Roles
All agency employees are expected to comply with state and agency policies
related to discrimination-free, harassment-free, equal opportunity, and affirmative
action. The 2021 State of Oregon DEI Action Plan and DLCD DEI Committee
Action Plan are included in all agency position descriptions and DLCD employees

                                                                                8|Page
are expected to implement the priorities and actions of those resources into their
duties and responsibilities. In addition, undergoing required diversity, equity, and
inclusion trainings.

Training, Education, and Development Plan
DLCD encourages workforce development through training and learning opportunities.
Employees have access to a biennial training budget that supports participation in
development opportunities such as conference attendance, workshops, continuing
education training, and DEI specific training. Agency leadership encourages employees
to build relationships with Community Based Organizations (CBOs) that serve current
and historically underserved and under resourced communities. The agency’s internal
DEI Committee prioritizes and develops recommendations for training agency staff.

All employees have access to Workday Learn, the state’s online learning management
system. Employees can explore a large variety of training topics and register for training
through this system. Available training includes the Statewide Diversity Conference
sessions. Training courses hosted by the Cultural Change Office are shared agency
wide and employees are encouraged to attend.

In addition, DLCD employees and other individuals serving on interview panels receive
Department of Administrative Services Equitable Interview training prior to their
participation.

Internship, Mentorship, and Outreach Programs
DLCD supports an ongoing fellowship program which provides students with tangible
experience in a professional setting. The department works with local colleges and
universities to recruit participants. Participants are assigned projects that coordinate
with their area of study. The purpose of DLCD’s informal intern program is to provide
professional experience to students while building a pipeline of diverse talent.
The Human Resources Manager participates in statewide recruitment efforts including
partnering with other state agencies to host open house and job fair events.

Employment and Retention
DLCD recruitments are coordinated by the agency’s Human Resources team, in
partnership with the hiring manager. All open position job descriptions are reviewed and
updated to ensure accurate description of the position, job duties, competencies and
required minimum qualifications. Knowledge of and commitment to the 2021 State of
Oregon DEI Action Plan is an expectation of all DLCD positions. The agency conducts
an open and competitive recruitment process to reach and attract a wide and diverse
audience. Job announcements are shared with current agency employees to support
development and growth opportunities.

One of DLCD’s top priorities is to reflect the diversity of the state within its workforce. To
meet this goal, the agency conducts employment outreach and engagement with
entities like Government Alliance on Race & Equity (GARE) and Partners in Diversity.
The agency often places advertisements for open positions with national affiliated


                                                                                    9|Page
organizations like the American Planning Association and the American Water
Resources Association to invite diverse perspectives into our work.

DLCD supports retention efforts that ensure a welcoming environment that values
diverse perspectives and lived experiences of individuals. New employees have an
opportunity to meet with and learn about different groups and initiatives within the
agency. This includes an introduction to the Land Conservation and Development
Commission, the internal DEI Committee, and internal program leaders. The goal is to
provide new employees a sense of connection and belonging from their first day at the
agency.

Progress Made
The agency has made several advancements in affirmative action and diversity, equity,
and inclusion efforts.

Strategy 1: Agency support for the Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion Committee to
integrate best practices into agency policies and programs.
The Committee continues to play an integral part in reviewing and recommending
changes within the agency. Recent accomplishments include creating a new hire
resource form which includes guidance documents like pronoun and land
acknowledgement guidance, as well as resource links to the DEI Committee Work Plan
and the State of Oregon DEI Action Plan. The Committee has also sourced and
scheduled vital training to encourage DEI across the agency.

Strategy 2: Provide a training program at agency All Staff Meetings.
DLCD staff have and will continue to participate in training at all staffs that support DEI.
This is part of an intentional effort to promote diversity, equity, and inclusion training for
staff at all-staffs and at the individual level. In 2023, we provided trainings on the Racist
History of Oregon, Identifying and Addressing Microaggressions, and Implicit Bias
Training.

Strategy 3: Sponsor and participate in the State of Oregon Diversity Conference.
DLCD leadership continues to support staff participation in the statewide Diversity,
Equity, and Inclusion Conference. In 2023, DLCD staff participated in training
opportunities offered as part of the 2023 Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion Conference.

Incorporation of DEI plan, Strategic Plan, and Affirmative Action Plan
DLCD has incorporated its DEI plan into the 2023-2031 strategic plan, as it is a core
function of DLCD’s work. DLCD’s Affirmative Action plan is complementary to the
strategic plan to further and focus the diversity, equity, and inclusion work being done.
DLCD takes a programmatic approach that centers race. Research shows that when
investments focus on Black, Indigenous, and people of color, these benefits also accrue
to low-income community members. Low-income community members also include a
greater share of Oregonians who identify as living with a disability than the population
as a whole. Accordingly, DLCD takes an intersectional approach that centers race.



                                                                                    10 | P a g e
   Black, Indigenous, and people of color share similar barriers with other historically
marginalized groups such as people with extremely low income, people with disabilities,
  LGBTQIA2S+ communities, women, older adults, and young people (this concept is
known as intersectionality). People of color also tend to experience those barriers more
 deeply due to the pervasive and systemic nature of racism. They experience the most
  disparate outcomes in nearly every category of social well-being, including housing,
            transportation, climate, access to nature, education, and health.

DLCD recognizes that by addressing barriers experienced by Black, Indigenous, and
people of color and centering their wisdom, voice, and experience in the planning
process, the agency can effectively identify equitable solutions that also remove barriers
for other marginalized groups. DLCD commits to practicing racial equity approaches
that intersect with other historically underserved communities in our work so that all
Oregonians can thrive.

Leadership Development and Evaluation
Strategy 1: New Manager Training.
All managers participate in the Foundational Management training program offered by
the Department of Administrative Services. Employees interested in state management
or who serve in lead roles are encouraged to participate in the Emerging Manager
training program. Both programs develop and strengthen participants’ understanding
related to the enterprise manager competencies.

Strategy 2: Continuing progress in promotion of Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion
in the Workplace.
The 2021 State of Oregon DEI Action Plan and DLCD DEI Committee Action Plan are
included in all agency position descriptions. All agency employees are expected to
reference and incorporate priorities and practices included in both documents.
Affirmative action, diversity, equity, and inclusion responsibilities are included in all
management job descriptions.

Strategy 3: Include evaluation of management personnel in effectiveness in
achieving affirmative action objectives.
Agency managers will be evaluated in their effectiveness to advance affirmative action,
diversity, equity, and inclusion priorities as part of their regular performance review
process. The progress of these evaluations will be included in the following Biennium’s
Affirmative Action Plan.

2025-2027 Goals
Goal 1: Create a more inclusive environment for staff using the results of the
Gallup employee survey conducted in May of 2024.
DLCD participated in the Gallup Employee survey to understand concerns and
successes for DLCD’s workplace. DLCD leadership will use the data to further the
feeling of belonging and inclusion with staff to ensure that everyone feels welcomed and
able to express themselves while at work.

DLCD Management will make changes with the support of the staff they supervise.
Creating a welcoming environment requires everyone to be accepting and allowing staff
                                                                                11 | P a g e
and management the encouragement and time to build relationships beyond day-to-day
work. Gallup will be conducting a follow-up survey annually allowing DLCD to be able to
see progress towards this goal and measurable improvement into the future.

Goal 2: Provide training, workshop, and discussion opportunities for DLCD
employees related to DEI topics.
DLCD will continue to prioritize trainings and discussions related to Diversity, Equity,
and Inclusion. The agency’s goal is to be intentional in building and providing an
inclusive and supportive environment for all employees. The agency intends to host
trainings, workshops, and discussion opportunities for all staff. DLCD will continue to
promote and encourage participation in statewide DEI related trainings and events
hosted by the Chief Human Resources Office (CHRO), DAS Office of Cultural Change,
DEI Leaders, and other state agencies.

The responsibility of finding and setting up training will be done by DLCD’s DEI
Committee in partnership with the Affirmative Action Representative. Training is an on-
going goal and remains a priority with other responsibilities of the job. Training will be
completed individually by employees and managers with the assistance of Workday
Training as well as in all-staff meetings as a group. This ensures alignment in goals and
direction in creating a welcoming environment.

Goal 3: Become a diverse, equitable, and inclusive agency that implements an
equitable and inclusive planning program for Oregon.
DLCD recognizes that to successfully meet the agency’s mission and values, our
commitment to diversity, equity, and inclusion must be at the center of our work. The
agency commits to reviewing current policies and procedures such as hiring and
retention, procurement, decision making, grant making, engagement, training, and
communication, to identify actions to create a more diverse, equitable, and inclusive
agency.

As part of DLCD’s Strategic Plan, Management plans to establish, refine, and
implement policy and procedure best practices. This will be done by creating an internal
policy review committee that’s focus will be on updating internal facing policies while
keeping our commitment to racial equity, diversity, equity, and inclusion must be at the
center of our work. Progress towards this goal will be measured by working towards
having all policies reviewed on a regular basis to ensure updates take place as needed.

This will also be done through intentional workforce development as referenced in
DLCD’s strategic plan. Recruit, hire, support, and retain a workforce reflective of the
communities we serve by eliminating barriers and bias within the agency hiring process.
This is achieved by using diverse interview panels to promote inclusivity in the staff and
commission recruitment process; continue to ensure panels receive training on bias and
cultural competency. Workforce development is a great opportunity to promote
inclusivity, belonging, respect, and courtesy in the workplace.
To accomplish this, DLCD will provide clear expectations, assess candidate’s DEI
awareness and commitment to equity, inclusion, racial justice, and honor lived
experiences during the recruitment process – from position descriptions and postings to
interview questions.

                                                                                12 | P a g e
Complaint Options
Informal Complaint
Management and employees are encouraged to bring any complaints of discrimination
immediately to Human Resources to be investigated. There is an intentional goal to
ensure all DLCD staff feel comfortable reaching out to their manager, human resources,
or other staff members and know the complaint will be confidential, taken seriously, and
responded to appropriately. The initial informal concern can be done in person, through
email, phone, Microsoft Teams, or whichever medium the person with the concern feels
is appropriate.

Formal Complaint
DLCD uses the Department of Administrative Services complaint form when a complaint
comes in. This will be followed by sharing the Harassment and Discrimination Free
Workplace Policy and an Opening Letter to the complainant stating the expectations of
the investigation and giving information that retaliation is not permitted. Lastly, the
opening letter also states that this matter will be handled confidentially, and appropriate
action will be taken. This will be followed by an Opening Letter to the subject of the
complaint, giving them the same information and expectations of the investigation.
DLCD’s Human Resource Manager will input the investigation into the enterprise-wide
investigation database on Workday so it is available for statewide reporting. Upon
closure of the complaint, after appropriate action has been taken, the complainant, the
subject, and any witnesses will receive a closure letter indicating the investigation has
been completed. The complaint may be removed from the employee’s file in accordance
with policies set forth in the union contract.

Contact Information and Timeline
Any employee at DLCD that would like to file a complaint should talk to the Human
Resources Manager using the contact information below. All efforts will be made to
ensure a timely resolution to any complaint. A response to the initial report of a
complaint will be made within 15 days of the complaint.

Tyler Potter, Human Resources Manager
635 Capitol Street NE, Suite 150
Salem, OR 97301-2540
Tyler.G.Potter@DLCD.Oregon.gov

Succession Plan
DLCD leadership has created a succession plan to further ensure the success of the
future workforce and continuation of operations. This was done through the review of
critical positions, identifying a development plan to ensure the knowledge transfer of
those positions, and the continuing focus on planning towards the future.

The succession plan focused on two goals for DLCD:
Goal 1: Provide regular new staff orientations, all staff meetings, trainings, and other
means to support and cultivate an employee growth mindset environment, curiosity,
innovation, and creativity.

                                                                                 13 | P a g e
Goal 2: Identify, establish, and communicate development opportunities that align with
employee interests and capacity through regular check-ins. Provide materials and
resources for employee reference.

Contracting
DLCD remains committed to awarding contracts to diverse businesses serving Oregon
where possible. This is done through ensuring that persons of color (POC)-, woman-,
and service-disabled veteran (SDV)-owned businesses don’t face barriers in the State
of Oregon’s (the state’s) construction; professional services; and non-professional
services, goods, and supplies contracts and procurements.

Between July 1, 2017, and June 30, 2022, DLCD spent two of the three million spent on
Certification Office for Business Inclusion and Diversity (COBID) Contracts. This
equates to 13 of our 45 contracts going to COBID-Certified Vendors. This is an area
that is a continual focus for DLCD and due to restructuring and additional positions
DLCD has more capacity to reach out to small businesses, POC-owned businesses,
woman owned businesses, SDV-owned businesses, and other disadvantaged
businesses.

Appendix A – State Policy Documentation

   •   Statewide Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion Action Plan
   •   Executive Order 22-11
   •   ADA and Reasonable Accommodation Policy (Statewide policy 50.020.10)
   •   Discrimination and Harassment Free Workplace (Statewide policy
       50.010.01)
   •   Recruitment and Selection (Statewide policy 40.010.02)
   •   Candidate Preference in Employment (Statewide policy 40.055.04)
   •   Equal Opportunity and Affirmative Action Rule (105.040.0001)

Appendix B – Federal Documentation

   •   Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967 (ADEA)
   •   Disability Discrimination Title I of the Americans with Disability Act of 1990
   •   Genetic Information Discrimination Title II of the Genetic Information
       Nondiscrimination Act of 2008 (GINA)
   •   Equal Pay and Compensation Discrimination Equal Pay Act of 1963
   •   Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 a. National Origin Discrimination
           o Discrimination
           o Race/Color Discrimination
           o Religious Discrimination
           o Sex-Based Discrimination
           o Sexual Harassment
   •   Retaliation Title VII of Civil Agency Affirmative Action Policy




                                                                                 14 | P a g e
