           GRTMENT Og
       g                    )
  ra)&                          ©
 ao                              &
                                    Zz
 a *                    *           oa

 %oO               |            é                U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT
       %
           Bay we                                                WASHINGTON, DC 20410-8000
ASSISTANT SECRETARY FOR HOUSING           —
FEDERAL HOUSING COMMISSIONER



     Special Attention of:                                                  Notice H—2024—3
                                                                            Issued: 01/31/2024
     All Multifamily Regional Center Directors
     All Multifamily Satellite Office Directors                             Expires: This Notice remains in effect
     All Multifamily Asset Management Division                              until amended, superseded, or rescinded
     Directors
     All Multifamily Operations Officers
     All Multifamily Field Counsel
     All Contract Administrators
     All Multifamily Project Owners

SUBJECT: Approval and Processing of Requests to Bifurcate Contracts
I.                     Purpose
                       Bifurcation entails the division of a project-based Section 8 Housing Assistance
                       Payments (HAP) contract into two or more HAP contracts. This Notice explains the
                       standards and conditions a Project Owner must meet to obtain HUD approval for a HAP
                       contract bifurcation. It also describes the processing of approved bifurcation requests.
II.                    Background
                       The Office of Multifamily Housing programs (MFH) views HAP contract bifurcation to
                       be an important asset management and housing preservation tool. There are various
                       reasons for which a Project Owner may seek to bifurcate a HAP contract. With respect to
                       asset management, it may be that the project is comprised of multiple properties that are
                       more appropriately managed as single assets. In terms of housing preservation, it may be
                       that a single project is so large as to require multiple Low Income Housing Tax Credit
                       allocations, which requires subdividing the project into separate projects, each with a
                       distinct ownership entity and HAP (see paragraph IV.B, below).
                       Bifurcation might be used in combination with other tools, such as transfers of budget
                       authority under section 8(bb)! (see paragraph IV.C, below), to reduce the assisted
                       housing footprint in a particular location, either in combination with a redevelopment of
                       the site into higher-density, market-rate housing with an affordable component or without
                       any sort of redevelopment, but simply in the interest of deconcentrating assisted housing
                       units.
                       Bifurcation may also be used in cases where a portion of a project becomes unsafe or
                       uninhabitable, for example as the result of a natural disaster.
Hl.                    Terminology
                       Throughout this Notice, HUD uses the term “bifurcate” to describe the division of a
                       contract, even if the contract will be divided into more than two contracts. HUD refers to
                       the initial contract that is subject to bifurcation as “Contract A” (at “Project A”). HUD



"42 U.S.C. 1437£(bb)


                                                   www.hud.gov         espanol.hud.gov
      refers to the contracts that result from bifurcation as Contracts Al and A2. (All contracts
      other than Contract Al are referred to in this Notice as “Contract A2.”)
IV.   Applicability
      A. This Notice applies to the bifurcation of HAP contracts under all project-based
         Section 8 programs administered by HUD’s Office of Multifamily Housing.
      B.    This Notice does not apply to a request from a Project Owner to assign a HAP
            contract to a new ownership entity. Such requests must be made separately, following
            the applicable HUD procedures. A Project Owner who contemplates requesting the
            assignment of Contract Al or Contract A2 following HUD approval of a HAP
            contract bifurcation is advised to inform their local HUD Account Executive in order
            to facilitate processing of both requests.
           . This Notice does not apply to a request from a Project Owner to transfer the budget
             authority associated with a HAP contract to another HAP contract pursuant to Section
             8(bb) of the United States Housing Act of 1937. A Project Owner who wishes to
             request HUD approval for an 8(bb) transfer following HUD approval of a HAP
             contract bifurcation must do so separately, following the applicable HUD guidance
             (e.g., Notice H 2015-03).
      Bifurcation: Standards for Approval
      A. The proposed bifurcation will facilitate the asset management of a project or the
         preservation of project-based assistance. The request must demonstrate that
         bifurcation is consistent with facilitating the asset management of a HUD-assisted
         project or the long-term preservation of project-based assistance, as determined by
         HUD. For example:
             1.   The HAP may cover:
                  a.     A project comprised of more than one building, where each building, or
                         subset of buildings, would more appropriately be managed as a separate
                         financial asset.
                  b.     A project that must be split into two ownership entities (and thus two HAP
                         contracts) in order to attract capital investment adequate to address the
                         project’s capital needs (for example, in states that cap the amount of 9
                         percent Low Income Housing Tax Credit (LIHTC) awards per owner or
                         where both 9 percent LIHTCs and tax-exempt bonds will be pursued).
            2.    The request to bifurcate a HAP may be a component of a larger preservation
                  strategy, including, for example, a strategy that will entail a subsequent request
                  for HUD approval to transfer budget authority pursuant to section 8(bb),
                  following the applicable HUD guidance.
           . The Project Owner is in good standing with HUD. The Owner of Project A must be in
             good standing with HUD or must be able to demonstrate experience owning HUD-
             assisted or multifamily housing. For example, the Owner must not have any
             unresolved Management and Occupancy Review (MOR) findings; must be current in
            the submission of audited or owner-certified Annual Financial Statements (AFS), if
            applicable; and must be actively vouchering for monthly subsidy for Project A.

                                                page 2 of 14
         C.   The Project Owner is in compliance with all applicable civil rights requirements.”
              HUD’s Office of Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity (FHEO) may review a
              proposed bifurcation request including when the Regional Director (RD) for the
              jurisdiction in which Project A is located has requested such a review. FHEO may
              request additional information, including information about the Owner’s compliance
              with nondiscrimination requirements and the Owner’s obligation to affirmatively
              further fair housing.
              The RD will deny the request for a bifurcation if the Owner of Project A has
              unresolved civil rights matters, as described below:
              1.   Charges from HUD concerning a systemic violation of the Fair Housing Act or
                   cause determination from a substantially equivalent state or local fair housing
                   agency concerning a systemic violation of a substantially equivalent state or local
                   fair housing law proscribing discrimination because of race, color, religion, sex
                   (including sexual orientation and gender identity), national origin, disability, or
                   familial status;
                   Status as a defendant in a Fair Housing Act lawsuit filed by the United States
                   alleging a pattern or practice of discrimination or denial of rights to a group of
                   persons raising an issue of general public importance under 42 U.S.C. 3614(a);
                   Status as a defendant in any other lawsuit filed or joined by the Department of
                   Justice, or in which the Department of Justice has intervened, or filed an amicus
                   brief or statement of interest, alleging a pattern or practice or systemic violation of
                   Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of
                   1973, Section 109 of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, the
                   Americans with Disabilities Act, Violence Against Women Act, or a claim under
                   the False Claims Act related to fair housing, non-discrimination, or civil rights
                   generally including an alleged failure to affirmatively further fair housing;
                   A letter of findings identifying systemic non-compliance with Title VI of the Civil
                   Rights Act of 1964, Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, Section 109 of
                   the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, Violence Against
                   Women Act, or the Americans with Disabilities Act; or
                   A cause determination from a substantially equivalent state or local fair housing
                   agency concerning a systemic violation of provisions of a state or local law
                   prohibiting discrimination in housing based on sexual orientation, gender identity,
                   or lawful source of income.
              As part of the bifurcation request, the Owner of Project A must disclose any of the
              above listed unresolved civil rights matters and whether they are operating under any
              federal, state, or local remedial order, compliance agreement, final judgment, consent
              decree, settlement agreement, or other court order or agreement, including but not
              limited to those related to a fair housing or other civil rights finding of
              noncompliance. If the Owner is operating under such a document, it must provide a



? See 24 C.F.R. 5.105(a).


                                                 page 3 of 14
              citation to the document and attach a narrative description explaining how the
              proposed bifurcation and all associated actions comply with such document.
VI.      Bifurcation: Conditions for Approval
         A request that meets the standards for approval in paragraph V. must also meet certain
         conditions for approval. These conditions vary based on whether the contract is a non-
         M2M HAP contract,          a M2M    HAP contract, ora RAD PBRA HAP contract, as described
         below.
         A. Bifurcation of        anon-M2M HAP contract. The conditions for approval of a request to
              bifurcate    a non-M2M     contract are as follows:

              1.   Unit mix and configuration. The total number of assisted units and the bedroom
                   size of such units across all resulting contracts following bifurcation must equal
                   the number and bedroom size mix of assisted units under Contract A prior to
                   bifurcation.
                   Renewal rents. Immediately following bifurcation, Contracts Al and A2 shall be
                   terminated and renewed with the execution of new renewal Contracts Al and A2
                   (see section IX., Processing Steps; also, make note of item 5, below). All resulting
                   HAP contracts not subject to a Mark-to-Market Use Agreement must be renewed
                   under an Option of the Project Owner’s choice for which the project is eligible.
                   For projects subject to a Mark-to-Market Use Agreement, please refer to
                   paragraph B of this section.
                   Renewal term. Unless the project is subject to a use agreement that cannot be
                   extended for 20 years,’ each new renewal HAP contract resulting from bifurcation
                   must have a term of 20 years. HUD does not require Contracts Al and A2 to be
                   subject to Preservation Exhibits solely as a result of bifurcation. If prior to
                   bifurcation Contract A had a Preservation Exhibit, however, then both Contracts
                   Al and A2 will be subject to Preservation Exhibits, but such Preservation
                   Exhibits shall include only the number of years remaining on Contract A prior to
                   bifurcation.
                   Utility Allowance Adjustment. No utility allowance analysis or adjustment will be
                   required until 12 months following the previous year’s utility adjustment. If the
                   Project Owner chooses to submit a utility analysis or factor adjustment early, in
                   conjunction with the bifurcation request, it will be effective on the date of renewal
                   of the contracts resulting from bifurcation.
                   Transfer of budget authority. If the Project Owner has submitted or intends to
                   submit within 12 months of the Project Owner’s bifurcation request a request to



A Project Owner who wishes to reconfigure units prior to or following bifurcation may request HUD approval to do so
following the procedures outlined in Notice H 2011-03, “Policies and Procedures for the Conversion of Efficiency Units
to One-Bedroom Units.” Although this Notice addresses the conversion of efficiency units to one-bedroom units, it also
establishes the factors HUD will take into account when considering owner requests for the reconfiguration of other unit
types, which HUD will do on a case-by-case basis.
“ See paragraph B.2., below.


                                                      page 4 of 14
                   transfer budget authority pursuant to Section 8(bb) of the Housing Act from either
                   Contract Al or Contract A2, then the timing of termination and renewal for
                   Contracts Al and A2 following the bifurcation shall be governed by Notice H
                   2015-03° or successor guidance rather than this Notice.
         B.   Bifurcation of aM2M contract. In the case of                aM2M HAP contract, the following
              conditions apply:
              1.   Renewal option. Option Three B (1.e., renewal with a Full M2M Renewal
                   Contract) is the only subsequent renewal option for which Contracts Al and A2
                   are eligible while the M2M Use Agreement is in effect.
              2.   Renewal Term. The term of a Full M2M Renewal Contract may not exceed the
                   term of the M2M Use Agreement.° In general, if the project was originally
                   restructured with Market Rents, the Full M2M               Renewal Contract may be
                   extended for a term of 20 years. The M2M Use Agreement will also be extended
                   to be coterminous. If the project was originally restructured with Exception Rents,
                   the M2M     Use Agreement cannot be extended; therefore, the Full M2M                     Renewal
                   Contract may be less than 20 years so both the Renewal Contract and Use
                   Agreement are coterminous.
              3.   Contract rents. The rent level for Contracts Al and A2 will remain unchanged.
                   Rents will be adjusted only in accordance with the terms of the new Full M2M
                   Renewal Contract (i.e., on that contract’s anniversary date, by OCAF).
              4.   Use Agreement. The M2M Use Agreement shall be bifurcated on a pro rata basis
                   according to the number of bedrooms covered by Contracts Al and A2.
              5.   Treatment of Note(s).’ HUD may administratively require the bifurcation of some
                   or all of the outstanding balance (including both principal and any accrued
                   interest) under the Note(s). HUD will amend and restate the Note(s) to allocate
                   the debt on a pro rata basis according to the number of bedrooms that are covered
                   by Contracts Al and A2, respectively. Contracts Al and A2 will remain
                   encumbered by all the mortgage liens and use agreements associated with such
                   Note(s). The Return to Owner, Surplus Cash, and the resulting payments to HUD
                   under the Note(s) shall be calculated based on the entirety of the projects



> Transferring Budget Authority of a Project-Based Section 8 Housing Assistance Payments Contract under Section
8(bb)(1) of the United States Housing Act of 1937

© Please see Section 5-5 of the Section 8 Renewal Guide for the specific requirements pertaining to M2M properties
while the M2M Use Restriction is in place.

7 Through the M2M restructuring, HUD adjusts the rents down to market and the owner obtains a new first mortgage
loan that is supportable at the new rents. In most M2M restructuring transactions, HUD pays off a portion of the existing
FHA-insured or HUD-held formerly insured first mortgage through a one-time, non-default payment of claim made on
behalf of the owner. HUD documents the owner’s continuing obligation to repay this amount through a Mortgage
Restructuring Note (“MRN7”) and/or a Contingent Repayment Note (“CRN”). The Demo Program, a precursor to M2M,
operated in much the same way, with the owner’s obligation documented by one or more “Demo Notes.” Except as
otherwise specified, for the remainder of this Notice, the term “M2M” shall be used to mean either M2M    or the Demo
Program, and the term “Note(s)” shall be used to mean an MRN, CRN, or Demo Note.



                                                       page 5 of 14
                   encumbered by the mortgage liens associated with the Note(s).
       C.    Bifurcation of aRAD PBRA HAP contract. In the case of aRAD PBRA HAP
             contract, the total budget authority must be equal to or less than the budget authority
             under the original contract. The total number of units under both contracts must equal
             the total number of units under the original contract. Contracts Al and A2 will use the
             same form of RAD PBRA HAP contract that was used at conversion and maintain its
             terms (e.g., rent adjustments, mandatory contract renewal at expiration for projects
             converted from public housing or 202 PRAC assistance, etc.), except that HUD will
             require that, at a minimum, the term of the original contract be maintained for the
             contracts that result from bifurcation. For example, if bifurcation occurs in year 7 of a
             20-year RAD PBRA HAP contract, HUD will require the resulting Contracts Al and
             A2 to have terms of at least 13 years. The resulting Contracts Al and A2 will retain
             the Contract A anniversary date.
             HUD has developed a “Bifurcation Exhibit” that must be executed as part of        aRAD
             PBRA HAP contract bifurcation (see Attachment II). At the end of the original RAD
             PBRA HAP contract term, the contract will be eligible for renewal in accordance with
             the RAD statute and the Section 8 Renewal Policy Guidebook.
VIL.   Required Contents of Project Owner’s Bifurcation Request to HUD
       To request HUD approval for a bifurcation, the Project Owner must submit the following
       information (as applicable) to the Regional Director (RD) for the geographic location in
       which Project A is located:
       A. A narrative statement with supporting documentation explaining why bifurcation is
          necessary to facilitate the asset management of a HUD-assisted project or the long-
          term preservation of assistance.
            . A description of any redevelopment activities for which a Project Owner intends to
              seek HUD approval following HUD’s approval of the Project Owner’s bifurcation
              request. The description must include the anticipated timeline for the conduct and
              completion of redevelopment activities, the improvements to be made, and the
              benefits to tenants;
       C.    A copy of the original HAP contract and the any renewal contract that is currently in
             place;
       D. A description of the proposed bifurcation, including:
              1.   The number and bedroom counts of units assisted under Contract A;
             2.    The number of HAP contracts into which Contract A will be divided; and
             3.    The proposed number and bedroom counts of assisted units at Contracts Al and
                   A2 following bifurcation.




                                               page 6 of 14
         E.     Requests to renew Contracts Al and A2 for 20-year terms.® The requests must
                comply with the requirements of the Section 8 Renewal Policy Guidebook.’ The
                Owner is advised to contact the RD prior to submitting a bifurcation request to learn
                what additional materials may be required to support the subsequent request for a
                renewal. Examples of such materials include, but are not limited to, a capital needs
                assessment, a sources and uses statement, a document showing financing terms, a
                LIHTC commitment or award letter, or a statement from a current lender consenting
                to the bifurcation and renewal. Note that HUD approval of the bifurcation request
                does not constitute HUD approval of a renewal request, which must be considered
                separately.
              . Acopy of any Use Agreement to which Project A is subject. HUD program counsel
                will be consulted on any request that involves the bifurcation of a Use Agreement.
              . For any project that is assisted under a RAD PBRA HAP contract or was restructured
                under the M2M program, additional materials may be required depending on
                activities for which an Owner intends to request HUD approval following HUD
                approval of the bifurcation request (e.g., sale or refinance). The Owner is advised to
                contact the Office of Recapitalization to learn what, if any, additional materials or
                approvals will be required.
         The RD will require up to 14 calendar days to review the request for completeness. For
         any requests that are found to be incomplete, the RD will determine whether to return the
         application to the Project Owner or to request specific items by a specific date in order to
         avoid the return of the incomplete application.
VI.      HUD         Review
         After determining that a request for bifurcation is complete, the RD will evaluate the
         request. If the RD does not support the request, s/he will notify the Project Owner, citing
         specific reasons for the denial. If the RD supports the request, the RD will issue a
         memorandum to the Director of the Office of Asset Management and Portfolio Oversight
         (OAMPO). The memorandum will describe the proposed bifurcation and state the reason
         for which the RD supports the request. OAMPO will review all materials and either
         approve or deny the request. If OAMPO denies the request, it will notify the Owner. If
         OAMPO approves the Project Owner’s request, then HUD will process the bifurcation
         (see section IX., below).
IX.      Processing Steps Upon HUD Approval of a Project Owner’s Request to Bifurcate
         This section describes the steps involved in bifurcating Contract               A once HUD approval
         for bifurcation has been provided.
         A.     HUD will duplicate the original HAP contract and, if it has been renewed, the
                renewal contract currently in effect. The result will be:
                1.    Contract Al: Original HAP contract and renewal contract in effect.



8 See, however, section VI.B.2.

? See footnote 4. In some cases, the term of the M2M HAP contract may be less than 20 years.


                                                     page 7 of 14
                2.   Contract A2: Original HAP contract and renewal contract in effect.
           B.   For Contract Al, the existing HAP contract number will be retained. HUD will apply
                anew HAP contract number to Contract A2 (the duplicated documents from step A).
                The result will be:
                1.   Contract Al: Original HAP contract and renewal contract in effect; existing HAP
                     contract number retained.
                2.   Contract A2: Original HAP contract and renewal contract in effect; new contract
                     number applied.”
           C.   HUD will amend the rent schedules associated with Contracts Al and A2 to reflect
                the unit mix and the configuration of each renewal contract. The result will be:
                1.   Contract Al: Original HAP contract and renewal contract in effect; existing HAP
                     contract number retained. Rent schedule revised to reflect reduced number of
                     units assisted, with no change in unit configuration of assisted units.
                2.   Contract A2: Duplicate of Contract Al; new contract number applied. Rent
                     schedule revised to reflect reduced number of units assisted, with no change in
                     unit configuration of assisted units.
                The amendments must have an effective date and be signed by the Contract
                Administrator and the Project Owner.
           D.   Except for RAD PBRA HAP contracts in their initial term, HUD will terminate
                Contracts Al and A2 and issue a new 20-year renewal contract for each one,'! !
                attaching the original HAP contract to each renewal contract. If Contract                A was
                subject to a Preservation Exhibit, then each renewal contract must include the
                Preservation Exhibit included as Attachment I to this Notice. The result will be:
                1.   Contract Al: New 20-year renewal contract with materials from Paragraph C(1)
                     above and Preservation Exhibit included as attachments.
                2.   Contract A2: New 20-year renewal contract with materials from Paragraph C(2)
                     above and Preservation Exhibit included as attachments.
                Steps C. and D. must occur on the same date.
           E.   HUD will ensure that the resulting contracts are accurately reflected in HUD systems
                (including iREMS). The term, rents, and number of units on each HAP should reflect
                the rent schedules described in Step C.
X.         Contract Administration
           If Contract    A is administered by a Performance-Based Contract Administrator (PBCA),



'0 The Field Funding Specialist will request a new HAP contract number using the Financial Operations Branch
SharePoint site:
https://hudgov.sharepoint.com/sites/DASMFH/OHACAO/FOD/FOD            Funding/Lists/s8   num   requests/AllItems.aspx

'] See footnote 4 for M2M HAP contracts.

     See, however, paragraph V.B.2.


                                                    page 8 of 14
      then, following bifurcation, Contract A2 will be assigned to the PBCA, according to the
      assignment process established by the Contract Administration Branch, with the result
      being that both Contracts Al and A2 will be assigned to the PBCA. Bifurcation itself will
      not trigger the need for an MOR.
XI.   Paperwork Reduction Act
      The information collection requirements in this Housing Notice are approved under OMB
      Approval number 2502—0587, issued under the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995 (44
      U.S.C. 3501-3520). In accordance with the Paperwork Reduction Act, an agency may
      not conduct or sponsor, and a person is not required to respond to, a collection of
      information unless the collection displays a currently valid OMB control number.



                                               Julia R. Gordon
                                               Assistant Secretary for Housing — FHA
                                               Commissioner




                                          page 9 of 14
Attachment I



                                         PRESERVATION             EXHIBIT


        Subject to all applicable laws and regulations in effect upon expiration, the
Renewal Contract shall renew automatically for a term of            year(s)! beginning on
       2 This requirement shall be binding on the Owner and the Contract Administrator,
as identified in section 1 of the Renewal Contract, and on all their successors and
assigns.




' Enter the number of years remaining on Contract A prior to bifurcation. If less than 1 year remained on
Contract A prior to bifurcation, enter the number “1.”
” Enter the date of the first day after expiration of the initial or renewal contract.
Attachment II




                  UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF
                HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT
      OFFICE OF MULTIFAMILY HOUSING PROGRAMS
        BIFURCATION OF PROJECT-BASED SECTION 8
       HOUSING ASSISTANCE PAYMENTS CONTRACT
                   ISSUED UNDER THE
          RENTAL ASSISTANCE DEMONSTRATION
FOR THE MULTIFAMILY HOUSING PROJECT KNOWN AS
                        ** [Project Name]__”
            (SECTION   8 PROJECT   NUMBER       )
This instrument, “Bifurcation of Project-Based Section 8 HAP Contract for the Multifamily
Housing Project Known as ‘             ’ (Section 8 Project Number          y’ @ Bifurcation’),
provides as follows:
I.     RECITALS
       A.      The United States of America, acting by and through the Secretary of the
               Department of Housing and Urban Development (“HUD”), and __ [Name of Current
               Owner|___, entered into a project-based Section 8 HAP Contract on _[Signature
               Date]__ and _[Signature Date]__, respectively, as authorized under the Rental
               Assistance Demonstration (“RAD”). See Consolidated and Further Continuing
               Appropriations Act, 2012, Pub. L. No. 112-55 (approved Nov.18, 2011) as
               amended. The Section 8 Project Number is             . Section | identifies the
               project name as “          .’ The HAP Contract shall be referred to herein as
               “Original RAD HAP Contract.”
               Section | of the Original RAD HAP Contract reflects an effective date of            ,
               and a term of twenty (20) years. Section | reflects a total of        covered units
               (__ 1-BR units, _— 2-BR units, __ 3-BR units, and__ 4-BR units) located at the
               following site(s): __[address]__.
               The Original RAD HAP Contract was executed on the contract form in use at that
               time for conversions under RAD from
               LU      Public housing
               LU      Project Rental Assistance Contracts
               LU      Section 8 Moderate Rehabilitation or Single Room Occupancy
               LU      Rent Supplement
               LU      Rental Assistance Payment to project-based section 8.
               [LIHTC Only] In __[Year]__,     __ [Name of Current Owner]__ was awarded Low-
               Income Housing Tax Credits (“LIHTC”) to rehabilitate _ [Project Name]__. To
               accommodate the LIHTC structure, the project buildings and improvements for
               _[Project Name]_ were transferred via a ground lease to __[New Tax Credit Entity]_.
               _[Name of Current Owner]_ retained ownership of the land.
               HUD has agreed to a request by _[Name of Current Owner]__to bifurcate the
               Original RAD HAP Contract to reflect the resulting two projects. One of the
               resulting HAP Contracts will cover __ units located on the _[Project Names]_ site,
               the Owner of which shall be _[Name of Owner]__. This project shall be known as
                          ” and shall retain the Section 8 Project Number of the Original RAD
               HAP Contract (i.e., Section 8 Project Number of             ).
               The other resulting HAP Contract will cover __ units at the _[Project Name]___ site,
               the Owner of which shall be _[Name of Owner]__. This project shall be known as
               .          ”. The Section 8 Project Number for this project is
               Both HAP Contracts shall have an effective date of               and aterm of __ years
               and     months.
           The initial rents of the HAP contracts shall follow the rent schedule previously in
           effect for the original HAP contract, adjusted by the applicable OCAF.
           The contracts shall retain the same Anniversary date of the original HAP contract,
           which shall be
Il.   BIFURCATION, REPLACEMENT OF ORIGINAL RAD HAP CONTRACT WITH
      TWO RAD HAP CONTRACTS, AND AMENDMENT
      A.   After bifurcation, the Original RAD HAP Contract shall be replaced by two project-
           based rental assistance RAD HAP Contracts, one for _[Project Name]__; the other
           for _[Project Name]_, as detailed above. Both HAP Contracts shall be executed on
           the same Form as the original RAD HAP (such as HUD-52620 for RAD Public
           Housing PBRA conversions) and shall be governed by all of its terms, except for
           section 2.1(b) (“Condition of the Property”), which is hereby amended to read as
           follows:
           “The Owner warrants that the rental units to be leased by the Owner under the HAP
           Contract are in decent, safe, and sanitary condition (as defined and determined in
           accordance with HUD regulations and procedures). The Owner further warrants that
           it will remedy any defects or omissions covered by this warranty throughout the
           initial term and during any renewal term of the HAP Contract.”
           All other terms of the HAP Contracts shall remain the same.
              [The remainder of this page has been left blank intentionally. ]
                                         SIGNATURE PAGE
Name of Project:                 [PROJECT NAME]
Name of Project Owner:           [OWNER NAME]


Signature of authorized representative


Name of signatory (print or type)


Official title (print or type)


Date (mm/dd/yyyy)


Name of Project:                 [PROJECT NAME]
Name of Project Owner:           [OWNER NAME]


Signature of authorized representative


Name of signatory (print or type)


Official title (print or type)


Date (mm/dd/yyyy)


United States of America Secretary of Housing and Urban Development



Signature of authorized representative


Name of signatory (print or type)


Official title (print or type)


Date (mm/dd/yyyy)
