Projects | Metro Skip to main content collapse all Events News and stories Tools and data Contact Language hub Metro logo, to the homepage Open menu Close menu What Metro does show menu hide menu What Metro does Projects Connecting regional priorities Garbage and recycling system Housing and homelessness Land use and development Parks and nature investments Transportation Tools and data Get involved show menu hide menu Get involved Give your input Committees Find funding Public engagement Waste disposal and prevention show menu hide menu Waste disposal and prevention Need to get rid of something? Healthy living and waste reduction Report dumped garbage Education resources Parks and cemeteries show menu hide menu Parks and cemeteries Parks Boat ramps Cemeteries Reservations and services Safety and policies About Metro show menu hide menu About Metro Metro Council Metro Auditor MERC Structure and operations Civil rights at Metro Accessibility at Metro Equity at Metro Doing business with Metro Public records Jobs Events News and stories Tools and data Contact Language hub Search Search Open search Close search Search Search Projects Explore what Metro is working on around the region. Browse public projects, see what’s happening near you and dive into details, updates and ways to get involved. Search Submit Filters Filter results Project type Improvement (6) Investment (1) Plan (8) Policy (1) Study (1) Initiatives Economy (1) Environment (1) Equity (2) Garbage and recycling (2) Housing and homelessness (1) Land and transportation (6) Parks and nature (3) Visitor venues (1) Zoo (0) Apply filters 1 - 12 of 17 results found Plan Future Vision: a 50-year regional vision Metro is bringing together communities across greater Portland to create a 50-year visionary outlook for the region. Equity Plan Regional housing coordination strategy Metro is collaborating with cities, counties and the State of Oregon to promote housing production and access in the region. Housing and homelessness Study Community connector transit study Metro is exploring how smaller, more flexible solutions could make transit easier to access and more convenient. Land and transportation Plan Regional Transportation Demand Management strategy Metro is developing a 10-year strategy to improve residents’ access to transportation demand management programs and services. Land and transportation Improvement Willamette Cove cleanup and future nature park Learn how Metro and the Port of Portland are cleaning up the land at Willamette Cove and weigh in on the design of the future nature park. Parks and nature Improvement Chinese cemetery memorial at Lone Fir Garden Metro is creating a cultural heritage and healing garden on ground that was once the Chinese section of the historic cemetery. Parks and nature Plan 2023 Regional Transportation Plan As the planning organization for the Portland area, Metro is authorized to coordinate and plan transportation investments in Clackamas, Multnomah and Washington counties. This is done through updates to the Regional Transportation Plan every 5 years. Improvement 82nd Avenue transit project Planning and design work are underway to improve access and transit travel time on 82nd Avenue while connecting people to essential jobs, education facilities, shopping and community services. Land and transportation Improvement Tualatin Valley Highway transit and safety project The TV Highway transit and safety project will improve safe access and transit travel time while connecting people to essential jobs, healthcare facilities, shopping and community services from downtown Beaverton to Forest Grove. Land and transportation Plan Regional System Facilities Plan How do we build a system that reduces waste and increases access, while maintaining affordability? Learn how Metro is planning to expand and improve reuse, recycling and garbage facilities in greater Portland. Garbage and recycling Improvement Blue Lake Regional Park improvements People have come to Blue Lake for generations to gather, play, and connect with nature. But the infrastructure at the park is aging, and improvements are needed to keep Blue Lake Regional Park fun, safe and welcoming. Parks and nature Improvement Expo Future The Portland Expo Center has a complex history that needs acknowledgment. It also requires a long-term plan for financial sustainability. The Expo Future project exists to address these issues. Visitor venues, Equity, Economy Pagination Current page 1 Last page 2 Next Opportunities Give your input Jobs Grants and funding Contracts Services Ask a garbage and recycling expert Apply for a contractor's business license Buy a parks pass Buy a cemetery plot Pay my SHS tax Find information for Metro employees Get language assistance Get ADA assistance Leadership Metro Council Who is my councilor? Metro Auditor MERC Committees Metro logo, to the home page Whether your roots in the region run generations deep or you moved to Oregon last week, you have your own reasons for loving this place — and Metro wants to keep it that way. Help shape the future of the greater Portland region and discover tools, services and places that make life better today. Contact Metro 503-797-1700 Relay service 711 Send a message Oregon Convention Center Oregon Zoo Portland Expo Center Portland'5 Centers for the Arts Find Metro on Facebook X LinkedIn Instagram YouTube Blue Sky © Oregon Metro. All rights reserved.