 »e “0%.     LOCAL AND REGIONAL
.° e@e *.    GOVERNMENT ALLIANCE ON
    ~
        -    RACE & EQUITY


            Racia
               ul
            Aation
            Plans
            A How-to Manual

            by Ryan Curren, Julie Nelson, Dwayne S. Marsh, Simran Noor, and Nora Liu
                          e » | LOCAL AND REGIONAL
                 e.      e*-        GOVERNMENT            ALLIANCE         ON
                      °°.           RACE & EQUITY

              This toolkit is published by the
         Government Alliance on Race and Equity,
 a national network of government working to achieve
     racial equity and advance opportunities for all.


                                            AUTHORS
 Ryan Curren, Julie Nelson, Dwayne S. Marsh, Simran Noor, and Nora Liu


                                    ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

            The authors would like to thank the following individuals
     who contributed to this guide by participating in interviews and editing:
             Rachelle Galloway-Popotas, Ebonye Gussine Wilkins


                                     REPORT      CITATION
                   Curren R., Nelson, J., Marsh, D.S., Noor, S., Liu, N.
                   "Racial Equity Action Plans,        A How-to Manual”:
                      Haas Institute for a Fair and Inclusive Society,
                          University of California, Berkeley, 2016




                               GARE is a joint project of

sv     naas            institute             (   A j    CENTER FOR SOCIAL INCLUSION
Ss     FOR   A FAIR AND INCLUSIVE    IETY
7]




                                RACIALEQUITYALLIANCE.ORG
TABLE OF CONTENTS

Executive SUMMALY ...........::::ccssccecssseeesssseeessseeees 4
          Achieving Local Government's
          Vision of Racial Equity oo...                                         6
          Articulating a Theory of Change
          for the JUTISCICTION 20... eects eeeeeeeeeeen 6
          Action Planning PIoCesS ......cccccccceeeccee 9
PTL@PaLAatlON ...........c22:ccceesssseeeeesssceeeensssceeeesssaeeseessaes 10
          Staffing Leads and Racial Equity
          ACTION TCAMS 0o.cccccccccccccccesesessetesestetesetereaeseen 10
           Organizational Structure and Scale........ 12
           Community Engagement uu...                                         12
          RESOUICES ooo. .ecccccccccccccceecseetescseetseetseseeteeseenes 13
Research and
Organizational Assessment .............:.:s:0ssseee 14
Research Find In               ..............:::cssssseesssseeessseeeesseeeees 18
The Plann ............::ccccscccccssceceesseeeessceeessseeeessseeensseeess 19
Review and Finalizing
the Plan .............:::ccssccccesseecessseeeseseceeessseeeessseeessseeess 24
          Roll Out and Implementation.......00.c.... 25
          Annual Progress Reporting .........ccccce 26
CONCIUSION .............2:::cccsscccesssseeesssceeessnseeessseeeesseeess 27
                                                                                       TOOLKIT
PN)                ee                                                         28    Racial Equity
                                                                                    Action Plans
          Racial Equity Plan Template........00.c... 28                              Government
                                                                                     Alliance on
                                                                                    Race and Equity
EXECUTIVE                           SUMMARY
While local governments may consider themselves fair and just, people of color fare worse
than their white counterparts 1n every area: housing, employment, education, justice, and
health. Current day disparities are just as bad and sometimes worse than they were before
the Civil Rights era. Since then, most governments have not made significant changes in
outcomes for employees or residents of color, even with years of effort.

Because local governments have a unique responsibility to all residents, these racial ineq-
uities can and must be addressed. The public sector must be for the public
good; current racial inequities are destructive. We must go beyond individ-
ual, intentional discrimination or acts of bigotry, and examine the systems
in which we all live. We must investigate—honestly—how our longstanding                 WHAT IS RACIAL EQUITY?
systems, policies, and practices, unintentionally or not, have created and              Racial equity is realized when race
continue to maintain racial inequity, and we must change them.                             can no longer be used to predict
                                                         .       .          .              life outcomes, and outcomes for all
Racial Equity Action Plans can put a theory of change into action to achieve               groups are improved.
a collective vision of racial equity. Plans can drive institutional and struc-                                                :
tural change. However, the goal we seek is not a plan. The goal is institu-
tional and structural change, which requires resources to implement: time,
money, skills, and effort. It requires local governments’ will and expertise to
change our policies, the way we do business, our habits, and cultures.

Our theory of change requires normalizing conversations about race, making sure we have
a shared understanding of commonly held definitions of implicit bias and institutional and
structural racism. Normalizing and prioritizing our efforts creates greater urgency and
allows change to take place more expeditiously. We must also operationalize racial equity,
integrating racial equity into our routine decision-making processes, often via use of a
Racial Equity Tool and development and implementation of measurable actions. Opera-
tionalizing a vision for racial equity means implementation of new tools for decision-mak-
ing, measurement, and accountability. We also organize, both inside our institutions and
in partnership with others, to effect change together. Organizing involves building staff
and organizational capacity through training for new skills and competencies while also
building internal infrastructure to advance racial equity.

This manual provides guidance for local governments to develop their own Racial Equity
Action Plans after a period of research and information gathering. This manual also pro-
vides guidance and tools to conduct this research. GARE created a Racial Equity Action
Plan template after a national scan of promising practices from cities and counties that
have developed plans for racial equity and the structures that supported successful plan-
ning processes. We are also appreciative of the Results Based Accountability framework
as a disciplined way of thinking and taking action that communities and government can
use to achieve meaningful improvements, eliminate racial inequities and lift up outcomes
for all.

Racial Equity Plans are both a process and a product. A successful process will build staff
capacity which can be valuable during implementation. A process can also serve to famil-
larize more staff with the jurisdiction’s racial equity vision and its theory of change.
                                                                                                                        TOOLKIT

Preparing leadership support, forming a skilled planning team, designing community en-                              Racial Equity
gagement structures upfront, and securing resources to support all participants are key                             Action Plans
preparatory steps Key to set the process on the right path. Your research must not only in-                           Government
fluence the content of your plan but also how it is framed. The methodology should include                             Alliance on
                                                                                                                     Race and Equity
both quantitative and qualitative data collected through community engagement. A clear
set of findings can provide a solid foundation to inform your plan. Areas to analyze include:

         workforce demographics, hiring, retention, and promotion;
         contracting practices;
         jurisdiction commitment, leadership, and management;
         community access and partnership; and
         data, metrics, and on-going focus on improvement.



Figure 1: The Racial Equity Action Plan Process

                        Research and                                          Implementation,
                         Information                                           Reporting, and
                          Gathering                                              Evaluation




A strong Racial Equity Action Plan is guided by a clear vision of racial equity and struc-
tured to achieve meaningful and measurable results. A simple plan structure provided by
GARE includes the following components:

         Results: Community level conditions we are aiming to impact.
         Community Indicator: Community indicators are the means by which we can
         measure impact in the community. Community indicators should be disaggregat-
         ed by race.
         Outcome: A future state of being resulting from a change at the jurisdiction, de-
         partment, or program level. Strong outcomes articulate a clear improvement or
         define how much improvement will take place.
         Action: They are the specific things your jurisdiction will do to achieve the out-
         comes.
         Performance Measure: A quantifiable measure of how well an action is
         working. Different types of measures include 1) Quantity-How much did
         we do? 2) Quality—How well did we do it? 3) Impact-Is anyone better off?


Successfully implementing a plan will require well-resourced stewardship, strong ac-
countability structures, and clear communications with all partners during the rollout and
beyond. An organizational body, with authority to remove barriers during implementation
and monitor progress, is critical infrastructure over the life of the plan. Regular tracking of
performance and reporting on progress provides a level of accountability to follow through
on the jurisdiction’s commitment to action. Using data and the opportunity to reflect de-
velops a culture of learning and innovation to improve upon commitments in the plan over
its lifetime. The quality and consistency of communication about the plan both within the
government and with community will be a major indicator of whether the plan is another
exercise In maintaining the status quo or whether it is truly the harbinger of your jurisdic-
tion’s commitment to advancing racial equity.

                                                                                                     TOOLKIT
                                                                                                  Racial Equity
ACHIEVING LOCAL GOVERNMENT'S VISION                                                               Action Plans
OF RACIAL EQUITY                                                                                   Government
A jurisdiction's clear and bold vision for racial equity is important for the success of a Ra-     Alliance on
                                                                                                  Race and Equity
cial Equity Action Plan. The vision should be heavily informed by communities of color
impacted by institutional and structural racism—those with the real expertise. Your ju-
risdiction may already have made a formal commitment to achieving racial equity and
expressed this through adoption of legislation, a general plan, or executive proclamation. If
so, then Racial Equity Action Plans can layout the approach to operationalizing this com-
mitment. If not, then Racial Equity Action Plans are an excellent opportunity to make such
a commitment paired with the change necessary to achieve it. Figure 2 shows the City
of Portland’s Citywide Racial Equity Goals and Strategies, adopted unanimously by City
Council as binding policy in 2015.

By embarking on a planning process you are are undergoing a reprioritization of your work
and changing long-standing systems and structures. You are creating a shared practice
and forming relationships across the jurisdiction's structure. Creating a cul-
ture of learning and reflection to improve upon the work as you go is essen-
tial. You are expanding a field of practice, building off of the experiences of
local governments directly addressing racial inequities, and have the oppor-           WHAT IS MY JURISDICTION
tunity to break relatively new ground. Your planning process is an opportu-
                                                                                       ISN’T READY BUT MY
                                                                                       DEPARTMENT IS?
nity to take a step back and ask engaging questions, Knowing that you may
not have the answers, and set an actionable course toward achieving racial             The framework and approach to
equity. GARE, your peers, and our network of national partners are all here to         creating Racial Equity Action Plans
help you, and to share resources and promising practices.                              presented in the manual is also
                                                                                       applicable to departments within
                                                                                       a jurisdiction. Most often jurisdic-
                                                                                       tions beginning to focus on racial
ARTICULATING A THEORY OF CHANGE FOR THE                                                equity have only a small number of
JURISDICTION                                                                           departments with any emphasis on
                                                                                       racial equity or the infrastructure to
The ultimate goal of a jurisdiction’s racial equity work should be to eliminate        support the work. A department
racial inequities and improve outcomes for all racial groups. Government               with some foundation to build a
played a primary role in the creation of racial inequities, including laws, pol-       Racial Equity Action Plan upon is
icles, and practices that created racial inequities. Our ideas of “equality and        a good place to start. A strong
justice” have shifted over time, and we now have collective values for a more          director with capable staff and
inclusive democracy. To achieve our aspirations and to get to different out-           good community partnerships can
comes, we will need to fundamentally transform government. This requires               develop a plan to serve as a model
high level leadership, committed action teams, supportive community lead-              or proof of concept for the entire
ers, and effective structures and practices. But what guides this change?              jurisdiction.

A new theory of change to achieve racial equity should guide your jurisdic-
tion and its plan to make transformative change. GARE’s recommended the-
ory of change does the following!:

    1.   Normalize—Establish racial equity as a key value by developing a shared under-
         standing of key concepts across the entire jurisdiction and create a sense of ur-
         gency to make changes.
    2.   Organize—Build staff and organizational capacity, skills, and competencies
         through training while also building infrastructure to support the work, like in-
         ternal organizational change teams and external partnerships with other institu-
         tions and community.
    3.   Operationalize—Put theory into action by implementing new tools for deci-
                                                                                                                      TOOLKIT
         sion-making, measurement, and accountability like a Racial Equity Tool and de-
                                                                                                                   Racial Equity
         veloping a Racial Equity Action Plan.                                                                     Action Plans

                                                                                                                    Government
                                                                                                                    Alliance on
1   GARE Resource Guide                                                                                            Race and Equity
This theory of change can be measured over time to track progress and impacts, both with-
in the organization and in the community. Activities can be quantified like the number
of employees trained, number of departments with Racial Equity Action Plans, number
of times a Racial Equity Tool is used to address institutional and structural barriers, or
number of community members partnering with the jurisdiction to advance racial equity.
Outcomes can also be quantified by measuring the improved knowledge of racial equity
Figure 2: City of Portland Citywide Racial Equity Goals and Strategies

                                                                                                                  soy, OFFICE of EQUITY
 CITYWIDE RACIAL EQUITY GOALS & STRATEGIES                                                                       gg72% and
                                                                                                                       and HUMAN
                                                                                                                            HUMAN RIGHTS
                                                                                                                                    RIGHTS



 We   will end          racial disparities
 within      city   government,          so        Use   a   racial   equity   framework:
 there is fairness in hiring              and      Use a racial equity framework that clearly articulates racial equity;   implicit and explicit
 promotions     greater                            bias; and individual, institutional, and structural racism.
                    3

 opportunities in contracting,
 and equitable services to all
 residents.                                        Build organizational capacity:
                                                   Commit to the breadth and depth of institutional transformation so that impacts are
                                                   sustainable. While the leadership of electeds and officials is critical, changes take place
                                                   on the ground, through building infrastructure that creates racial equity experts and
              EQUITY        GOAL    #2             teams throughout the city government.


 We will strengthen outreach,                      Implementa racial equity lens:
  public engagement      and access                Racial inequities are not random; they have been created and sustained over time.
  to City services for ;                           Inequities will not disappear on their own. It is essential to use a racial equity lens when
  communities of color and                         changing the policies, programs, and practices that perpetuate inequities, and when
 bs     .                                          developing new policies and programs.
 immigrant and refugee
 communities, and support                     or   Becatordniven:
 change       existing services using              Measurement must take place at two levels—first, to measure the success of specific
 racial   equity        best   practices.          programmatic and policy changes; and second, to develop baselines, set goals, and
                                                   measure progress. Using data in this manner is necessary for accountability.



                                                   Partner with other institutions and communities:
              EQUITY        GOAL    #3             Government work on racial equity is necessary, but insufficient. To achieve racial equity in
                                                   the community, government needs to work in partnership with communities and
 We   will    collaborate        with              institutions to achieve meaningful results.
 communities and institutions to
 eliminate racial inequity in all
 areas of government, including                    Operate with urgency and accountability:
 education, criminal justice,                      When change is a priority, urgency is felt and change is embraced. Building in
 environmental justice, health,                    institutional accountability mechanisms using a clear plan of action will allow
 housing, transportation, and                      accountability. Collectively, we must create greater urgency and public commitment              to
          .                                        achieve racial equity.
 economic success.



concepts among employees, increased skills to work on and communicate about racial
equity, and the changes made due to racial equity considerations being integrated into
decision-making structures. We must also focus on our desired results in the community,
those conditions we are aiming to impact. Community indicators are the means by which
we can measure impact in the community, with clear focus on closing racial disparities,
and lift up success for all groups.




                                                                                                                                                           TOOLKIT
                                                                                                                                                        Racial Equity
                                                                                                                                                        Action Plans

                                                                                                                                                         Government
                                                                                                                                                         Alliance on
                                                                                                                                                        Race and Equity
This higher level strategic thinking is helpful in advance of developing Racial Equity Ac-
tion Plans but does not need to be exhaustive and should not impede your process. Some
simple exercises can help you stay focused on racial equity and the above framework. Ask
the following effective questions:

        What conditions of well-being do we want for our community?
        Why do these conditions exist differently for people of color? Ask your self “Why
        else?” 3-5 times to get deeper into the institutional and structural issues at play.
        What would these conditions look like if we achieved them?
        What measures can we use to quantify these conditions?
        Who are the partners with a role to play?
        What works to “turn the curve’ of the baseline inequities?
        What do we propose to do?
A jurisdiction's racial equity work needs to be transformative. This means work should cut
across multiple institutions and practices, and the focus should be on changing policy and
organizational culture. Work will alter the ways institutions operate. It will shift cultural
values and create greater political will to advance racial equity.

Transactional changes are those that help individuals negotiate existing the structures but
leave those structures in place. They may result in short-term gains for communities and/
or employees of color but do little to ensure those gains will be lasting.

With a clear vision for racial equity, transactional approaches can help position a jurisdic-
tion for more transformational work. To do this effectively requires an on-going focus on
organizing, operationalizing, and normalizing.




Figure 3: Transactional Approaches vs Transformative Approaches
a




                               * Issue-based
    Transactional              * Help individuals negotiate existing structures.
                               * Solutions “transact” with institutions
      approaches               * Short-term gains for communities, but leave the existing
                                 structure in place



                               * Cut across multiple institutions
    Transformative             * Focus on policy and organizational culture
                               - Alter the ways institutions operate
      approaches               : Shift cultural values and political will to create racial
                                equity




                                                                                                   TOOLKIT
                                                                                                Racial Equity
                                                                                                Action Plans

                                                                                                 Government
                                                                                                 Alliance on
                                                                                                Race and Equity
ACTION PLANNING PROCESS
Recommended steps for developing and implementing a Racial Equity Action Plan are out-
lined below. The details in each of the steps may vary between jurisdictions, depending on
the size, structure, and resources your have available. It is much better to be pragmatic and
focused so that the plan you develop sets your jurisdiction on the path to achieving racial
equity.

We recommend designing your work plan to produce three products for broader commu-
nication:

        Research Findings
        Racial Equity Action Plan

        Annual Updates



                        Research and                                        Implementation,
                       Organizational                                        Reporting, and
                        Assessment                                             Evaluation




Racial Equity Action Teams can work with their leadership to develop agreed-upon deci-
sion making protocols and processes for vetting each of these products internally. We'll
share more about these products in the next sections of this guide.

Note, some jurisdictions have the advantage of existing strategic plans with committed
goals, objectives, strategies, and actions, some of which may be related to diversity, inclu-
sion or racial equity. You can use those as a foundation from which to build upon. Addi-
tional content can then be added to you Racial Equity Action Plan to round out your juris-
diction’s racial equity work if needed. Also, some jurisdictions have existing or planned
processes to create broader strategic plans. You can use those processes to create your
Racial Equity Action Plan rather than duplicating efforts which may otherwise lead to staff
and community confusion and fatigue.




                                                                                                   TOOLKIT
                                                                                                Racial Equity
                                                                                                Action Plans

                                                                                                 Government
                                                                                                 Alliance on
                                                                                                Race and Equity
PREPARATION                                                                                              10




         _               >                            -




Successfully developing a Racial Equity Action Plan will require preparation.


THE JURISDICTION
Your executive and leadership team should communicate the purpose and importance of
this work, how it relates to the jurisdiction’s work overall, and how it fits into any other
work on racial equity. This context is especially important for those staff with little or no
exposure to racial equity work.

“Leadership” may vary from jurisdiction to jurisdiction. In some cases, a city or county
manager may be the most appropriate top leadership providing direction for the develop-
ment of the Racial Equity Action Plan. In other cases, it might be elected officials.

In Seattle in 2009, Mayor Greg Nickels established the Race and Social Justice Initiative as
one of his early priorities. With a strong-mayor form of government, Mayor Nickels set clear
expectations of his department directors for developing Racial Equity Action Plans on an
annual basis and he held his department directors accountable for implementation of ac-
tions. After losing his re-election bid, Seattle’s City Council further institutionalized racial
equity as a priority by the unanimous passage of Resolution 31164—A Resolution Directing
Race and Social Justice Work to Continue, including development of annual Racial Equity
Action Plans and support for Racial Equity Action Teams.

Fairfax County, Virginia launched a process to develop a racial equity strategy with joint
legislation adopted by Fairfax Board of Supervisors and School Board. The resolution di-
rected the development of a racial and social equity policy and strategic actions that in-
clude “intentional collective leadership, community engagement, equity tools, and infra-
structure to support and sustain systemic change, and shared accountability.”

Ata minimum, we recommend that the executive send out a jurisdiction-wide email in-
troducing the staff leading the planning process, giving them authority to oversee the pro-
cess, and explaining what to expect. An accompanying FAQ is recommended. Another
preparatory step is to present an overview of the context and process at meetings where
staff from all divisions and programs are represented, such as an all-staff meeting or man-
agers’ meeting. Jurisdictional newsletters are also a good tool to communicate the context
and importance of this work.

We recommend sending a clear message about the reality of this change work and the
type of change that staff can expect. Do not shy away from the reality that the planning
process and the plan itself will require jurisdiction resources to implement: time, money,
skills, and effort.
                                                                                                      TOOLKIT
                                                                                                   Racial Equity
                                                                                                   Action Plans
STAFFING LEADS AND RACIAL EQUITY ACTION TEAMS
                                                                                                    Government
Leadership at the executive level should identify a lead or two co-leads who will oversee
                                                                                                    Alliance for
the plan development project. Co-leads should work with their executive and/or leadership          Race and Equity
team to recruit staff to form a Racial Equity Action Team, a small group who will shepherd
the jurisdiction through the entire process. The form and composition of your Racial Eq-              11
uity Action Team will depend on the size and structure of your jurisdiction. However, the
function of your team should include the following:

        Racial equity focus—Maintaining a clear focus on racial equity throughout all
        stages of the process, working with any resistance that arises, and providing ra-
        cial equity resources for participants who lack the skills needed to meaningfully
        participate.
        Project Design—Designing the scope, structure, and timeline of the process.
        Project Management — Coordinating the meetings and communications, produc-
        ing materials and deliverables.
        Research and Systems Change Analysis—Designing information-gathering in-
        struments and facilitating discussions to solicit qualitative information. Analyz-
        ing your jurisdiction's systems, including policies, practices and procedures, how
        they are working, and opportunities for change that will advance racial equity.
        Synthesizing information gathered to identify gaps in racial equity, promising
        practices, and report on findings and recommendations.
        Strategic Planning—Designing exercises and facilitating discussions to develop
        the content for the Plan (outcomes, actions, and performance measures).
        Communications—Communicating       with    leadership,  staff, and    commu-
        nity about the purpose of this process, updates on the process, results
        of the process, and being a point of contact for anyone with questions.
        Some considerations as you compose the Racial Equity Action Team include:
          *     Authority—The Racial Equity Action Team will need to ask staff in differ-
               ent divisions, programs, and departments to provide information and to
               take various actions. They need to have sufficient authority to make these
               requests. This could be done by either having upper management staff as
               members of the team or by explicit and clear authorization from the execu-
               tive or director to oversee the project.
          *     Expertise—Team members will need to collectively possess a robust set
              of skills to fulfill the functions listed above. People with lived experiences
              bring important expertise. People with a strong racial equity analysis, some
              experience with strategic planning, and a good project manager are espe-
              cially important.
          *     Familiarity—All team members should be familiar with the jurisdiction's
               racial equity terminology. They also need familiarity with the jurisdiction's
               decision-making structure and processes.
          *     Time—The Racial Equity Action Team should be given dedicated time for
               this project. The time commitment will vary dramatically depending on the
               capacity of the Team, the size of the jurisdiction, and the scale and depth of
               the process.
          *   Composition—Each Racial Equity Action Team will look different and be a
              different size. Ideally, team members represent the demographic diversity
              of the jurisdiction. Racial diversity is especially important. Ideally, team         TOOLKIT
              members also represent the different divisions or programs across the ju-         Racial Equity
              risdiction. Representation from up and down the jurisdiction’s hierarchy is       Action Plans
              also ideal, though if leadership is represented then it is important to be sen-
                                                                                                 Government
              sitive to power dynamics so all members feel empowered to meaningfully
                                                                                                 Alliance for
              participate. Tenure and union representation are also important consider-         Race and Equity
               ations. Representativeness 1s something to strive for but should be balanced
               with the need to recruit members with the skills sets listed above.
                                                                                                       12


ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURE AND SCALE
The Racial Equity Action Team should develop an appropriately scaled organizing struc-
ture for this process. Not every staff person in the jurisdiction needs to or has to be in-
volved at every stage of the process. The size and complexity of the jurisdiction is one
factor shaping this project’s scope. The racial equity expertise within the jurisdiction is
another.

Engaging a jurisdiction’s leadership team is critical regardless of their racial equity exper-
tise. They will need to be engaged in both managing the process and providing substantive
input in all phases. Engaging the top-level managers could be done as a group and/or with
each manager participating in the engagement of their division or program staff. Man-
agers of color and/or with racial equity expertise could also be considered for individual
interviews to provide candid feedback.

Engaging entire divisions or large programs may prove challenging. We recommend the
Racial Equity Action Team work with managers of larger divisions or programs to recruit
a small team of staff to represent. These staff should have the most familiarity and expe-
rience with the concepts of racial equity in addition to being familiar with the work of the
division or program.

The Racial Equity Action Team should consider creating a graphic of the agreed upon juris-
dictional structure to use as a communications tool.



COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT
Communities of color have borne the burdens of inequitable policies, practices, and invest-
ments, and they hold deep expertise on those impacts. Their expertise and ownership of
this plan is critical to success. Engaging residents of color—along with employees of col-
or—as subject matter experts in the process can improve the process and the final product
in myriad ways; from more accurate analysis of institutional barriers to identification of
more effective strategies and greater community buy-in during implementation. Robust
community engagement throughout your process will be critical to your success.

Jurisdictions willing to examine their own institutional racism are opening themselves
up to criticism which may feel vulnerable. Their tendency may be to conduct an inter-
nally focused planning process. Overcoming this tendency is important. At a minimum,
jurisdictions should engage people of color most impacted by racial inequities to establish
the jurisdiction's broader vision for racial equity and theory of change to achieve it. This
foundation can serve as the touchstone for your planning process. The other critical point
of community accountability is an opportunity to review your draft plan and take an active
role in implementation and regular reporting on progress.

Community engagement during the planning process can take many forms, not all of
which are discussed here. Community bodies formed with decision-making authority and
                                                                                                    TOOLKIT
specific planning responsibilities are most effective. The volunteer nature of these bodies
                                                                                                 Racial Equity
makes it difficult to recruit community members from outside the jurisdiction’s institu-
                                                                                                 Action Plans
tional partners who are already paid to do this work. People of color in the community with
different lived experiences of institutional racism should be compensated for their exper-        Government
tise, similar to how jurisdictions value technically-skilled professionals like architects and    Alliance for
                                                                                                 Race and Equity
engineers. Portland Metro's Equity Strategy Advisory Committee is a good example of a
body that advised Metro through the creation of their racial equity strategy. Its members               13
represented leaders from philanthropy, nonprofit, government, and business sectors.

Another strategy is contracting with community based organizations (CBOs) already
working on issues of racial equity to host community events at different points in the pro-
cess. Research methods conducted by CBOs such as focus groups, surveys, and interviews
can solicit information government could not, and it also builds the capacity of CBOs to do
future work.

Another way to access community expertise and identify priorities without fatiguing the
community is to use existing community-produced reports as research material. Reports
cataloguing disparities, their causes, and associated solutions are often available*. In some
cases, these reports are even the impetus for local government to institute a racial equity
initiative. However, these reports are resource intensive to produce so community groups
should be sufficiently resourced. Jurisdictions should also value this work by providing
decision making authority during the implementation phase to maintain trust, ensuring
that community-sourced strategies are not co-opted or made ineffective.



RESOURCES
Itis important to have a central point of contact for questions, training, and support during
the process.

Resources provided could include a project webpage with background and training materl-
als, sample materials, frequently asked questions, a glossary defining common terms, and
contact information for specific technical assistance. You can also hold open office hours
to provide tailored technical assistance through the process.

Some foundational training is a critical pre-requisite for meaningful participation in this
project. The Racial Equity Action Team and leadership groups should take a basic racial
equity training as a foundation for building a shared analysis and definitions for racial eq-
uity work. Additional training on strategic planning for racial equity is also recommended
for co-leads and Racial Equity Action Team members. However, do not hesitate due to a
fear of not being totally ready. Inaction is itself a decision to continue the status quo. Your
leadership and Racial Equity Action Team simply need to be ready enough to begin.




                                                                                                     TOOLKIT
                                                                                                  Racial Equity
                                                                                                  Action Plans

                                                                                                   Government
                                                                                                   Alliance for
2   “An Unsettling Profile”, Coalition of Communities of Color, Portland, Oregon                  Race and Equity
RESEARCH AND                                                                                              14

ORGANIZATIONAL ASSESSMENT
                          Research and
                         Organizational
                          Assessment




This guide is primarily about a planning process to create the actual Racial Equity Action
Plans. However, some form of research or basic information gathering is recommended to
assess the jJurisdiction’s culture, structure, and practices.

The Racial Equity Action Team can first develop a research methodology and oversee the
process to collect and analyze information. This will help assess key areas where a juris-
diction can improve racial equity and solicit ideas for making improvements. If informa-
tion and/or data is lacking in some areas, you can include data development actions as a
part of your Racial Equity Action Plan.


METHODOLOGY AND PROCESS
Start by first taking an inventory of what racial equity information you already track and
how useful or reliable it is. Then you can ask what information is not being tracked and
what are the possible methods for collecting it.

Some jurisdictions are using a structured racial equity assessment to develop a baseline
evaluation of gaps within an jurisdiction’. These assessments look at the jurisdiction's op-
erations, practices, workforce, culture, policies, and programs. The City of Portland’s Racial
Equity Assessment’ was used by all 26 bureaus to assess themselves before developing
their five-year Racial Equity Plans.

Other research instruments and methodology can be used. Methodology used can range
from reviewing source documents (ex. strategic plans, program materials, communication
materials, etc.), individual interviews, administering a simple online survey’ to facilitat-
ing in-person focus groups (ex. leadership team, managers, division/program teams, etc).
Research can be conducted by staff or outside consultants. The City of Seattle Race and
Social Justice Initiative alternates conducting employee surveys and community surveys
(information on both of these surveys). The data collected through these surveys provides
important feedback into their planning processes. To get the most candid feedback possi-
ble, it is important for the survey to be conducted anonymously.




                                                                                                       TOOLKIT
3.   City of Seattle and City of Portland racial equity assessments                                 Racial Equity
4    We would like to offer special thanks to the All Hands Raised project and the Racial Equity    Action Plans
Strategy Guide developed by the Urban League of Portland, in concert with City of Portland staff,
                                                                                                     Government
especially its Bureau of Planning and Sustainability.                                                Alliance for
5    Portland Bureau of Transportation racial equity assessment survey                              Race and Equity
Figure 4: Sample Process for Research and
Development of Recommendations                                                                         15

                                                       QUALITATIVE AND
                                                       QUANTITATIVE DATA
       Review
       Primary                                         Regardless of which approach you
       Source                                          choose, it is important to create op-
     Documents
                                                       portunities for group dialogue and
                                                       analysis. Many of the most import-
                                                       ant and complex questions may not
                                                       be suitable for an online survey and
                                                       should be considered for facilitat-
                                                       ed discussions. The richest infor-
                                                       mation gleaned from a survey will
   Interview Key                Compile Data,          not be the quantifiable answers but
     Individuals                  Synthesize           the respondent’s reasoning (always
   and Facilitate                  Results,
       Group                        Report             provide a comment box). Facilitat-
    Discussions                    Findings
                                                       ed discussion provides participants
                                                       the opportunity to clarify the ques-
                                                       tions, listen to each other's analysis,
                                                       and also begin to identify solutions
                                                       which can be mined later in the
                                                       Plan development phase.

                                                       For group discussions, use your Ra-
                                                       cial Equity Action Team to staff the
     Adminster
     Survey(s)                                         process, as experienced facilitators,
                                                       to create facilitation guides, dis-
                                                       tribute questions ahead of time to
                                                       participants, as note takers, and for
                                                       on-going communication.

For survey analysis, conduct sub-group analysis, including comparisons between man-
agers and non-managers, by race, between departments, and tenure. In the case of small
numbers of people in some categories, to maintain confidentiality, you may want to com-
bine racial data into whites and people of color and only highlight departmental differenc-
es for the largest departments.




                                                                                                    TOOLKIT
                                                                                                 Racial Equity
                                                                                                 Action Plans

                                                                                                  Government
                                                                                                  Alliance for
                                                                                                 Race and Equity
RECOMMENDED AREAS OF ASSESSMENT
                                                                                                     16
Jurisdiction Workforce Demographics, Hiring, Retention, and Promotion

We recommend collecting the current workforce demographic information. Try to disag-
gregate data by race, gender, management, line staff, represented staff, and tenure. This
can help identify disparities and determine if the workforce or parts of the workforce are
representative of the diversity of the jurisdiction's population.

Further research can then be done to assess how racial equity goals and practices are em-
bedded in workforce development and hiring. The jurisdiction’s human resources depart-
ment can be helpful in determining whether racial equity considerations inform the hiring
processes, professional development, performance evaluations, and promotions tonamea
few important workforce processes.

GARE'’s issue paper, “Public Sector Jobs: Opportunities for Advancing Racial Equity,’ has
useful resources both for assessment of current conditions and practices, as well as devel-
opment of actions to advance racial equity as an employer. When it comes to workforce eq-
uity, your goal should be for your workforce to reflect the diversity of the communities you
serve across the breadth (functions) and depth (hierarchy) of your jurisdiction. Based on
your analysis of workforce data, review of institutional policies and practices, and engage-
ment of key stakeholders, you will be able to integrate specific workforce equity actions
into your Racial Equity Action Plan.



Contracting Practices

Your jurisdiction may participate in a program to increase contracting with people of color
and other underutilized contractors. It is wise to collect data on your contracting perfor-
mance, and specifically identify to what extent your jurisdiction conducts business with
contractors of color.

You can then inquire further about the specific contracting practices. A contract manager
can help provide information on the outreach practices to contractors of color, whether
minimum requirements of contractors are excluding some contractors disproportionately,
or the procurement process has any unintended bias.

GARE’s issue paper, “Contracting for Racial Equity: Best Local Government Practices
that Advance Racial Equity in Government Contracting and Procurement” has useful re-
sources both for assessment of current conditions and practices, as well as development
of actions to advance racial equity in your contracting and procurement. When it comes to
contracting and procurement, your goal should be for your contracting and procurement
dollars to benefit the full diversity of the communities you serve. Based on your analy-
sis of contracting and procurement data—with a special focus on those departments with
the largest budgets, review of institutional policies and practices, and engagement of key
stakeholders—you will be able to integrate specific contracting and procurement equity
actions into your Racial Equity Action Plan.



Jurisdictional Commitment, Leadership, and Management                                             TOOLKIT
                                                                                               Racial Equity
Your Racial Equity Action Team can assess your Jurisdiction’s commitment to racial equl-       Action Plans
ty at the policy, planning, and budget levels. Whether racial equity is embedded into key
                                                                                                Government
guiding documents or decision-making processes can give an indication of jurisdictional
                                                                                                Alliance for
commitment. Important information can be gathered about the general workplace envi-            Race and Equity
ronment for staff; whether there are broadly agreed upon definitions of racial equity terms
or even opportunities to discuss racism and racial equity.                                            17

Exploring the way leadership and management level practices affect your jurisdiction’s
ability to advance racial equity can provide useful insights. Ask how leadership supports
racial equity in the jurisdiction, and among the employees. Ask about networking at the
leadership level—to help support management and leadership staff in the pragmatic work
of racial equity.

You should be cognizant of the fact that some staff may be hesitant to provide honest feed-
back, especially if there are any sorts of concerns about lack of management receptivity.
If you have anecdotal evidence that suggests such concerns might exist, conduct focus
groups and interviews with confidentiality.



Community Access and Partnership

It is important to understand how the jurisdiction engages with people and communities
of color. Some areas of focus include looking at the racial diversity of advisory bodies,
availability and access of translation and interpretation services, culturally relevant com-
munication practices, and the frequency of staff interaction or partnership with commu-
nities of color during planning and implementation processes.



Data, Metrics, and On-going Improvement

Community-level data disaggregated by race in housing, jobs, education, criminal justice,
health and others will capture various areas of disproportionality. In reality, local govern-
ment touches each of these areas, but ultimately, does not control the entire system. There-
fore, it is important to supplement your data analysis with assessment conversations to
determine the key leverage points and opportunities for your jurisdiction to influence each
area of inequity.

You should also review how your jurisdiction collects information and tracks the results
of its actions to improve racial equity. We recommend looking closely at how data is dis-
aggregated by race or not, whether a racial equity toolkit is used on programs and policies,
and whether data collected by communities of color is valued and used by the jurisdic-
tion. A deeper examination is needed to look at how service-level demographic data and
data documenting disparities is used to prioritize and develop criteria for decision-making.
This will provide valuable insight into whether investments and resource distribution are
likely serving to achieve the jurisdiction's racial equity goals.

Jurisdictional practices in this area may help later in the process when developing a Racial
Equity Action Plan’s methods for tracking progress.




                                                                                                   TOOLKIT
                                                                                                Racial Equity
                                                                                                Action Plans

                                                                                                 Government
                                                                                                 Alliance for
                                                                                                Race and Equity
RESEARCH                         FINDINGS                                                             18




A summary of research findings is a helpful way to synthesize a large amount of informa-
tion into a useful format. This may require sorting through data to find themes, anomalies,
and discrepancies, all with the ultimate goal of identifying your “headline” findings. A
Racial Equity Action Team is best suited for this work but may need supplemental support
from data analysts or content experts.

Communicating your findings is an opportunity to raise awareness and give leadership an
opportunity to convey the importance of advancing racial equity. Your executive or direc-
tor is well positioned to communicate the findings and next steps. In-person meetings of
staff and leadership to share the findings are good opportunities to answer questions and
garner support for your plan.

A summary can help answer the following questions:

        What research methodology was used?
        Who participated? How did leadership participate? How did community partici-
        pate?

        What are the high level summary findings (headlines)? Are there themes or trends
        identified?
        Where are the gaps in the jurisdiction’s use of promising practices of racial equity?
        You may want to provide brief explanation for gaps.
        Were there any discrepancies between some findings and the Racial Equity Action
        Team's opinion? Why do they exist and is there a recommended response?
        Where are the strengths in the jurisdiction's use of promising practices of racial
        equity?
        What opportunities for change does your research suggest? What are some initial
        recommendations for the Plan?




                                                                                                   TOOLKIT
                                                                                                Racial Equity
                                                                                                Action Plans

                                                                                                 Government
                                                                                                 Alliance for
                                                                                                Race and Equity
THE PLAN                                                                                            19




>                                 OD                                   >




Racial Equity Action Plans should be ambitious documents to bring about institutional
change in order to eliminate racial disparities, both inside government and in the com-
munity. Plans will have clear outcomes and measurable actions to achieve them. Effective
actions should be specific, measurable, attainable, relevant, and timely. Be sure your plan
includes sufficient funding, staffing, accountability mechanisms, and evaluation.

Racial Equity Action Plans should create opportunities for reflection and learning. No one
has all the right answers. Making some mistakes is highly likely but do not let the fear of
mistakes stall your process or the implementation of your Plan. The Racial Equity Action
Team can provide a model of reflection and learning for the whole jurisdiction to emulate.

The terminology for Racial Equity Action Plans is informed by Results Based Accountabil-
ity. This approach clearly delineates between community conditions/results and perfor-
mance accountability/outcomes. These levels share a systematic approach to measure-
ment. This approach emphasizes the importance of beginning with a focus on the desired
end condition.

We encourage you to be clear about the desired end conditions in the community and to
emphasize those areas where you have the most direct influence. When you align com-
munity indicators, government strategies, and performance measures, you maximize the
likelihood for impact. Recognize also that to ultimately impact community conditions, you
will need to partner with other institutions, across sectors, always putting community in
the center of your efforts.



Figure 5: Results Based Accountability Flow



                                                      ae




        - What you                               * What you aim —
         hope to see         * Community          to achieve          * Performance
         in the               indicators          with an action       measures
         community
                  Vision /
                  Results




We have provided a sample template (see appendix 1) that uses the following definitions of       TOOLKIT
                                                                                              Racial Equity
key terms:
                                                                                              Action Plans
    *      Results: Community level conditions you are aiming to achieve.
                                                                                               Government
    *      Community Indicator: The means by which you can measure community condl-            Alliance for
                                                                                              Race and Equity
        tions, disaggregated by race.
                                                                                                                20
    *   Outcome A future state of being resulting from a change at the jurisdiction, de-
        partment, or program level. Strong outcomes articulate a clear improvement or de-
        fine how much improvement will take place. Beginning outcomes with the words
        “Increase” or “decrease” help with the latter.
    *   Action: Specific things your jurisdiction will do to achieve the outcomes. Strong
        actions start with verbs.
    *   Performance Measure: A quantifiable measure of how well an action is working.
        Different types of measures include
                  Quantity—How much did you do?
                  Quality—How well did you do it?
                  Impact—Is anyone better off?
    *   Timeline: The month, quarter, and/or year an action will be accomplished.
    *   Accountability: The position or body that is responsible for the action and/or is
        accountable for its completion.

1. CREATE A RACIAL EQUITY GUIDING STATEMENT FOR YOUR JURISDICTION
A simple statement can help guide your jurisdiction throughout a plan’s development and
implementation. Questions to consider when developing this statement:

        How does your jurisdiction’s existing mission statement relate to racial equity?
        (For departments) What           is your unique      role in the jurisdiction-wide     effort to
        achieve racial equity?
        What principles or shared values are reflected in this guiding statement?
The racial equity guiding statements below are some examples:

        Portland Bureau of Planning and Sustainability: Develop planning and sustain-
        ability solutions that eliminate racial disparities thereby creating prosperous, re-
        silient, healthy, and affordable communities for all Portlanders.
        Seattle    Race   and   Social   Justice   Initiative:   Eiminate   institutional   racism   and
        achieve racial equity in Seattle.



2. IDENTIFY RESULTS AND COMMUNITY INDICATORS THEN CREATE OUTCOMES
Identify a result and its associated community indicator(s) and then commit to an outcome
stating the change your jurisdiction will make in order to improve the indicator. Indicators
should measure a specific racial disparity. Outcomes articulate the change that strength-
ens the jurisdiction's position to reduce that disparity.

Again, this is an opportunity to engage leadership and secure buy-in to the necessary
change. The Racial Equity Action Team can draft results/indicators and outcome language
for leadership to process and finalize through a facilitated work session. Use this precious
time wisely by coming with prepared materials and a facilitator’s guide.

Questions to consider as you select community indicators and outcomes are:                                    TOOLKIT
                                                                                                           Racial Equity
        What needs or opportunities were identified during the research and assessment
                                                                                                           Action Plans
        phase of this process?
                                                                                                            Government
        What needs to be different in our jurisdiction's culture, workforce, policies, practic-
                                                                                                            Alliance for
        es, and procedures? What change do we ideally want (not just for what we would                     Race and Equity
        settle)?
                                                                                                                           21
        What does our jurisdiction define as the most important racially equitable out-
        comes?

        What are some Known racial inequities in your jurisdiction?        What are the root
        causes or factors creating these racial inequities?
        How does your jurisdiction's relationship with communities of color need to
        change? How can those most adversely affected by an issue be actively involved
        in solving it?
        How will proposed outcomes address root causes of racial disparities and advance
        institutional and/or systemic change?
Examples of community indicators in Racial Equity Action Plans (disaggregated by race):

        Dane County, WI: Unemployment rates

        City of Seattle: Severe housing cost burden for renters
Examples of outcomes include:

        Dane County, WI: Dane County is a model employer advancing racial equity.
        Portland Bureau of Planning and Sustainability: Shared project management ap-
        proach that integrates equity at all phases (scoping, design, implementation, eval-
        uation).
        Seattle Public Utilities: Position service equity as one of the primary
        filters for decision making by Q1 2018.
                                                                                         TIPS FOR WRITING AN EASILY
                                                                                         UNDERSTOOD PLAN

3. CREATE ACTIONS TO ACHIEVE EACH OUTCOME                                                To ensure the public can understand
Develop a clear action or set of actions to achieve each outcome. Facilitat-             the Plan, use the follow writing tips:
ed action planning sessions with departments or divisions are a good way
to source potential actions. Bring the relevant indicators and outcomes to               .     Use plain language to describe
these sessions and facilitate a conversation about what steps are necessary                    your indicators, outcomes,
to achieve them.                                                                               actions, and measures.
                                                                                               Spell out acronyms.
Questions to consider when developing actions include the following:                     .     Double-check for spelling
                                                                                               errors.
        Were any actionable solutions identified during the information                        Have a communications expert
        gathering phase of this process? Are there actions prioritized by                      review the Plan for clarity and
        communities of color?                                                                  cultural competency.
        What is a specific change in policy, practice, or procedure that could
        help produce more equitable outcomes?
        How will an action decrease racial disparities?
        Are there any unintended consequences?       Can they be mitigated?
        What capacity is needed to successfully implement the action?
        How will an action be implemented and by whom?
        Is the action achievable within the lifetime of the plan?
        Is the action measurable and how will it be measured?                                                          TOOLKIT
                                                                                                                    Racial Equity
Similar to the sorting and summarizing of your research findings, there will need to be a
                                                                                                                    Action Plans
process to refine all the proposed actions solicited through your work sessions. Again, the
Racial Equity Action Team is best suited for this role.                                                               Government
                                                                                                                      Alliance for
                                                                                                                    Race and Equity
Examples of actions include the following:
                                                                                                     22
        Portland Bureau of Planning and Sustainability (BPS): Develop a customized BPS
        project management approach that integrates transformational values frame-
        work, equity tools, and community engagement.
        Seattle Public Utilities: Implement an ongoing, sequential community        engage-
        ment training and coaching process for all project managers.
        Seattle, WA: Develop and implement a Racial Equity Fund—provide funding to
        support institutional/community collaborations aimed at eliminating structural
        racism.



4. CREATE PERFORMANCE MEASURES FOR EACH ACTION AND COMMIT TOA
COMPLETION DATE
Each action should have a completion date (month/quarter/year) and performance mea-
sure(s). You may consider these questions as you develop a date and measures:

        What is your timeline?
        How will you evaluate and report progress over time?
        How will you know the action 1s complete?
        Can you retain stakeholder participation and ensure internal and public account-
        ability?
Examples of tangible results to measure include the following:

        Seattle Department of Human     Services:

             900 youth/young adults of color participating in the Youth & Young Adults
             Program made academic progress by achieving at least one of the following:
             GED completion, grade progression, credit retrieval, passing HSPE scores, on-
             time graduation.
             By Q4 100 percent of our Human Resources policies will have been evaluated
             and corrected as filtered through the racial equity toolkit.
        Dane County Racial Equity Framework: 75 percent of Dane County employees be-
        lieve their department seeks input and assistance on decision making from com-
        munities of color.

5. IDENTIFY THE LEAD POSITION OR BODY THAT HOLDS THE POSITION
ACCOUNTABLE FOR COMPLETION OF EACH ACTION
The responsibility for completing actions should be delegated to a position or body.    Any
community oversight body should also be identified.

Recommend a Stewardship Plan

The ultimate goal of this work is not a Racial Equity Action Plan. The goal is institutional
and structural change. Thus, GARE recommends the Racial Equity Action Team also pro-
vide recommendations on Plan stewardship and accountability. This includes responsible
parties, resources committed, and accountability structures.                                      TOOLKIT
                                                                                               Racial Equity
Recommendations could include a proposal for an ongoing coordinating body to track and         Action Plans
support implementation of the Plan. Your accountability and stewardship structure is an-
                                                                                                Government
other opportunity to partner with the community.
                                                                                                Alliance for
                                                                                               Race and Equity
Stewardship provides the opportunity to obtain broad buy-in—including from leadership—
for any shifting of existing resources and/or any new staffing and resources required to             23
implement actions. Also, some actions may be flagged for prioritization due to required
immediate or near-term action.

Questions concerning limited resources for this work will undoubtedly arise. Remember,
we are paying the cost already for past inaction to reduce disparities. There is a continued
and growing cost to inaction. Your leadership should be reminded of this cost when they
are considering how much to invest in the plan.




                                                                                                  TOOLKIT
                                                                                               Racial Equity
                                                                                               Action Plans

                                                                                                Government
                                                                                                Alliance for
                                                                                               Race and Equity
REVIEW AND FINALIZING                                                                               24

THE PLAN
                                                                        Implementation,
                                                                         Reporting, and
                                                                           Evaluation



Each jurisdiction's process for reviewing a draft plan will be different. The Racial Equity
Action Team may want to circulate a draft to all or some participants, similar to the pro-
cess for sharing the research findings. A public review process and/or comment period is
recommended.

After receiving feedback, the Racial Equity Action Team can collectively and individually
review the plan using questions like these below. Again, this is an excellent opportunity to
engage the community in this process.

        Does the Plan reflect the research findings?
        Are the community indicators of racial disparities explicitly named?
        Are the outcomes and actions likely to make institutional or structural changes?
        Are the actions measurable and realistic?
        Do the actions reflect relevant promising practices in racial equity work?
        Are there positions responsible for the actions?
        Is the Plan implementable and well resourced?
        Are there any multi-department trends?
        Are there opportunities for different departments to work together?
        Are there opportunities for the community to work with departments on an action
        or the Plan as a whole?




                                                                                                  TOOLKIT
                                                                                               Racial Equity
                                                                                               Action Plans

                                                                                                Government
                                                                                                Alliance for
                                                                                               Race and Equity
ROLL OUT AND                                                                                          25

IMPLEMENTATION
Implementation of the plan is perhaps the most critical step to create positive, meaningful
change over time. The rollout of the plan should launch its implementation. The plan is a
public document so the rollout should occur externally as well as internally. Each rollout
will look different for each jurisdiction depending on their structure and their communi-
cations capabilities.

Once the plan is finalized, you will want to work with your leadership to distribute the plan
at multiple staff levels and in multiple venues. Your communications staff could be good
resources. The initial internal process may use similar communication strategies that
were used when announcing the planning process; director sends all-staff email, presen-
tation at all-staff meetings, summary materials distributed, etc.

The release of the plan will be a highly visible statement of the jurisdiction’s intent and
commitment to racial equity. GARE recommends using this opportune moment to raise
awareness about racial inequities, government's role in eliminating inequities, and leaders’
commitment to eliminating inequities. Achieving these objectives during the rollout of the
plan will likely support many of the plan’s actions.

At a minimum the executive should publicly release the plan with a press release, social
media, and unique webpage. If possible or needed, a legislative body can provide addition-
al legitimacy by adopting the Racial Equity Action Plan through a legislative action. This
action could also include budgetary authority for implementation.




                                                                                                   TOOLKIT
                                                                                                Racial Equity
                                                                                                Action Plans

                                                                                                 Government
                                                                                                 Alliance for
                                                                                                Race and Equity
ANNUAL PROGRESS                                                                                      26

REPORTING
Your stewardship body can help track and report on the progress of the Racial Equity Ac-
tion Plan. They can compile the reports received from responsible parties and synthesize
the results. Ata minimum these should document challenges faced and plans for address-
ing challenges or how the outcome or action might be refined in the future. Also, be sure to
document and celebrate successes that have been achieved.

By tracking challenges, the stewardship body will be able to see what obstacles are affect-
ing progress towards racial equity and attempt to resolve those issues. They can also share
jurisdiction successes with others who are looking for promising practices.

Some things to consider when reviewing progress on the plans:

        Are there outcomes and actions that are receiving less attention than others?
        Is there a need to change the plan?
        Have plan actions been implemented or in progress? What do the results indicate
        as to how to improve?
        If there are unmet or blocked actions, is there an explanation and/or proposal for
        resolving the issue?
        Are there racially diverse staff working on the plan over the year(s)?
        Are residents of color engaged in the implementation of the plan over the year(s)?
        Are measures being recorded and updated as actions change or are completed?
        Is the Jurisdiction reporting on challenges and successes?




                                                                                                  TOOLKIT
                                                                                               Racial Equity
                                                                                               Action Plans

                                                                                                Government
                                                                                                Alliance on
                                                                                               Race and Equity
CONCLUSION                                                                                              27


By developing a Racial Equity Action Plan, you are moving from theory into action, recog-
nizing the potential for government transformation—a public sector for “the public good.”
You are creating a shared practice and forming new relationships across the jurisdiction’s
structure and in partnership with community. You are also creating a culture of learning
and reflection to improve upon the work as you go. GARE, your peers, and our network of
national partners are all here to help you.



    In closing, we encourage you to be driven by:
        Justice—Be clear-eyed about the past and rigorously committed to a new way of
        governing, one that intentionally creates racial equity rather than reinforces his-
        toric injustice. Government itself created and continues to maintain ineguity. City
        governments are uniquely suited and responsible for creating and sustaining eq-
        ultable outcomes.
        Community—Adhere to the principle “nothing about us without us” as a core tenet
        of your approach. People of color and communities most affected by inequity are
        supported to lead efforts toward equity in cities, counties, and states across the
        country. Build capacity with leaders at all levels—from formal positions of author-
        ity and community leaders in cities to peer leaders elsewhere in our movement.
        Momentum—Aimfornothinglessthancompletetransformation,butbeboth                pragmat-
        icandurgentinyourapproach,seekingnotperfectionbutprogress. Startingfrom what
        exists, build solutions, constantly evolve and adapt toaccelerate the pace of progress.


You are joining a growing movement of people within government, normalizing conversa-
tions about race, operationalizing new behaviors and policies, and organizing to achieve
racial equity. GARE is seeing more and more jurisdictions that are making a commitment
to achieving racial equity, focusing on the power and influence of their own institutions,
and working 1n partnership across sectors and with the community to maximize impact.
There is an increasingly strong field of practice. We are organizing in government with the
belief that the transformation of government is essential for us to advance racial equity
and is critical to our success as a nation.




                                                                                                     TOOLKIT
                                                                                                  Racial Equity
                                                                                                  Action Plans

                                                                                                   Government
                                                                                                   Alliance on
                                                                                                  Race and Equity
APPENDIX I                                                                                          28




Racial Equity Plan Template
(Template that can be customized depending on your jurisdiction’s self-assessment and
priorities; add your actions, timeline, accountability and performance measures, along
with any additional results, indicators and outcomes)




 Community          Outcomesand          Timeline   Accountability   Performance   Progress
 Indicator          Actions                                          Measure       Report
 *Percent of        A. Jurisdiction’s
 population         employees
 who believe        understand,
 advancing          are committed
 racial equity      to, and have
 should be          the infrastruc-
 a priority of      ture needed to
 government         advance racial
                    equity.
 «Percent of
 population
 who under-
 stand the
 jurisdiction's
 commitment
 to racial equity




 Community          Outcomesand          Timeline   Accountability   Performance   Progress
 Indicator          Actions                                          Measure       Report
 * Percent of       A. Jurisdiction’s
 population         employees have
 who believe        outreach and en-
 the jurisdic-      gagement skills
 tion values        and competen-
 community          cies to advance
 participation      racially inclusive
 and engage-        outreach and
 ment               engagement.

 «Jurisdiction
 services are
 well received
 by community
 members

 * voter turnout
                                                                                                 TOOLKIT
                                                                                              Racial Equity
                                                                                              Action Plans

                                                                                               Government
                                                                                               Alliance on
                                                                                              Race and Equity
Racial Equity Plan Template                                                                29




Community    Outcomesand        Timeline   Accountability   Performance   Progress
Indicator    Actions                                        Measure       Report
*Unemploy-   A. Jurisdiction
ment rates   is a model em-
             ployer advancing
«Household   racial equity.
income
             B. Investments
«Number of   in contracting
businesses   and procure-
developed    ment benefit
             the diversity of
             jurisdiction's
             communities.




Community    Outcomesand        Timeline   Accountability   Performance   Progress
Indicator    Actions                                        Measure       Report
*Criminal
justice

*Education

*Housing

*Health




                                                                                        TOOLKIT
                                                                                     Racial Equity
                                                                                     Action Plans

                                                                                      Government
                                                                                      Alliance on
                                                                                     Race and Equity
            Across the country,
   governmental jurisdictions are:

  Making a           FOCUSING On           Working In
commitment             tne power           partnersnip
to acnieving        and influence          with otners
racial equity        of their own
                      INSTITUTIONS

  When this occurs, significant leverage
   and expansion opportunities emerge,
 setting the stage for the achievement of
      racial equity in our communities.




                   LOCAL AND REGIONAL
                   GOVERNMENT ALLIANCE ON
                   RACE & EQUITY


                RACIALEQUITYALLIANCE.ORG
