                  SECTION 3 PLAN



                        FOR

             THE HOUSING AUTHORITY



                        OR



          THE CITY OF




          OFFICE OF ECONOMIC OPPORTUNITY
           FAIR HOUSING EQUAL OPPORTUNITY
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT
                                                   RESOLUTION

                              A RESOLUTION TO ADOPT THE SECTION 3 PLAN
                                TO COMPLY WITH 24 CFR, PART 135 OF THE
                                UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING
                                  AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT SECTION 3




WHEREAS,      the United States Congress passed Section 3 of the Housing and Urban Development Act of
1968 (12 U.S.C. 1701u) (Section 3) to further the goal of ensuring that federal funds benefit the residents of
projects funded wholly or in part by those funds, and


WHEREAS,      Part 135 of Section 3 is to establish the standards and procedures to be followed to ensure
that the objectives of Section 3 are met; and


WHEREAS,      the                   Housing Authority, or City of            staff has developed a revised
Section 3 Plan in adherence to 24 CFR, Part 135 that more comprehensively addresses the standards and
procedures prescribed in the Act; and


WHEREAS,      the Section 3 Plan has been reviewed by the                      Housing Authority’s or City of
              senior staff members and their comments incorporated into the Plan.

NOW, THEREFORE,           BE IT RESOLVED     THAT the Board of Commissioners or City Council authorizes the
                    to adopt and implement the revised Section 3 Plan to ensure compliance with Federal Law.




APPROVED AND ADOPTED this                    day of




Chairperson                                  Secretary
                                                              Table of Contents


                                                                                                                                        Page
General Policy Statement .............ccceceecee
                                eee eee eee e eee ee eee ene een teens tate ntee nena ea enes                                             4
ad § 010 )<\- ce                                                                                                        eres              5
Section 3 Contracting Policy & ProCeCUre ............cccce
                                              cee ce ene et eee ee eee eeeeee eee saeeeeeeeeseeteaenaeas                                  6
Section 3 Action PLAN ........ cece cece                                 EEE              EEE EEE EEE EEE nnn eee eat                     7
Employment and Training Goals ...........ccececceeeee
                                     eee e eee eens eee teeter eee eae ea eee eenene ene:                                                 8
Certification Procedure for Section 3 Program Participants ...............:cceeceeeee
                                                                           eset ee teeta ees                                              9
Resident Hiring Requirement                .............cccecceceeceee
                                                    eee eeeee eee ene eee eae sae ee eee eeeneeeeeneean eae eatanengs                    10
Assisting Contractors To Achieve Section 3 Goals ............ccceccceeeeceeeeeeneeeeeeseeseeeaeereaeaes                                  11
Preference for Contracting with Section 3 Business Concerns ............:ccceceeceeeeeeeeeeneeseues                                      12
Section 3 Business Certification ............cc cece cee ce eee ee cece eens eee eee ee ene ene eee sae eae eeeeeeeeentnanaaeas          13
Resident Owned-Business Contracting ...........::cice eect                        eee rere                                               14
Contracting with Section 3 BUSINESS CONCEINS ...........cceceeceecene
                                                       eaten eee ene eee ea teen eae eeen een eenes                                      15
Section 3 Recruitment, Training, and Employment ..................cc
                                                                cee cee cece eee eee ee eee eee eaten                                    16
Employment of Section 3 Program Participants ................cceceee
                                                               cece e eee eee ee tenet eee eens                                          17
Contractor Requirements in Employing Section 3 Participants ..............:.cececeeeee   eee ee eee eee                                  18-19
Internal Complaint Procedure ............. cece cece                            nee                erent            teeta teens          20


DEFINITIONS 20.0... . cece cece cee nee            een e nn    ne Ene EEE EE EEE EE EEE EEE SEES EOE Ea Sd sens ens ta ete t antennas    21-23
Section 3 Contract Clause ........ 00.                     tee                                                           ene te eee      24

Exhibits/Forms

Exhibit 1:             Certification for Business Concerns Seeking Section 3 Preference


Exhibit 2:             Certification of Residents Seeking Preference in Training and Employment


Exhibit 3:             Contracting Policy & Procedure


Exhibit 4:             Special Conditions
General      Policy Statement


It is the policy of the                     of                                           to require its contractors
to provide equal employment opportunity to all employees and applicants for employment without regard to
race, color, religion, sex, national origin, disability, veteran’s or marital status, or economic status and to
take affirmative action to ensure that both job applicants and existing employees are given fair and equal
treatment.


The Housing Authority of                                                   implements this policy through the
awarding of contracts to contractors, vendors, and suppliers, to create employment and business
opportunities for residents of the           and other qualified low- and very
low-income persons residing:


The policy shall result in a reasonable level of success in the recruitment, employment, and utilization of
              residents and other eligible persons and business by               contractors working on contracts
partially or wholly funded with the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD)
monies.      The            shall examine and consider a contractor's or vendor's potential for success by
providing employment and business opportunities to                   residents prior to acting on any proposed
contract award.
Section 3 Purpose


Section 3 of the Housing and Urban Development Act of 1968, as amended (12 U.S.C. 1701u) (Section 3)
requires the            Housing Authority or City of              to ensure that employment and other
economic and business opportunities generated by the Department of Housing and Urban Development
(HUD) financial assistance, to the greatest extent feasible, are directed to public housing residents and
other low-income persons, particularly recipients of government housing assistance, and business
concerns that provide economic opportunities to low- and very-low income persons.
Section 3 Contracting Policy and Procedure


The             will incorporate Section 3 in its existing Procurement Policy and adopt a Section 3
Contracting Policy and Procedure to be included in all procurements generated for use with HUD funding.
This policy and procedure contains goal requirements for awarding contracts to Section 3 Business
Concerns.


All contractors/obusinesses seeking Section 3 preference must before submitting bids/proposals to the
            be required to complete certifications, as appropriate, as acknowledgement of the Section 3
contracting and employment provisions required by this section.    Such certifications shall be adequately
supported with appropriate documentation as referenced in the form.


The existing Procurement Policy also contains goal requirements for awarding contracts to Small
Disadvantaged Businesses, formerly Minority and Women Business Enterprises (M/WBE).
Section 3 Plan


The                                           , In conjunction with the                            , Will develop
a Section 3 Action Plan to identify the goals, objectives, and actions that will be implemented to ensure
compliance with the requirements of Section 3.


                 intent to develop this plan is to include input from various city departments to include and, as
well as HUD.     Where applicable, input from other agencies and companies will be included.
Section      3 Employment    & Training Goals


It is the policy of the            to utilize residents and other Section 3 eligible persons and businesses in
contracts partially or wholly funded with monies from the Department of Housing and Urban Development
(HUD).                 has established employment and training goals that contractors and subcontractors
should meet in order to comply with Section 3 requirements.         (Reference 24 CFR    135.30 — Numerical goal
for meeting the greatest extent feasible requirement).      The numerical goal is:


     e      Thirty percent (80%) of the aggregate number of new hires in any fiscal year.


It is the responsibility of contractors, vendors and suppliers to implement progressive efforts to attain
Section 3 compliance.       Any contractor that does not meet the Section 3 numerical goals must demonstrate
why meeting the goals were not feasible.        All contractors submitting bids or proposals to the           are
required to certify that they comply with the requirements of
Section 3.


The Section 3 Contract Clause specifies the requirements for contractors hired for Section 3 covered
projects.    The Section 3 Clause must be included in all Section 3 covered projects.      The Section 3 Contract
Clause is included in Exhibit 3.
Section 3 Program      Participant Certification Procedure


The              will certify Section 3 program participants who reside in the City of
and who are seeking preference in training and employment by completing and attaching adequate proof of
Section 3 eligibility, as required (see Exhibit 3 — Section 3 Participant Eligibility for Preference form).

      e   All persons living in the City who meet the Section 3 eligibility guidelines can, by appointment, visit
          with the Section 3 Coordinator to complete a job readiness assessment.


      e   Once this assessment is complete, the Section 3 Coordinator will determine if the individual meets
          the eligibility requirements and is job ready.


      e = If the individual is deemed eligible for Section 3 participation and deemed not ready for
          employment, a referral will be made to other agencies that are better equipped to address the
          individual’s needs, |.e., substance abuse providers, etc.


      e   The Section 3 job readiness component is a part of the                commitment to provide
          economic opportunities and training to residents/eligible participants to become gainfully employed.
Resident Hiring Requirements

The                has adopted the following scale for resident hiring that is to be used on all construction
contracts, service contracts and professional service contracts that contain a labor component.               It is
expected that an appropriate number of residents with particular qualifications or a willingness to begin
unskilled labor will be able to participate in          contracted labor efforts.           A prime contractor may
satisfy             resident hiring requirements through its subcontractors.


TOTAL      LABOR     DOLLARS                               RESIDENT AS A % OF TOTAL              LABOR
USE TOTAL CONTRACT                                         DOLLARS
AMOUNT      FOR SERVICE CONTRACTS
Labor dollars $25,000 but less than $100,000               10% of the labor dollars
$100,000, but less than $200,000                           9% of the labor dollars
At least $200,000, but less than $300,000                  8% of the labor dollars
At least $300,000, but less than $400,000                  7% of the labor dollars
At least $400,000, but less than $500,000                  6% of the labor dollars
At least $500,000, but less than $1 million                5% of the labor dollars
At least $1 million, but less than $2 million              4% of the labor dollars
At least $2 million, but less than $4 million              3% of the labor dollars
At least $4 million, but less than $7 million              2% of the labor dollars
$7 million or more                                         1 — %% of the labor dollars


With this sliding formula, it is expected that an appropriate number of                       public housing residents
and neighborhood residents with particular qualifications or willingness to begin unskilled labor will be able
to participate in contracted labor efforts. A prime contractor, through its subcontractor(s), may satisfy
            resident hiring requirement set forth above.


      1.      Subcontract or joint venture with a resident owned business.            The business must be 51% of
              more owned by                                                                 public housing residents, or
              subcontract/joint venture with a business that employs full-time, 30% or more
                                                            or low and very-income individuals within the
                                                 City of                             , or


      2.      Direct hiring of                         Housing Authority’s
                               public housing residents and/or low and very low-income neighborhood
              residents based on the Resident Hiring Scale, or


      3.      Contractor incurs the cost of providing skilled training for residents in an amount
              commensurate with the sliding scale set forth in the Resident Hiring Scale, or

      4.      Contractor makes a contribution to              Education Fund to provide assistance to residents
              to obtain training. The level of contribution would be commensurate with the sliding scale set
              forth in the Resident Hiring Scale.




                                                            10
Assisting Contractors to Achieve Section 3 Goal Hiring and Contracting Goals


The             will assist contractors with little or no experience in achieving Section 3 hiring and
contracting goals by:


Requiring the contractor to present a list, to the Section 3 Coordinator, of the number of subcontracting
and/or employment opportunities expected to be generated from the initial contract.


            Section 3 Coordinator will provide the contractor with a list of interested and qualified Section 3
residents for construction projects.

           Section 3 Coordinator will provide contractor with a list of Section 3 business concerns interested
and qualified for construction projects.

           Section 3 Coordinator will inform contractor of known issues that might affect Section 3 residents
from performing job related duties.


           Section 3 Coordinator will review the new hire clause with contractors and subcontractors to
ensure that the requirement is understood.    It is not intended for contractors and subcontractors to
terminate existing employees, but to make every effort feasible to employ Section 3 program participants
before any other person, when hiring additional employees needed to complete proposed work to be
performed with HUD (federal) funds.




                                                        11
Preference for Contracting with Section 3 Business Concerns


The             , in compliance with Section 3 regulations, will require contractors and subcontractors
(including professional service contractors) to direct their efforts towards contracts to Section 3 business
concerns in the following order to priority:


        Category 1: Business concerns that are 51% of more owned by residents of the housing
        development for which the work is performed, or whose full-time, permanent workforce includes
         30% of these persons as employees.


         Category 2: Business concerns that are 51% of more owned by residents of the Authority’s public
         housing development(s) other than the housing development where the work is to be performed; or
        whose full-time permanent workforce includes 30% of these persons as employees.


         Category 3: HUD Youthbuild programs being carried out in the city of                              in
        which Section 3 covered assistance is expended.


         Category 4: Business concerns that are 51% or more owned by a Section 3 resident(s), or whose
         permanent, full-time workforce includes no less than 30% Section 3 residents (category 4
         business); or that subcontract in excess of 25% of the total amount of subcontracts to Section 3
         business concerns.


Contractors and subcontractors are expected to extend to the greatest extent feasible, efforts to achieve
the numerical goals established by the




                                                       12
Evidence of Section 3 Certification


Any business seeking Section 3 preference in the awarding of contracts or purchase agreements with the
           shall complete the Certification For Business Concerns Seeking Section 3 Preference In
Contracting and Demonstration of Capability form, which can be obtained from the                  Section 3
Coordinator. The business seeking Section 3 preference must be able to provide adequate documentation
as evidence of eligibility for preference under the Section 3 Program.


Certifications for Section 3 preference for business concerns must be submitted to the Section 3
Coordinator of the            prior to the submission of bids for approval.   If the Section 3 Coordinator
previously approved the business concern to be Section 3 certified, then the certification can be submitted
along with the bid.




                                                      13
Resident Owned     Business Contracting


           will consider utilizing the alternative procurement process (Section 24 CFR Part 963) when
contracting with businesses owned in substantial part by housing agency residents (resident-owned
business) for public housing services, supplies or construction.


To be eligible for the alternative procurement process, a business must submit evidence to                    that
shows how each of the following requirements have been met:


    e   Submit certified copies of any city, state, or county municipal licenses that support the type of
        business activity for which it performs.
    e   Disclose to the Section 3 Coordinator, all owners of the business, as well as, each owners
        percentage of ownership and names of those individuals who posses the authority to make
        decisions on a day-to-day basis.
    e   Submit evidence that the business is able to perform successfully under the terms and conditions
        of the proposed contract.
    e   Provide a certified listing of all contracts awarded and received under the alternative procurement
        process within a two-year period.    If a resident-owned business has received under this alternative
        contracting procedure one or more contracts (within the two-year period) with total combined
        dollars of $1,000,000, then it is no longer eligible for additional contracts under the alternative
        process until the 2-year period is past.


This alternative procurement policy is based upon the procurement procedure and policy set forth in HUD’s
regulations at 24 CFR, Part 85.36, but applies only to solicitations of resident-owned businesses.      SPHA
will utilize the alternative contracting procedure for resident-owned businesses only in cases where it is
considered to be in the best businesses, economic and service interests of the authority.




                                                       14
Efforts to Award Contract Opportunities to Section 3 Business Concerns


The              will use the following methods to notify and contract with Section 3 business concerns when
contracting opportunities exist.


      e   Advertise contracting opportunities via newspaper, mailings, posting notices that provide general
          information about the work to be contracted and where to obtain additional information.


      e   Provide written notice of contracting opportunities to all known Section 3 business concerns. The
          written notice will be provided in sufficient time to enable business concerns the opportunity to
          respond to the bid invitation.


      e   Coordinate pre-bid meetings at which the Section 3 business concerns would be informed of
          upcoming contracting opportunities in advance.


      e   Conduct workshops on                contracting procedures to include bonding, insurance, and other
          pertinent requirements, in a timely manner in an effort to allow Section 3 business concerns the
          opportunity to take advantage of any upcoming contracting opportunities.


      e   Contact the City of                               Business Development Department, business
          assistance agencies, Minority and Women’s Business Enterprise (M/WBE) contractor associations
          and community organizations to inform them of contracting opportunities and to request their
          assistance in identifying Section 3 businesses.


      e   Establish relationships with the Small Business Administration (SBA), Minority and Women’s
          Business Enterprise M/WBE association, Community Development Corporations, and other
          sources as necessary to assist SPHA with educating and mentoring residents with a desire to start
          their own businesses.


      @   Seek out referral sources in order to ensure job readiness for public housing residents through on-
          the-job-training (OJT) and mentoring to obtain necessary skills that will transfer into the external
          labor market.


      e   Develop resources or seek out training to assist residents interested in starting their own
          businesses to learn to prepare contracts, prepare taxes, obtain licenses, bonding, and insurance.




                                                        15
Section 3 Residents Recruitment, Training, and Employment            Goals


           will develop resources to provide training and employment opportunities to Section 3 program
participants by implementing the following:

    e   Training opportunities will be advertised by distributing flyers via mass mailings and posting in
        common areas of the housing developments as well as all                  public housing management
        offices.


    e   The resident councils, resident management corporations, as well as neighborhood community
        organizations will be contacted to request their assistance in notifying residents of the available
        training and employment opportunities.


    e   Employment opportunities will be advertised by posting job vacancies in common areas of all of the
                    housing developments as well as contacting resident councils, resident management
        corporations, and neighborhood community organizations.

    e   A database will be developed of certified Section residents of public housing and other Section 3
        residents.


    e   A database will be developed to maintain a skill assessment of all Section 3 residents of public
        housing and other Section 3 residents.


    e   A database will be developed of eligible qualified Section   3 Business concerns to contact with
        respect to the availability of contract opportunities.

    e   Relationships will be developed with local area employers in an effort to solicit job vacancies to
        determine skills needed in their workforce, thereby providing training to residents developing skills
        that will transfer into the external   labor market.


    e   A provision for a specific number of public housing or Section 3 program participants to be trained
        or employed by the contractor will be incorporated into the contract.




                                                           16
Employment of Section 3 Program         Participants


   e   The Section 3 Coordinator will conduct a pre-interview with all residents prior to being hired by a
       contractor.


   e   The pre-interview will assess job readiness (i.e., childcare, transportation, work maturity, job
       retention skills).   Only residents meeting the minimum qualifications of the contractor or
       subcontractor will be referred to the job site.     Residents not deemed job ready would be referred
       elsewhere.     It is imperative that the resident’s basic needs are met prior to employment.

   e   lf aresident is referred to a contractor and does not perform satisfactorily due to poor work habits
       (i.e., tardiness, absenteeism, alcohol/drugs, abusive language, fighting, etc.) she/he will be allowed
       two additional opportunities to be referred to other contractors.       If after that time the resident still
       does not perform satisfactorily, it will be mandatory that she/he attend and complete a job
       readiness class, alcohol/drug treatment center, or any other program that he or she may be
       required to attend.    After successful completion the resident will be given the opportunity to be
       reinstated on the list of residents available for work.


   e   Residents experiencing problems with contractors should first communicate the problem to the
       employer. If the problem cannot be solved between the employee and employer, the Section 3
       Coordinator will meet with the parties involved to assist in trying to resolve the problem.          Residents
       and employers (contractors or subcontractors) should document problems whenever they occur
       and record any and all efforts to correct them.         The written documentation of the problem should be
       submitted to the Section 3 Coordinator.


   e = In order to qualify for employment with contractors, public housing residents must have their
       name(s) ona                 lease, be current on rent, be at least eighteen years of age, and not be
       involved in any legal action with                 (current documented eviction, criminal and drug activity
       or trespassing).


   e   Residents not interested in construction employment opportunities will be assessed for other skills
       (clerical, administrative, etc.) and will have the opportunity to receive help with interviewing
       techniques, mock interviews, resume preparation, application assistance, employment leads, and
       how to dress for success when conducting a job search.


   e   Residents interested in pursuing General Equivalency Diploma (GED) and continued training
       education will be referred to those resources by the Section 3 Coordinator who will maintain bi-
       weekly contact with residents to monitor progress.




                                                          17
Contractor’s Requirements in Employing Section 3 participants:


Under the             Section 3 Program, contractors and subcontractors are required to:


    Provide employment opportunities to Section 3 residents/participants in the priority order listed below:


            a)   Category 1 —Section 3 Resident
                 Residents of the housing development or developments for which the contract shall be
                 expended.



                 Category 2— Section 3 Resident
                 Residents of other housing developments managed by the housing authority of the City of



                 Category 3 — Section 3 Resident
                 Participants in HUD Youthbuild program being carried out in the project boundary area.


                 Category 4 — Section 3 Resident
                 Residents of Section 8 of the                Housing Authority as well as all other residents
                 residing in the City of __             who meet the income guidelines for Section 3
                 preference (refer to Section 3 Income Limits).


        After the award of contracts, the contractor must, prior to beginning work, inform Section 3
        participants of the development at which the work will be performed, by providing the following:

            names   of the Section 3 business concerns to be utilized,


            estimates of the number of employees to be utilized for contract,


            projected number of available positions, to include job descriptions and wage rates
            (construction wages consistent with Davis Bacon),


            efforts that will be utilized to seek Section 3 participants.   (See Exhibit 2)



        Contractors must notify the Section 3 Coordinator of their interests regarding employment of
        Section 3 participants prior to hiring.   The Section 3 Coordinator will ensure that the participant is
        Section 3 eligible, by assessing the Section 3 database to ensure job readiness.        Additionally, the
        legal department will be contacted to ensure that the individuals are not involved in any legal
        proceedings against/with the


        Submit a list of core employees (including administrative, clerical, planning and other positions
        pertinent to the construction trades) at the time of contact award.




                                                         18
Document the performance of Section 3 participants (positive and negative), regarding punctuality,
attendance, etc., and provide this information to the             Section 3 Coordinator.


Immediately notify the Section 3 Coordinator of any problems experienced due to the employment
of Section 3 participants.

Immediately notify the Section 3 Coordinator if a participant quits, walks off, or is terminated for any
reason. The contractor must provide written documentation of all such incidents to support such
decisions to the Section 3 Coordinator to determine if an investigation is warranted.




                                              19
Internal Section    3 Complaint    Procedure


In an effort to resolve complaints generated due to non-compliance through an internal process,
encourages submittal of such complaints to its Section 3 Coordinator as follows:


    e   Complaints of non-compliance should be filed in writing and must contain the name of the
        complainant and brief description of the alleged violation of 24 CFR    135.


    e   Complaints must be filed within thirty (30) calendar days after the complainant becomes aware of
        the alleged violation.


    e   An investigation will be conducted if complaint is found to be valid.   The Section 3 Coordinator will
        conduct an informal, but thorough investigation affording all interested parties, if any, an
        opportunity to submit testimony and/or evidence pertinent to the complaint.


    e   The Section 3 Coordinator will provide written documentation detailing the findings of the
        investigation of the                 . The             will review the findings for accuracy and
        completeness before it is released to complainants.     The findings will be made available no later
        then thirty (30) days after the filing of complaint.


If complainants wish to have their concerns considered outside of the                  a complaint may be filed
with:


                   Assistant Secretary for Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity
                   United States Department of Housing and Urban Development
                   451 Seventh Street, SW
                   Washington,    DC 20410


The complaint must be received not later than 180 days from the date of the action or omission upon which
the complaint is based, unless the time for filing is extended by the Assistant Secretary for good cause
shown.




                                                         20
                                                   Definitions


Applicant — Any entity which makes an application for Section 3 covered assistance, and includes, but is
not limited to, any State, unit of local government, public housing agency or other public body, public or
private nonprofit organization, private agency or institution, mortgagor, developer, limited dividend sponsor,
builder, property manager, community housing development organization, resident management
corporation, resident council, or cooperative association.


Assistant — the Assistant Secretary for Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity.

Business Concern — a business entity formed in accordance with State law, and which is licensed under
State, county or municipal law to engage in the type of business activity for which it was formed.


Contractor_- any entity which contracts to perform work generated the expenditure of Section 3 covered
assistance, or for work in connection with a Section 3 covered project.

Employment Opportunities Generated by Section 3 Covered Assistance — all employment
opportunities generated by the expenditure of Section 3 covered public assistance (i.e., operating
assistance, development assistance and modernization assistance, (as described in Section 135.3 (a) (1)).
With respect to Section 3 covered housing and community development assistance, this term means all
employment opportunities arising in connection with Section 3 covered projects (as described in Section
135.3 (a) (2)), including management and administrative jobs. Management and administrative jobs
include architectural, engineering or related professional services required to prepare plans, drawings,
specifications, or work write-ups; and jobs directly related to administrative support of these activities, e.g.,
construction manager, relocation specialist, payroll clerk, etc.

Housing Authority (HA) — Public Housing Agency.

Housing Development — low-income housing owned, developed, or operated by public housing agencies
in accordance with HUD’s public housing program regulations codified in 24 CFR Chapter IX.


HUD Youthbuild Programs — programs that receive assistance under subtitle D of Title IV of the National
Affordable Housing Act, as amended by the Housing and Community Development Act of 1992 (42 U.S.C.
12899), and provide disadvantaged youth with opportunities for employment, education, leadership
development, and training in the construction or rehabilitation of housing for homeless individuals and
members of low- and very low-income families.


JTPA — The Job Training Partnership Act (29 U.S.C. 1579 (a)).

Low-income person — families (including single persons) whose incomes do not exceed 80 per centum of
the median income for the area, as determined by the Secretary, with adjustments for smaller and larger
families, except that the Secretary may establish income ceilings higher or lower than 80 per centum of the
median for the area on the basis of the Secretary’s findings that such variations are necessary because of
prevailing levels of construction costs or unusually high or low-income families.




                                                        21
Metropolitan Area — a metropolitan statistical area (MSA), as established by the Office of Management
and Budget.

New Hires — full-time employees for permanent, temporary or seasonal employment opportunities.


Recipient — any entity which receives Section 3 covered assistance, directly from HUD or from another
recipient and includes, but is not limited to, any State unit of local government, PHA, or other public body,
public or private nonprofit organization, private agency or institution, mortgagor, developer, limited dividend
sponsor, builder, property manager, community housing development organization, resident management
corporation, resident council, or cooperative association.   Recipient also includes any successor, assignee
or transferee of any such entity, but does not include any ultimate beneficiary under the HUD program to
which Section 3 applies and does not include contractors.

Section 3— Section 3 of the Housing and Urban Development Act of 1968, as amended            (12 U.S.C.
1701u).

Section 3 Business Concern — a business concern,


           1)   That is 51 percent or more owned by Section 3 resident: or
          2)    Whose permanent, full-time employees include persons, at least 30 percent of whom are
                currently Section 3 residents, or within three years of the date of first employment with the
                business concern were Section 3 residents; or
          3)    That provides evidence of a commitment to subcontract in excess of 25 percent of the dollar
                award of all subcontractors to be awarded to business concerns that meet the qualifications
                set forth in paragraphs 1 or 2 above.


Section 3 Covered Assistance —


           1)   public housing development assistance provided pursuant to Section 5 of the 1937 Act;

          2)    public housing operating assistance provided pursuant to Section 9 of the 1937 Act;


          3)    public housing modernization assistance provided pursuant to Section 14 of the 1937 Act;


          4)    assistance provided under any HUD housing or community development program that is
                expended for work arising in connection with housing rehabilitation, construction, or other
                public construction project (which includes other buildings or improvements, regardless of
                ownership).


Section 3 Clause — the contract provisions set forth in Section 135.38.

Section 3 Covered Contracts — a contract or subcontract (including a professional service contract)
awarded by a recipient or contractor for work generated by the expenditure of Section 3 covered
assistance, or for work arising in connection with a Section 3 covered project.

Section 3 covered contracts do not include contracts awarded under HUD’s procurement program, which
are governed by the Federal Acquisition Regulation (FAR).      Section 3 covered contracts also do not include



                                                        22
contracts for the purchase of supplies and materials. However, whenever a contract for materials includes
the installation of the materials, the contract constitutes a Section 3 covered contract.

Section 3 Covered Project_- the construction, reconstruction, conversion or rehabilitation of housing
(including reduction and abatement of lead-based paint hazards), other public construction which includes
buildings or improvements (regardless of ownership) assisted with housing or community development
assistance.


Section 3 Resident — a public housing resident or an individual who resides in the metropolitan area or
nonmetropolitan county in which the Section 3 covered assistance is expended and who is considered to
be a low-to very low-income person.

Subcontractor — any entity (other than a person who is an employee of the contractor) which has a
contract with a contractor to undertake a portion of the contractor’s obligation for the performance of work
generated by the expenditure of Section 3 covered assistance, or arising in connection with a Section 3
covered project.


Very low-income person — families (including single persons) whose income do not exceed 50 per
centum of the median family income for the area, as determined by the Secretary with adjustments for
smaller and larger families, except that the Secretary may establish income ceilings higher or lower then 50
per centum of the median for the area on the basis of the Secretary’s findings that such variations are
necessary because of unusually high or low family incomes.




                                                      23
Section 3 Clause


All Section 3 covered contracts shall included the following clause (referred to as the Section 3 Clause):


A.   The work to be performed under this contract is subject to the requirements of section 3 of the Housing
and Urban Development Act of 1968, as amended,         12 U.S.C. 1701u (Section 3).    The purpose of Section 3
is to ensure that employment and other economic opportunities generated by HUD assistance or HUD-
assisted projects covered by Section 3, shall, to the greatest extent feasible, be directed to low- and very
low-income persons, particularly persons who are recipients of HUD assistance for housing.


B.   The parties to this contract agree to comply with HUD’s regulations in 24 CFR part 135, which
implement Section 3. As evidenced by their execution of this contract, the parties to this contract certify
that they are under no contractual or other impediment that would prevent them from complying with the
part 135 regulations.


C.   The contractor agrees to send to each labor organization or representative or workers with which the
contractor has a collective bargaining agreement or other understanding, if any, a notice advising the labor
organization or workers’ representative of the contractor’s commitments under this Section 3 clause, and
will post copies of the notice in conspicuous places at the work site where both employees and applicants
for training and employment positions can see the notice. The notice shall describe the Section 3
preference, shall set forth minimum number and job titles subject to hire, availability of apprenticeship and
training positions, the qualifications for each; and the name and location of the person(s) taking applications
for each of the positions; and the anticipated date the work shall begin.


D. The contractor agrees to include this Section 3 clause in every subcontract subject to compliance with
regulations in 24 CFR part 135, and agrees to take appropriate action, as provided in an applicable
provision of the subcontract or in this Section 3 clause, upon a finding that the subcontractor is in violation
of the regulations in 24 CFR part 135.    The contractor will not subcontract with any subcontractor where the
contractor has notice or knowledge that the subcontractor has been found in violation of the regulations in
24 CFR part 135.


E.   The contractor will certify that any vacant employment positions, including training positions, that are
filled (1) after the contractor is selected but before the contract is executed, and (2) with persons other than
those to whom the regulations of 24 CFR part 135 require employment opportunities to be directed, were
not filled to circumvent the contractor’s obligations under 24 CFR part 135.


F. Noncompliance with HUD’s regulations in 24 CFR part 135 may result in sanctions, termination of this
contract for default, and debarment or suspension from future HUD assisted contracts.


G. With respect to work performed in connection with Section 3 covered Indian housing assistance, section
7(b) of the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act
(25 U.S.C. 450e) also applies to the work to be performed under this contract. Section 7(b) requires that to
the greatest extent feasible (i) preference and opportunities for training and employment shall be given to
Indians, and (il) preference in the award of contracts and subcontracts shall be given to Indian
organizations and Indian-owned Economic Enterprises. Parties to this contract that are subject to the
provisions of Section 3 to the maximum extent feasible, but not in derogation of compliance with section
7(b).


                                                        24
Exhibit 1

                          CERTIFICATION FOR BUSINESS CONCERNS SEEKING SECTION 3
                        PREFERENCE IN CONTRACTING AND DEMONSTRATION OF CAPBILITY


Name of Business


Address of Business


Type of Business:               C)   Corporation              C)    Partnership
                                C1) Sole Proprietorship       1    Joint Venture

Attached is the following documentation as evidence of status:


For Business claiming status as a Section 3 resident-owned enterprise:
C1 Copy of resident lease                 C1 Copy of receipt of public assistance
C) Copy of evidence of participation                C) Other evidence
     in a public assistance program


For business entity as applicable:
C1 Copy of Articles of Incorporation                O    Certificate of Good Standing
CL) Assumed Business Name Certificate               [1 Partnership Agreement
C1) List of owners/stockholders and         C) Corporation Annual Report
    % ownership of each                     C) Latest Board minutes appointing officers
C) Organization chart with names and titles LJ Additional documentation
     and brief function statement


For business claiming Section 3 status by subcontracting 25 percent of the dollar awarded to qualified
Section 3 business:
C)   List of subcontracted Section 3 business(es) and subcontract amount


For business claiming Section 3 status, claiming at least 30 percent of their workforce are currently Section
3 residents or were Section 3 eligible residents within 3 years of date of first employment with the business:
C)   List of all current full-time employees        C1   List of employees claiming Section 3 status
[C1 PHA/IHA Residential lease less than3            1    Other evidence of Section 3 status less than 3
    years from day of employment                         years from date of employment

Evidence of ability to perform successfully under the terms and conditions of the proposed contract:
        1)     Current financial statement
        (      Statement of ability to comply with public policy
        C1     List of owned equipment
        C1     List of all contracts for the past two years



                                                                                          (Corporate Seal)
Authorizing Name and Signature



Attested by:




                                                                   25
Exhibit 2

                                                   THE HOUSING
                                                 AUTHORITY or City
                                      of the


                              RESIDENT EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY DATA
                                     THE HOUSING AUTHORITY OR CITY
                                                 OF THE
                                    CITY OF
                                        ELIGIBILITY FOR PREFERENCE

Eligibility for Preference

A section 3 resident seeking the preference in training and employment provided by this part shall certify, or
submit evidence to the recipient contractor or subcontractor, if requested, that the person is a Section 3
resident, as defined in Section 135.5. (An example of evidence of eligibility for the preference is evidence
of receipt of public assistance, or evidence of participation in a public assistance program.)

                    Certification for Resident Seeking Section 3 Preference in Training and
                                                       Employment

I,                                                  , am a legal resident of the

                                                          and meet the income eligibility guidelines for a low- or very-
low-income person as published on the reverse.

My permanent address is:




| have attached the following documentation as evidence of my status:


         C1 Copy of lease                                           C1 Copy of receipt of public
                                                                             assistance

         C) Copy of Evidence of participation                       C) Other evidence
                  in a public assistance program.




Signature


Print Name                                                            Date




                                                             26
Exhibit 2


                                                   THE HOUSING
                                                    AUTHORITY
                                     of the


                                       SECTION 3 INCOME LIMITS
All residents of public housing developments of the                   Housing Authority qualify as Section
3 residents. Additionally, individuals residing in the                            City of
Who meet the income limits set forth below, can also qualify for Section 3 status.


A picture identification card and proof of current residency is required.



                                              Eligibility Guideline
    Number in Household                       Very Low Income                       Low Income
         1 individual
            2 individuals
            3 individuals
            4 individuals
            5 individuals
            6 individuals
            7 individuals
            8 individuals




Current as of 1/03
Exhibit 3




            SECTION 3 CONTRACTING



            POLICY AND PROCEDURE




                      30
                                                INTRODUCTION



It is the mission of the Housing Authority or City of                     to provide a variety of safe,
sanitary, accessible, decent, and affordable housing to the citizens of the City of
                                 while enhancing and promoting resident self sufficiency.

The purpose of Section 3 of the Housing and Urban Development Act of 1968 (12 U.S.C. 1701u) (Section
3) is to ensure that employment and other economic opportunities generated by certain HUD financial
assistance shall, to the greatest extend feasible, and consistent with existing Federal State, and local laws
and regulations, be directed to low and very-low income individuals, especially recipients of government
assistance for housing, and to business concerns which provide economic opportunities to low and very-
low income individuals.     (Section   3 means section 3 of the Housing and Urban Development Act of 1968,
as amended 12 U.S.C. 1701u).

Section 3 requirements apply to all contractors and subcontractors performing work in connection with
projects and activities funded by public housing assistance covered by Section 3, regardless of the amount
of the contract or subcontract.    Section 3 covered contracts do not include contracts for the purchase of
supplies and materials unless the contract includes the installation of the materials.


A business concern seeking to qualify for a Section 3 contracting preference shall certify or submit
evidence that the business concern qualifies as a Section 3-business concern. (Refer to What Is A Section
3 Business Concern?). The Section 3 business must also be able to demonstrate its ability to complete the
contract.    The ability to perform successfully under the terms and conditions of the proposed contract is
required of all contractors and subcontractors subject to the procurement standards of 24 CFR 85.36, 24
CFR 85.36b(8).

Contractors who do not qualify as Section 3 business concerns, but who enter into contracts with the
Housing Authority or the City of                       , must agree to comply with certain general conditions (refer
to Section 3 Clause). All contractors and subcontractors, including Section 3 businesses, must comply with
these general conditions. Included in these conditions is the requirement that each contractor and
subcontractor submit with each pay request a report of Section 3 compliance (refer to Section 3
Compliance Report).       Failure to comply with these general conditions may lead to sanctions which can
include termination of the contract for default and suspension or debarment from future HUD-assisted
contracts (refer to Sanctions for Contractor’s Noncompliance).


            Please direct any questions you may have regarding this information to:


                                                           , Contract Administrator
                    Housing Authority or City of the




                                                            3]
                           WHAT IS A SECTION 3 BUSINESS CONCERN?

A Section 3 Business Concern is a business concern, as defined in this section—

    1.   That is fifty-one percent (51%) or more owned by Section 3 residents; or


    2.   Whose permanent, full-time employees include persons, at least thirty percent (830%0 of whom are
         currently Section 3 residents, or within three years of the date of first employment with the business
         concern were Section 3 residents; or


    3.   That provides evidence of a commitment to subcontract in excess of twenty-five percent (25%) of
         the dollar award of all subcontracts to be awarded to business concerns that meet the
         qualifications set forth in items (1) or (2) above.


Note:    A business concern seeking to qualify for Section 3 shall certify and submit evidence that
         the business meets one of the guidelines stated above. (Refer to Certification for Business
         Concerns Seeking Section 3 Preference in Contracting and Demonstration of Capability
         Form — Exhibit 1)




                                                          32
                                 WHO IS A SECTION 3 RESIDENT?

For purposes of the Housing Authority or the City of                                 , a Section 3 resident is:



   1.   A public housing resident;

   2.   An individual who lives with the                                   City of                     and
        whose income falls within the guidelines for low- or very low income.




                                                     33
                                 ORDER OF PROVIDING PREFERENCE
                                   SECTION 3 BUSINESS CONCERN


When considering the award of contracts to business concerns, and more than one Section 3 business
concern is being considered, to the greatest extent possible, awards shall be made in the following order of
priority:


     1.     A Section 3 business concern that is fifty-one percent (51%) or more owned by resident(s) of the
            public housing development in which the work is directed, or whose full-time, permanent
            employees include at least thirty percent (30%) of the residents of the public housing development
            in which the work is directed:


     2.     A Section 3 business that is majority owned by resident(s) of other developments owned by The
            Housing Authority or the City of                           , but not the housing development in
            which the work is directed, or whose full-time, permanent employees include at least thirty percent
            (30%) residents of other developments owned by The Housing Authority or the City of
                                      but not the housing development in which the work is directed;



     3.     HUD Youthbuild programs that are being carried out in the City in which the Section 3 covered
            assistance is expended.

     4.     A Section 3 business concern that is majority owned by a Section 3 resident who is not a public
            housing resident or whose permanent, full-time workforce includes no less than thirty percent
            (30%) Section 3 residents who are not public housing residents, or that subcontract in excess of
            twenty-five percent (25%) of the total amount of subcontracts to Section 3 business concerns.



Note:       A Section 3 business concern seeking any of the above preferences shall submit evidence
            that it meets the guidelines of that preference.




                                                         34
                                  WHAT IF MY BUSINESS DOES NOT
                                QUALIFY AS A SECTION 3 BUSINESS?


The Housing Authority will, to the greatest extent feasible, offer contracting opportunities to Section 3
business concerns.    However, in the event no Section 3 business bids on a contract, or bids but is not able
to demonstrate to the Housing Authority’s satisfaction that it has the ability to perform successfully under
the terms and conditions of the proposed contract, then that contract will be awarded to a non-Section 3
business concern that can meet the terms and conditions of the proposed contract through the competitive
bidding process.


That business concern must meet, as all business must (including Section 3 businesses), the general
conditions of compliance (refer to Section 3 Clause [Construction Contracts] and Section 3 Clause [Non-
Construction Contracts]).

This will include:


1.   Submitting a list of all positions necessary to complete contract, name of employees who will fill those
     positions, names of all other employees.

2.   Posting notices of any vacant positions, including training and/or apprenticeship positions,
     qualifications for positions, place where applications will be received and starting date of employment.


3.   To the greatest extent possible, making available vacant positions, including training and/or
     apprenticeship positions, to Section 3 residents (all categories) in order to priority.


4.   As positions are vacated during completion of contract, following guidelines enumerated in
     numbers 2 and 3 above.


5.   Submitting Compliance Reports as required.


6.   If notified of non-compliance, correcting non-compliance within allowable time period.




                                                         35
                               ORDER OF PROVIDING PREFERENCE
                              EMPLOYMENT OF SECTION 3 RESIDENT

When considering the employment of a Section 3 resident, the following order of priority is followed as
outlined in 24 CFR 135.32:

1.   Category 1 —Section 3 Resident
     Residents of the housing development or developments in which the contract shall be expended.


2.   Category 2—Section 3 Resident
     Residents of other housing developments managed by the Housing Authority or the City of



3.   Category 3-—Section 3 Resident
     Participants in HUD Youthbuild program being carried out.


4.   Category 4—-Section 3 Resident
     All other residents (including Section 8 recipients) of the City of                 who meet the income
     guidelines for Section 3 preference (refer to Section 3 Income Limits).


In all cases, applicants must meet the minimum qualifications for the position.   In no instance shall it be
construed that preference is given to Section 3 residents who do not meet these minimum qualifications.




                                                         36
                                       SECTION 3 INCOME LIMITS


All residents of public housing developments of The Housing Authority or the          City of
qualify as Section 3 residents.   Additionally, individuals residing within the
                                                                             of the
and who meet the income limits set forth below, can also qualify for Section 3 status.



    Number In Household                    Very Low Income                            Low Income



          1 individual

          2 individuals


          3 individuals


          4 individuals


          5 individuals


          6 individuals


          7 individuals


          8 individuals




                                                         37
Exhibit 4
                                        SECTION 3 SPECIAL CONDITIONS
The               has initiated efforts to enhance resident hiring in specific procurement areas.      These initiatives are
designed to set the requirements for resident hiring and developing and/or strengthening administrative procedures
for facilitating contractors’ hiring of                                 residents, other low income and/or very low-
income residents residing in the City of

      1.     Procurement     Documents


             Each bidder/proposer must include a Section 3 Opportunities Plan or a Schedule D which indicates its
             commitment to meet                 resident hiring requirements.


             If a bidder/proposer fails to submit a Section 3 Opportunities Plan or a Schedule D and the related data
             along with the bid/proposal, such bid/proposal will be declared as “non-responsive”.


             For invitations for Bids (“IFB”) where awards are made to the lowest, responsive and responsible
             bidder, the bidder’s commitment to satisfy               resident hiring requirements will be a factor used
             in determining whether the bidder is “responsive”.

             For RFQ’s, RFP’s and IFB’s, contractors shall be required to detail the cost of the bid or proposal by
             separately categorizing contract cost by labor (person hours and dollar amounts).


      2.     Resident Hiring Requirements


             In view of             desire to provide                                                       residents and
             neighborhood residents with employment opportunities, the following scale for resident hiring will be
             utilized on all construction contracts, service contracts, and professional service contracts containing a
             “labor” component:


             TOTAL LABOR DOLLARS                                      RESIDENT AS A % OF TOTAL LABOR
             USE TOTAL CONTRACT                                       DOLLARS
             AMOUNT FOR SERVICE CONTRACTS
             At least $25,000, but less than $100,000                 10% of the labor dollars
             $100,000, but less than $200,000                         9% of the labor dollars
             At least $200,000, but less than $300,000                8% of the labor dollars
             At least $300,000, but less than $400,000                7% of the labor dollars
             At least $400,000, but less than $500,000                6% of the labor dollars
             At least $500,000, but less than $1 million              5% of the labor dollars
             At least 1 million, but less than $2 million             4% of the labor dollars
             At least 2 million, but less than $4 million             3% of the labor dollars
             At least $4 million, but less than $7 million            2% of the labor dollars
             $7 million or more                                       1 -— 1/2% of the labor dollars


             With this sliding formula, it is expected that an appropriate number                         public housing
             residents and neighborhood residents with particular qualifications or willingness to begin
             unskilled labor will be able to participate in contracted labor efforts.       A prime contractor,
             through its subcontractor(s), may satisfy                   resident hiring requirements set forth
             above.




                                                             38
Exhibit 4


    3.      Enforcement


            To enforce the decision-making process pertaining to determining applicable percentages for
            resident hiring, enforcement strategies are set forth below.


            During the post award or pre-bid conference, the objective shall be to impact critical Section 3
            information to the contractor prior to commencement of the work/project.       The following
            contract requirements shall be discussed in detail:     (Non-construction contracts does not
            require Davis-Bacon)

                          Davis-Bacon
                          Minority and Women Owned Business Participation
                          Resident Hiring Professional


            Each representative will define specific functional requirements and require the contractor to
            certify its understanding of the terms and conditions of the contract as they pertain to Davis-
            Bacon, resident hiring and Minority and Women Owned Business participation.

    4.      Monitoring and Enforcement Authority and Responsibility


            The function of monitoring and enforcing resident hiring will be carried out by the Section 3
            Coordinator, including all field activities.

            DEFINITION:

            For participation in the Resident Hiring effort,   a resident is defined as anyone who is residing in
            the Housing Authority or the City of                        public housing developments, Section 8
            residents and individuals residing within the City of                     who can be classified as
            low-and very-low income.




                                                         39
Exhibit 4


              INSTRUCTIONS FOR COMPLETING THE SECTION 3 OPPORTUNITIES PLAN
                           (SERVICE & PROFESSIONAL CONTRACTS)

The purpose of Section 3 is to ensure that jobs and economic opportunities generated by HUD financial
assistance for housing and community development programs shall be directed to low and very low income
persons, particularly those who are recipients of government assistance for housing and business concerns
which provide economic opportunities to low and very low income persons.


The Section 3 Opportunities Plan is to be completed for service and professional contracts.           There are four
(4) ways in which Section 3 can be fulfilled. They are listed in order of preference:

         1)       Subcontract or joint venture with a resident owned business.          The business must
                  be 51% more owned by                                                      , or
                                                 public housing residents, or subcontractor/joint venture with a
                  business that employs full-time, 30% or more
                                         , or low and very low income individuals within the
                                                     , or

        2)        Direct hiring of                           Housing Authority’s
                                                               public housing residents and/or low and very low-
                  income neighborhood residents, or


        3)        Incur the cost of providing skilled training for residents in an amount commensurate with
                 the sliding scale set forth.   Such training shall be determined after consultation with the
                  Section 3 Coordinator of the


        4)        Contribute to                    resident educational fund in an amount commensurate with
                 the sliding scale included in the Section 3 Conditions.



If a prime contractor is unable to satisfy                  resident hiring requirements per the above, the
requirements may be satisfied through any subcontractors that may be involved in the project.


In paragraph number one (1), if the (sub)contractor has identified a resident owned business or a business
which employs 30% or more                    Public Housing or Neighborhood residents, this paragraph is to be
completed by indicating the number of resident owned businesses that will be used on the contract/spec
number shown at the end of the paragraph.

If the (sub)contractor plans to hire              Public Housing or Neighborhood residents to work for its
company, paragraph two (2) must be completed with the contract/spec number and the percentage of
compliance in hiring the resident(s).   For example, if your contract amount is $100,000.00, the Section 3
dollar amount that must be expended is 10% of your labor dollars or $10,000.00.            If the whole dollar
amount is to be expended on the resident’s salary, then 100% is to be inserted on the percent line.              Ifa
percentage amount less than 100% will be expended on the resident’s salary, that amount must be inserted



                                                             40
on the line and the remaining percentage must be expended through subcontracting/joint venturing with a
resident owned business or a business that employs 30% or more residents, or placed into
Section 3 Resident Educational Fund.                    In which case, the corresponding paragraph must be completed.

If the (sub)contractor has exhausted the first two (2) options, then the full amount of the contractor's
Section 3 obligations will be placed into                          Resident Educational Fund, in which case paragraph
three (3) must be completed and paragraphs one (1) and two (2) will contain zeroes in the percentage
lines.


The second portion of the Section 3 Opportunities Plan begins with the specification or request for proposal
title and number.

The third section is to be completed by listing current staff to be used to complete the work bid upon.


            (1)    List the job titles,
            (2) Complete the Needed column if additional staff will be required to fulfill the classification,
            (3) In the Total column, list the total number of staff plus the number needed,
            (4) In the            and LIAR columns, list the number of current staff who are residents of
                                  public housing, or who are low or very low income neighborhood residents,
            (5)    Inthe To Be Filled column, list the number of positions that fit into the low and very low-income
                                  public housing residents                    and low and very low income Area Residents
                   (LIAR) who will be hired.
            (6)    In the Hiring Goal column, list the number of                        Public Housing residents or low and
                   very low-income neighborhood residents you intend to hire.


The final section is to be completed after the contract has been awarded; interviews have taken
Place and residents have been                 hired.     The completed    Section 3 Opportunities Plan must be submitted to
the Section 3 Coordinator and Procurement/Contracts Department.

The      Housing      Authority     or the     City of                    public    housing   and   neighborhood     residents   are
screened      and skills assessed            by the Section 3 Coordinator.         Each contractor is required to attend a pre-
construction        conference       with     the      Procurement/Contract     Compliance      Department   where      contractual
obligations will be explained, the contractor's Section 3 dollar amount will be determined, and the
contractor's hiring goals will be discussed. The Section 3 coordinator will refer qualified residents to be
interviewed by the contractor.


The Section 3 Opportunities Plan that is submitted with the RFQ/RFP/IFB and the final copy that is
submitted to the Section 3 Coordinator and Procurement Contract Compliance Department must be signed
and include the title of person executing the plan.




                                                                     Al
Exhibit 4
                                              SECTION 3 OPPORTUNITIES PLAN

      Business Opportunities and Employment Training of the Housing Authority of the City of                                       Public
                             Housing Residents and Low and Very Low Income Neighborhood
                                                               Residents

I.       Opportunities Plan
The Contractor had identified                 Section 3 resident owned business(es) or
business(es) which employ 30% or more Section 3 residents to comply with                               % of its Section 3
requirements covered under Contract#                              . (Option 1)

Alternately, the Contractor hereby agrees to comply with all the provisions of Section 3 as set forth in 24 CFR                    135.1
et seq. and           . Resolutions implementing Section 3 requirements.              The Contractor hereby submits this
document to identify employment opportunities for the                           public housing residents and low and very low-
income area residents, during the term of the contract between the Contractor and                                . The Contractor affirms
that the jobs identified shall be for meaningful employment that may or may not be related to the scope of services
covered under Contract #            . The Contractor has committed to employ the following in order to comply with
         % of its Section 3 requirements. (Option 2)

The above percentage(s) equal(s) 50% of the Contractor’s Section 3 obligations.                    Option three (8) on page 2 equal
25% of compliance and Option four (4) on page 2 equals 25% of compliance.                    You may choose one option to comply
or all; however, total compliance must equal 100%.            The Contractor hereby agrees by signing below that any
remaining percentages will be deducted from payouts placed in the                            Section 3 Educational Fund.

Il.          Labor Survey:
SPEC OR RFP TITLE                                                             SPEC OR RFP NUMBER
(1)                                                 NUMBER     OF POSITIONS                                HIRING GOAL


                                        (3)
                             (2)                              FILLLED
          JOB TITLE          NEEDED
                                        (a)             (b)                   (c)
                                                                                          (4) TO BE        (a)              (b)
                                        TOTAL           LICSDR                LIAR        FILLED           LICSDR           LIAR




Page 1




                                                                    42
Exhibit 4
  Ill. Resident List
  Section 3 Resident Employee Information (Jobs to be filled)


                Job Title                               LICGSPHAR OR                        ADDRESS                  SOCIAL SECURITY
                                                         LIAR NAME                                                        NUMBER




LISPHAR = Low and Very Low Income                                      Housing Authority Resident
LIAR = Low and Very Low Income Area Resident



Please check the Option(s) that describe your contracting efforts:

             Option    1:   Subcontract with Section 3 Business(es) — 25%
OOOO




             Option    2:   Hire Section 3 residents/participants — 25%
             Option    3:   | have a training program in place and am willing to train             residents — 25%
             Option    4:   Contribute to the            training/educational fund for resident training — 25%

             In the event | am awarded the contract, | have the option to submit my check in the compliance amount of the start of
             contract date, or allow             to deduct payment from my draw requests. (Compliance amount is based upon the
             labor dollars of the contract award.)


You may comply by choosing one or all options. Remember your compliance must be equal to 100% as noted on page 1,
paragraph three (3), or any remaining percentages will be deducted from payouts and placed in the      resident
training/educational fund account.


The failure of the contractor to comply with the above-approved plan shall be a material breach of the contract.



Contractor’s Signature and Title:

Date:




Page 2




                                                                              43
Exhibit 4

NAME OF PRIME CONTRACTOR:
TITLE OF RFP OR SPEC:
SPEC. # OR RFP # OR PURCHASE          ORDER#:
CONTRACT #:

SECTION 3 COORDINATOR
PROCUREMENT/CONTRACT COMPLIANCE                  DEPARTMENT

WARNING:       THIS DOCUMENT IS REQUIRED FOR ALL CONSTRUCTION OR LABOR RELATED PROCUREMENTS.

1.   Employment and Training of the Housing Authority or the City of                   Public Housing Residents and Low and Very
     Low Income Area Residents.

The Contractor hereby agrees to comply with all the provisions of Section 3 as set forth in 24 CFR 135.38 implementing Section
3 requirements. The contractor hereby submits this Schedule D as its Section 3 Opportunities Plan.

The Contractor shall provide a status report identifying its progress in meeting the Section 3 goals established in this Section D
on a quarterly basis throughout the contract period. The quarterly status report shall be submitted no later than 10 days after the
end of each calendar quarter of the contract (e.g., April 10 for calendar quarter January 1 to March 31). The status report shall
be in at least the same level of detail as the approved Schedule D. For any goal not met, the report shall identify any other
economic opportunities, which the contractor has provided, or intend to provide to              and neighborhood residents.

The failure of the Contractor to comply with the approved plan shall be a material breach of the contract.

Each Bidder/Proposer for a construction or labor related contract must complete this Schedule D and submit all relevant
information required herein. A prime contractor, through its’ subcontractors may satisfy the         Resident Hiring
Requirements. Please complete the Skill Needs Table in Section 1 of Section 3 Opportunities Plan in the following columns.

          1)        indicate each category of employment for all phase of this contract;
          2)        the number of positions which will be needed in each category;
          3)        how many of those positions are currently filled;
                          (a) the number filled by neighborhood residents, excluding                                    and
                                                 residents;
                          (6) the number filled by           Public Housing residents;
                          (c) how many positions need to be filled.

          4)        Indicate your goal for the number of positions you intend to fill with:

                         (a)   Section 3 Residents
                         (b)   Low and Very low income area residents.

NOTE:         The minimum of trainees is that which can reasonably be utilized in each occupation, and no less than the number
established by the U.S. Secretary of Labor for construction and non-construction labor related occupations. The contractor shall
fill all vacant positions with low-income persons (earning less than 80% of the median income in the City of
and these positions shall not be filled immediately prior to undertaking work in order to circumvent regulations as set forth at 24
C.F.R. Part 135 et seq: as amended.




                                                                  4A
Il.   SECTION 3 BUSINESSES SUBCONTRACTING OPPORTUNITIES

In a one (1) page letter on your company’s letterhead:


      1)       Indicate the goals, expressed in terms of percentage of planning subcontracting dollars, for the use of Section 3
               business concerns as subcontractors.
      2)       A statement of the total dollar amount to be subcontracted, total dollar amount to be subcontracted to Section 3
               business concerns for building trades, and total dollar amount to be subcontracted to Section 3 business concerns
               for other than building trades work (maintenance, repair, modernization and redevelopment).
               A description of the method used to develop the goals above and the efforts to be undertaken by the Contractor to
               meet those goals.

                                                            Acknowledged by:



                                                            (President or Authorized Officer)



                                                            Date:




                                                               45
