                                                                                          Poa
                                                                                          Uregot

                                                                                           Public    Utility
                                                                                             LOmmission

Oregon Public Utility Commission Fact Sheet:                                          3
Public Utility Regulatory Policies Act of 1978 (PURPA)

The Public Utility Regulatory Policies Act of 1978 (PURPA) was enacted following the energy
crisis of the 1970s to encourage competition and the development of renewable energy
technologies by non-utility power producers. PURPA, and Oregon’s parallel legislation codified
in ORS Chapter 758, requires electric utilities to purchase power generated by qualifying
facilities, or QFs. QEs fall into two groups:

    e   Small Power Production Facilities — 80 MW or less whose primary energy source is
        renewable.
    e   Co-Generation     Facilities — produce both electricity and another form of useful thermal
        energy (like heat or steam) in a way that is more efficient than separate production.

The rates paid by the utility for the energy and capacity of the QF power may not exceed a
utility's “avoided cost” and must be just and reasonable to the utility's customers and in the
public interest.   “Avoided cost” is defined as the cost to the utility of the electric energy which,
but for the purchase from the QF, the utility would generate or purchase from another source.

PUC’s Role

In Oregon, the PUC sets contracting and pricing terms for QF power sold to Oregon’s three
investor-owned utilities (Portland General Electric, PacifiCorp, and Idaho Power). Oregon’s
consumer-owned utilities adopt their own rules and prices to administer their PURPA
obligations.

The PUC has consistently interpreted its PURPA mandate to be the adoption of policies and
rules that encourage the economically efficient develooment of QFs, while protecting ratepayers
by ensuring that utilities pay prices equal to that which they would have incurred in lieu of
purchasing QF power.

        Eligibility for Standard Contracts

Under federal law, small QF projects 100 kW or less must be offered standard contracts and
standard avoided cost prices. The standard offerings allow small QFs the ability to contract with
utilities with limited need for negotiations.

States may raise this 100 kW threshold and require these standard offerings be provided to
larger QFs.   Over the years, the PUC has adjusted the size thresholds in response to market
changes and status of QF development.           The PUC has established the following thresholds,
which were last updated in 2017:

                                     Non-Solar QFs                      Solar QFs
 Standard avoided costs              Up to 1OMW                         Up to 3MW
 Standard contract terms             Up to 1OMW                         Up to 1OMW
        Methodology

There is significant diversity in the methodologies used by states to develop avoided cost
pricing.’ In Oregon, the PUC has adopted a methodology by which avoided cost prices are
based on the costs of the lowest cost resource otherwise available to the utility.

Although PURPA does provide some authority to adjust the utility's avoided cost to take into
account certain characteristics of the QF, this flexibility is limited for standard avoided cost
prices because they are by definition "standard" and as a general matter do not take into
account specific characteristics of any particular QF. However, the PUC has created multiple
price options that recognize the different value that different QF types provide to the energy and
capacity needs of the system. For example, there is a separate avoided cost price for wind QFs
and for solar QFs.

The flexibility to address unique characteristics, such as the QF’s dispatch ability or its proximity
to the utility's load, is greater for negotiated rates and contracts (which must be used by projects
larger than the threshold for standard rates and contracts but are available to QFs of any size).
If a QF has characteristics that provide particular value to the utility relative to the utility's
avoided proxy resource, negotiated avoided cost prices can be adjusted to reflect that value.

PURPA does not allow the PUC to adjust avoided cost prices to account for external benefits of
a QF project that are not related to its performance. These include economic benefits that a QF
project may bring to a local economy, or other general social benefits.

PUC Processes

The PUC regularly updates avoided cost pricing through two processes. First, the PUC
performs a comprehensive update of a utility's avoided costs following completion of the utility’s
integrated resource planning (IRP) process. This occurs at least every two years. Second, the
PUC performs a limited update to capture market forecasts and other inputs every May.

Both updates are completed through an open and public process, where the PUC and other
stakeholders have access to the data needed to vet to the utilities’ avoided cost calculations and
the resources that utilities procure outside of PURPA.    Some information used to help inform
avoided costs, however, is competitively sensitive. For that reason, the PUC may adopt
protective orders to allow its Staff, customer groups, and other stakeholders to access this
information, while shielding it from companies that negotiate or participate in utility procurement
processes.

The PUC also periodically conducts investigations and activities examine other PURPA related
issues to best balance the incentives for QF development while ensuring that ratepayers remain
indifferent to QF power by having utilities pay no more than their avoided costs. Currently, the
PUC has a rulemaking (Docket AR 631) that is considering, among other things, policies that
improve the contracting process. The PUC also has an open investigation into avoided cost
methodologies that is considering the changing utility resource mix when identifying proxy
resources and looking to include an expedited process to establish solar + storage standard
price streams.

1 For a summary of PURPA implementation by state, the National Regulatory Research   Institute
maintains an on-line database: PURPA Tracker.
