         a                        U.S. DEPARTMENT     OF HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT
             5                                       WASHINGTON, DC 20410-5000


OFFICE OF PUBLIC AND INDIAN HOUSING




Special Attention of:                                        Notice PIH 2024-30

Directors of HUD Regional and Field                          Issued:    August 20, 2024
Offices of Public Housing;
Agencies that Administer the Housing                         Expires:    This notice remains in effect until
Choice Voucher (HCV) Program                                 amended, superseded, or rescinded.

                                                             Cross References:     PIH 2020-01 (This notice
                                                             updates Sections 5 (f) and (g) of PIH 2020-
                                                             01); PIH 2012-31.


Subject:         Statutory and Regulatory Waivers for Mainstream Vouchers

    1.   Purpose

         Pursuant to the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2024 (Public Law 118-42), this notice
         establishes waivers and alternative requirements for Mainstream Vouchers.

    2.   Background

         The Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2024 (Public Law 118-42) (2024 Act’)
         authorized the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) to establish
         waivers and alternative requirements for Mainstream Vouchers that are necessary for the
         effective delivery and administration of funds. Per section 243 of the 2024 Act, HUD
         may waive or specify alternative requirements for Section 8(0)(6)(A) of the United States
         Housing Act of 1937 (1937 Act) (42 U.S.C. 1437f(0)(6)(A)) and regulatory provisions
         related to the administration of waiting lists, local preferences, and the initial term and
         extensions of tenant-based vouchers. HUD is not permitted to waive requirements
         related to tenant rights and protections, rent setting, fair housing, nondiscrimination, labor
         standards, and the environment.

         Mainstream Vouchers are special purpose vouchers for non-elderly persons with
         disabilities that are subject to the requirements in Section 8(0) of the 1937 Act and 24
         CFR 982 except as provided in this notice and any subsequent notice issued by HUD.
         However, funding and reporting for Mainstream Vouchers is separate from the HCV
         program.

         In targeting housing assistance to non-elderly persons with disabilities and their families,
         particularly those transitioning out of institutions or at serious risk of institutionalization,
         Mainstream Vouchers help further the goals of the Americans with Disabilities Act
         (ADA). One specific goal under the ADA is to ensure that services, programs, and


                                       www.hud.gov          espanol.hud.gov
    activities are provided by public entities in the most integrated setting appropriate to the
    needs of persons with disabilities.   In Olmstead v L.C. 527 U.S. 581 (1999), the United
    States Supreme Court affirmed the rights of persons with disabilities under the ADA to
    participate in community living. Recognizing that housing plays a central role in
    supporting community integration, HUD’s policy priorities for Mainstream Vouchers
    reflect its commitment to help public housing agencies (PHA) further localities’ and
    states’ implementation of Olmstead-related efforts and compliance with the ADA.

    The waivers and alternative requirements described below are intended to provide
    programmatic flexibilities to help PHAs improve Mainstream utilization and more
    successfully target Mainstream-eligible populations, including persons exiting institutions
    or at serious risk of institutionalization. PHAs with outstanding Olmstead-related
    litigation or enforcement activities, as well as those undertaking affirmative Olmstead
    planning and implementation efforts, who wish to establish preferences that target
    individuals with specific disabilities must request HUD approval. The process for
    requesting approval for a remedial preference targeting individuals with specific
    disabilities is outlined in Notice PIH 2012-31. See also Statement of the Department of
    Housing and Urban Development on the Role of Housing in Accomplishing the Goals of
    Olmstead, https://www.hud.gov/sites/documents/OLMSTEADGUIDNC060413.PDF
    (Question 3).

. Applicability

    The waivers and alternative requirements listed below are applicable to all PHAs
    awarded Mainstream Vouchers and PHAs that administer Mainstream Vouchers through
    a portability billing arrangement. This Notice does not apply to Non-Elderly Disabled
    (NED) Vouchers or “Mainstream 1 Year” Vouchers.

.   Effective Date

    This notice is effective upon publication.

    Compliance Date

    PHAs must adopt the mandatory policies described in Section 6 within 120 days from
    publication of this notice.

. Mandatory Program Policies: This section describes the mandatory waivers and
  alternative requirements that HUD is establishing for Mainstream Vouchers. A summary
  of the mandatory waivers and alternative requirements is included in Attachment I of this
  notice.

    a.   Initial Search Term. Many Mainstream Voucher applicants face challenges in their
         housing search. Tight rental markets coupled with specific unit needs (e.g.,
         accessible units, units near medical or supportive services, units near public transit,
         units meeting other disability-related needs, etc.) may require applicants to need
  additional time to search for a suitable unit. HUD is waiving 24 Code of Federal
  Regulations (CFR) 982.303(a), which requires an initial search term of at least 60
  days, and establishing an alternative requirement that the initial search term for a
  Mainstream Voucher must be at least 120 days. The initial 120-day term also applies
  when a family chooses to move to a new unit with continued assistance inside or
  outside the PHA’s jurisdiction, in accordance with 24 CFR 982 subpart H.

  When issuing a Mainstream Voucher, PHAs also must provide a current listing of
  available accessible units known to the PHA and, if necessary, otherwise assist the
  family in identifying an accessible unit (24 CFR 8.28(a)(3)).

. Extensions of Term.    The PHA’s administrative plan must describe its policies for
  granting extensions of the initial 120-day term (24 CFR 982.303(b)(1)) and provide
  clear instructions to families on the procedures for requesting an extension. Ifa
  family requires additional time for their unit search, PHAs are required to provide an
  extension as part of a reasonable accommodation under Section 504 of the
  Rehabilitation Act and HUD’s Section 504 requirements (24 CFR part 8; See also 24
  CFR 982.303(b)(2)).   While all Mainstream Voucher applicants include a family
  member with a disability and are eligible for an extension as part of a reasonable
  accommodation, PHAs have considerable discretion in the details they may establish
  for their general extension policy under (24 CFR 982.303(b)(1)) outside of the
  context of reasonable accommodations, including the deadline for requesting an
  extension and the length of the extension. National voucher success rates and median
  search times indicate that, on average, Mainstream Voucher applicants take longer to
  lease than HCV applicants and are more likely to ultimately be unsuccessful in using
  their voucher compared to other special purpose voucher applicants. As discussed
  above in Section 6(a), multiple circumstances may contribute to the barriers that
  Mainstream Voucher applicants experience in successfully leasing.

  Given the challenges Mainstream Voucher applicants may face in securing a unit,
  applicants should be provided with flexible extension policies. To support this need,
  HUD is waiving 24 CFR 982.303(b)(1) and establishing an alternative requirement
  for the process of requesting search extensions. PHAs must adopt an extension policy
  for Mainstream Vouchers that includes the following: 1) each extension must be for a
  minimum of 90 days, 2) the PHA must approve the first extension request, regardless
  of how the request is made (written or verbal) or when it is made, as long as the
  request is made on or before the term expiration date and is consistent with applicable
  requirements; subsequent requests should be processed in accordance with the PHA’s
  administrative plan, and 3) the PHA must, on at least one occasion after voucher
  issuance, notify the family prior to the initial term expiration to remind them of the
  term expiration date, the process for requesting an extension, and to inquire if the
  family is in need of assistance with their housing search. PHAs should be aware that
  families may require more than the minimum required initial extension to
  successfully lease up and must grant additional extensions if requested in accordance
  with the PHA’s administration plan.
             As part of its search extension policy, PHAs may not restrict a first extension
             approval to certain circumstances or require documentation from applicants. For all
             extension requests, the written or verbal request is sufficient. Note that this
             alternative requirement also applies to current Mainstream Voucher participants who
             choose to move to a new unit with continued assistance inside or outside the PHA’s
             jurisdiction, in accordance with 24 CFR 982 subpart H. In providing notice to
             families of the expiration date and extension request process, PHAs must ensure
             effective communication with persons with disabilities, including those with vision,
             hearing, speech, intellectual or other developmental disabilities, or any other
             communication-related disabilities.

             While HUD 1s establishing an alternative requirement to 24 CFR 982.303(b)(1), HUD
             reminds PHAs that 24 CFR 982.303(b)(2) requires PHAs to approve all extensions
             made as part of a reasonable accommodation and PHAs must provide this information
             during the family briefing (24 CFR 982.301(a)).

        c.   Residency Preference. Because Mainstream Vouchers are intended to facilitate
             access to housing for individuals with disabilities, including for individuals who
             reside in institutional or other segregated settings that may not be located in the
             geographic area that is typically served by a PHA, a residency preference may
             prevent an otherwise eligible applicant from accessing Mainstream Vouchers.
             Consequently, HUD is waiving Section 8(0)(6)(A) of the 1937 Act and 24 CFR
             982.207(b)(1) and establishing an alternative requirement under which a PHA cannot
             apply a residency preference to Mainstream Voucher applicants.

   7.   Discretionary Program Policies. This section describes the optional waivers that HUD
        is establishing for Mainstream Vouchers. PHAs may choose, but are not required, to
        adopt any optional waivers. PHAs that choose to adopt any of the optional waivers
        described below must describe those policies in their administrative plan (24 CFR
        982.54(d)(1)).   A summary of the optional waivers is included in Attachment I of this
        notice.

        a.   Waiting Lists. HCV regulations require PHAs to use a single waiting list for
             admission to its Section 8 tenant-based assistance program. Accordingly, PHAs
             select Mainstream Voucher applicants from its HCV waiting list (24 CFR
             982.204(f)). This requirement has led to challenges for some PHAs in administering
             Mainstream Vouchers, as it can be time-consuming and burdensome to identify
             eligible applicants from long HCV waiting lists. Further, PHAs may find it
             challenging to identify eligible applicants if the PHA has an established preference
             for targeted subgroups identified in a Mainstream Voucher Notice of Funding
             Opportunity (NOFO), such as persons transitioning out of institutional or other
             segregated settings.!

             To assist PHAs in identifying eligible applicants and enable PHAs to more effectively

' The 2017 Mainstream Voucher NOFO and 2019 Mainstream Voucher NOFO provided points to PHAs certifying
a plan to adopt a preference for certain subgroups.
allocate Mainstream Vouchers, HUD is waiving 24 CFR 982.204(f) and establishing
an optional waiver to maintain a separate Mainstream waiting list.

Successful establishment of a separate Mainstream Voucher waiting list requires
PHAs to have or to obtain applicants’ disability status to determine eligibility for
Mainstream Vouchers so they can be placed on the Mainstream Voucher waiting list.
To expedite issuance of Mainstream Vouchers under this notice, PHAs
should determine as quickly as possible which applicants on the existing HCV
waiting list are families that include non-elderly individuals who have a disability that
qualifies them for Mainstream Vouchers if this information has not already been
collected. That information will facilitate the prompt and effective notification of
existing applicants that qualify for Mainstream Vouchers or nondiscriminatory
preferences described in this notice. PHAs may obtain disability status by direct
outreach to families who are currently on the HCV waiting list. HUD encourages
PHAs to collect information on disability status for all applicants at the pre-
application and/or the application stages.

If a PHA chooses to create a separate Mainstream Voucher waiting list, the PHA
must ensure effective communication of notice is provided to ensure that families on
its HCV waiting list are informed of the separate Mainstream Voucher waiting list
and have an opportunity to be placed on the list. In providing this notice, PHAs must
ensure effective communication of this change to persons with disabilities, including
persons with vision, hearing, speech, intellectual or developmental disabilities, or any
other communication-related disabilities. Effective communication is especially
significant because Mainstream Vouchers are intended to serve individuals with
disabilities.

PHAs must ensure effective communication of notice is provided by taking a
combination of actions, which may include:

    e   individually notifying families that identified as having a family member with
        a disability at the time of application or pre-application;
    e   individually notifying a reasonable percentage of families from the top of the
        existing HCV waiting list given the anticipated number of Mainstream
        Vouchers that a PHA will be issuing in the next five years, while not denying
        the opportunity for any other household on the HCV waiting list to also be
        placed on the Mainstream Voucher waiting list;
    e   ensuring outreach to organizations serving persons with disabilities and
        service organizations so there is widespread awareness of the availability of a
        separate waiting list and how to access this resource;
    e   providing information on social media sites; and
    e   other communication methods.

PHAs must also inform families on the HCV waiting list of the Mainstream Voucher
waiting list by either posting the information to their website or providing public
notice in their communities.
When notifying families and providing notice, the PHA must describe the eligibility
criteria for Mainstream Vouchers and describe the actions a family should take to be
added to the Mainstream Voucher waiting list. The PHA notice should also make
clear to applicants that if they decide to be included on the Mainstream waiting list,
they will not lose their position on the HCV waiting list. PHAs must also take
reasonable steps to ensure meaningful access for persons with limited English
proficiency (LEP). If a PHA does not pursue the optional waiver to maintain a
separate Mainstream waiting list, the PHA must still ensure program access for
individuals with disabilities.

To support the effective administration of Mainstream Vouchers and the expeditious
implementation of a separate Mainstream waiting list, PHAs may choose and are
strongly encouraged to commence notifying (as described above) families on the
HCV waiting list before the establishment of a separate Mainstream waiting list is
formally adopted by the PHA Board of Commissioners or other authorized PHA
officials in the PHA administrative plan. The PHA notice in such a case must explain
that the establishment of the Mainstream waiting list is dependent on the amendment
to the PHA administrative plan being formally adopted but that families are strongly
encouraged to take the necessary action now to ensure that their names are placed on
the Mainstream waiting list as seamlessly and expeditiously as possible. Conducting
the outreach process to HCV waiting list applicants concurrently with the actions
necessary to formally adopt the establishment of the separate Mainstream waiting list
in the PHA administrative plan is an important consideration for PHAs that wish to
implement the separate Mainstream waiting list promptly. Taking such action allows
the PHA to ensure the HCV waiting list applicants are provided reasonable time to
complete the actions necessary to be added to the Mainstream waiting list at its
inception without having to unduly delay the implementation and the associated
benefits and efficiencies offered by the Mainstream waiting list.

PHAs must allow 60 calendar days for the effective communication of notice and to
provide families an opportunity to respond before issuing vouchers from the separate
Mainstream waiting list. This 60-day period may commence whenever a PHA elects
to do an early notification as described above.   In the interim, PHAs can continue to
use its HCV waitlist for issuing Mainstream Vouchers.

PHAs may use either date and time of application or a drawing or other random
choice technique in selecting families from the Mainstream waiting list among
applicants with the same preference status in accordance with the PHA’s
administrative plan. For PHAs that rely on the date and time of application in
determining the order in which families are selected from the Mainstream waiting list,
HUD is waiving 982.207(c)(1) and establishing as an alternative requirement that the
application date and time of the family’s prior HCV application must be used for
those Mainstream applicants that are already on the HCV waiting list. For example,
if the PHA determines the order of selection for families that qualify for the same
Mainstream waiting list local preference by date of application, the date used to
  determine the family’s place on the waiting list compared to the other families who
  qualify for that preference is the date of their application for the HCV
  program. However, the order that families may be reached on the Mainstream
  waiting list compared to the regular HCV waiting list may be different depending on
  the local preferences the PHA establishes for the Mainstream waiting list. Selection
  from the Mainstream waiting list will be in accordance with local preferences that the
  PHA establishes for Mainstream Voucher applicants. This may result in the selection
  of families from the Mainstream waiting list who were not previously on the HCV
  waiting list ahead of those who were on the HCV waiting list based on the family’s
  eligibility for a Mainstream applicant preference.

. Local Preferences.   While PHAs may establish local preferences based on local
  housing needs and priorities (24 CFR 982.207(a)), HCV regulations do not permit
  PHAs to establish separate preferences for Mainstream Voucher applicants.
  Preferences apply to all vouchers on the waiting list. HUD is waiving 24 CFR
  982.207(a)(1) and establishing an optional waiver permitting PHAs to establish
  separate preferences for Mainstream Voucher applicants. Regardless of whether a
  PHA chooses to adopt separate Mainstream Voucher preferences, PHAs that claimed
  points for a preference in a NOFO must continue to maintain a preference for at least
  one of the targeted groups in the NOFO. PHAs may choose to apply NOFO
  preferences to its entire HCV waiting list or only to Mainstream Voucher applicants
  as a Separate Mainstream Voucher preference.

  PHAs currently have the option, without an optional waiver, to establish a preference
  for applicants referred from certain agencies. Using the optional waiver described in
  the paragraph above, PHAs may choose to establish a referral preference specifically
  for Mainstream Voucher applicants. Referral partners may refer potential
  Mainstream Voucher participants directly to the PHA for processing, and such
  individuals can be placed on the Mainstream waiting list. A formalized partnership
  with a referring agency is not required for Mainstream Voucher referrals, but HUD
  encourages PHAs to execute MOUs with agencies providing referrals. A sample
  MOU   can be found here.   PHAs that choose to use direct referrals from other
  agencies to place individuals onto their waiting list must make such information
  publicly available, by providing clear information on these partnerships and the direct
  referrals process on their website and in their administrative plan, including the
  names and contact information of their partnering agencies (24 CFR 982.54(d)(1)).
  Written documentation of these referrals must be maintained in the tenant file by the
  PHA.

  When engaging in such partnerships and accepting referrals, PHAs must ensure that
  they are not discriminating based on disability type or on the basis of any other
  federally protected class. Referral partnerships cannot create, directly or indirectly,
  requirements to receive Mainstream Vouchers that may violate nondiscrimination
  requirements under any applicable federal civil rights laws, including Section 504 of
  the Rehabilitation Act (Section 504), the Fair Housing Act, Title VI of the Civil
  Rights Act (Title VI), the ADA, and the Age Discrimination Act, among others. This
         means, for example, that   a PHA cannot restrict Mainstream Vouchers to those
         referred by a specific state or local agency that provides services only to individuals
         with specific types of disabilities or diagnoses because such an arrangement would
         exclude individuals with other types of disabilities who are eligible to receive a
         Mainstream Voucher. Accordingly, if a PHA partners with such an organization, the
         PHA also must have a partnership with at least one organization that will accept and
         refer any potentially eligible applicant. Potential referral sources that may serve
         individuals with all types of disabilities and therefore will refer any potentially
         eligible applicant include Continuums of Care, Independent Living Centers, Area
         Agencies on Aging, and fair housing initiatives programs. So long as the PHA has a
         referral partnership with a source that serves all individuals regardless of types of
         disability, the PHA may create additional partnerships with disability-specific referral
         services or other sources that may not serve individuals with all types of disabilities,
         such as state Medicaid agencies. In implementing this referral process, a PHA cannot
         prioritize referrals from one referral source over others or provide any priority or
         preference over other referral sources in allocating vouchers and developing a waiting
         list. Any proposed preferences must comply with federal fair housing and civil rights
         authorities, including, but not limited to, the Fair Housing Act, Section 504, Title VI,
         the Age Discrimination Act, among others (24 CFR 5.105(a)).

         These partnerships are intended to help PHAs more efficiently identify eligible
         beneficiaries and quickly utilize vouchers. Such partnerships also help facilitate
         access to individuals who are exiting institutional settings. Given the challenges in
         timing and ensuring a voucher is available when an individual is ready to leave an
         institutional setting, this type of arrangement allows an agency to better ensure a
         voucher will be available when an individual is ready to exit an institutional or other
         segregated setting, coordinate any application and screening issues, and build in time
         for finding a unit that meets the individual’s disability-related needs. This advanced
         planning and coordination should help facilitate a ttmely move into a community-
         based, affordable, and integrated housing opportunity.

8.   Reasonable Accommodations. As a reminder, PHAs administering Mainstream
     Vouchers and landlords receiving Mainstream Vouchers may need to provide various
     reasonable accommodations for individuals with disabilities to ensure program access.        A
     common reasonable accommodation is providing approval for exception payment
     standards (24 CFR 982.503(d)(5)), so that an individual with a disability is able to rent a
     unit that meets their disability-related needs in terms of features, location, or other
     characteristics, as well as the possible need for additional space to accommodate a live-in
     aide or additional equipment. Other examples of types of reasonable accommodations
     that may be needed in HCV programs, including Mainstream Vouchers, to ensure
     program access include, but are not limited to: assistance in or modifications to the
     application process and procedures; permitting assistance animals in housing; and
     providing additional time or other modifications for an individual with a disability who is
     unable to move within a specific time period because of their disability when the
     individual reaches the top of a waiting list (e.g., due to hospitalization, treatment, or other
     disability-related reasons). In addition, a PHA is required to take appropriate steps to
        ensure effective communication with applicants, beneficiaries, and members of the
        public.” This effective communication obligation is separate from and in addition to a
        PHA’s reasonable accommodation obligations.

        Information Contact. Inquiries about this notice should be directed to
        Mainstream Vouchers @ hud. gov.

    10. Paperwork Reduction Act. The information collection requirements contained in this
        notice have been approved by the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) under the
        Paperwork Reduction Act (PRA) of 1995 (44 U.S.C 3520).              In accordance with the PRA,
        HUD may not conduct or sponsor, and a person is not required to respond to, a collection
        of information unless the collection displays a currently valid OMB control number. The
        active information collections contained in this notice have been approved under the PRA
        OMB    Control Number 2577-0169.




                                                           Richard J. Monocchio
                                                           Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary
                                                           Office of Public and Indian Housing




> 24 CFR 8.6 Communications (Section 504); 28 CFR part 35, Subpart   E-—Communications (Title II ADA).
                  MENT Or
          ys at


       al
 By
                     |        ° cosz                                U.S. DEPARTMENT       OF HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT

ULS.           I
                             * oO
                                 BK                                                      WASHINGTON, DC   20410-5000
Ww
                         |        @
 o”
       Ct4,                  es
              ®4n peve®

OFFICE OF PUBLIC AND INDIAN HOUSING




                                                                               Attachment I
                                                           Mainstream Voucher Waivers and Alternative Requirements

                    Item                    Statutory or        Brief Summary                 Mandatory                         Alternative Policy
                                             Regulatory                                          Use
                  Waiting              | 24 CFR            Waives the requirement                 No            PHAs may establish a waiting list separate from
                    Lists               982.204(f)         that PHAs maintain one                               their HCV waiting list for Mainstream Vouchers.
                                                           HCV waiting list.
                  Waiting               24 CFR             Waives the requirement              No, unless     | For PHAs that opt to establish a separate
                    Lists               982.207(c)(1)      that date and time of              establishing    | Mainstream waiting list and rely on the date and
                                                           application, if used by the         aseparate | time of application method, they must rely on the
                                                           PHA, applies only to the           waiting list | date and time of application for their Mainstream
                                                           HCV waiting list.                                 waiting list as well.
        Preferences | 24 CFR                               Waives the requirement                 No         PHAs may establish separate preferences for
                      982.207(a)                           that PHAs maintain one set                        Mainstream Voucher applicants. PHAs that claimed
                                                           of HCV preferences.                               points for a preference in a Notice of Funding
                                                                                                             Opportunity (NOFO) must continue to maintain a
                                                                                                             preference for at least one of the targeted groups
                                                                                                             identified in the NOFO.
        Preferences | Section 8(0)(6)(A) | Waives the ability for                                 Yes           A PHA may not apply any residency preference to
                                        of the United      PHAs to establish a                                  Mainstream Voucher applicants.
                                        States Housing     residency preference for
                                        Act of 1937; 24    Mainstream Voucher
                                        CFR 982.207(b)     applicants.
                  Initial               24 CFR             Waives the ability for                 Yes           A PHA must provide a minimum initial search term
                  Search                982.303(a)         PHAs to use a minimum                                of 120 days for Mainstream Voucher applicants.
                   Term                                    initial search term of 60
                                                           days for Mainstream
                                                           Voucher applicants.



                                                                           www.hud.gov           espanol.hud.gov
   Item          Statutory or         Brief Summary             Mandatory                    Alternative Policy
                  Regulatory                                       Use
  Term        24 CFR            Waives the ability for             Yes      PHAs must adopt an extension policy that includes
Extensions   | 982.303(b)(1)    PHAs to grant first                         the following features: 1) each extension must be
                                extensions at its discretion.               for a minimum of 90 days, 2) the PHA must
                                                                            approve the first extension request, regardless of
                                                                            how the request is made or when it is made (written
                                                                            or verbal), as long as the request is made on or
                                                                            before the term expiration date and is consistent
                                                                            with applicable requirements, and 3) the PHA must,
                                                                            on at least one occasion after voucher issuance,
                                                                            notify the family prior to the initial term expiration
                                                                            to remind them of the term expiration date, the
                                                                            process for requesting an extension, and to inquire
                                                                            if the family is in need of assistance with their
                                                                            housing search.




                                                                                                                                     11
