             (Adopted July 8, 1988)(Amended May 5, 1989)(Amended March 2, 1990)
   (Amended June 28, 1990)(Amended November 2, 1990)(Amended December 7, 1990)
                            (Amended August 2, 1991)(Amended September 6, 1991)
                              (Amended December 9, 1994)(Amended March 8, 1996)
  (Amended June 13, 1997)(Amended December 11, 1998)(Amended December 2, 2005)
                          (Amended September 5, 2014)(Amended November 1, 2024)


RULE 1151.                 MOTOR VEHICLE AND MOBILE EQUIPMENT
                           NON-ASSEMBLY LINE COATING OPERATIONS

(a)   Purpose
      The purpose of this rule is to reduce Volatile Organic Compound (VOC) emissions,
      toxic air contaminants, stratospheric ozone-depleting compounds, and global-
      warming compound emissions from Automotive Coating applications performed
      on Motor Vehicles, Mobile Equipment, and Associated Parts and Components.

(b)   Applicability
      This rule is applicable to any person who supplies, sells, offers for sale, markets,
      manufactures, blends, packages, repackages, possesses, or distributes any
      Automotive Coating, Automotive Coating Component, or associated solvent for
      use within the South Coast AQMD, as well as any person who uses, applies, or
      solicits the use or application of any Automotive Coating, Automotive Coating
      Component, or associated solvent within the South Coast AQMD.

(c)   Definitions
      (1)     ADHESION PROMOTER means any Automotive Coating that is
              specifically labeled and formulated to be applied to uncoated plastic and
              other synthetic surfaces, excluding metals, to facilitate bonding of
              subsequent Automotive Coatings.
      (2)     AEROSOL COATING PRODUCT means a pressurized Coating product
              containing pigments or resins that dispenses product ingredients by means
             of a propellant, and is packaged in a disposable can for hand-held
             application, or for use in specialized equipment for ground traffic/marking
             applications.
      (3)    ASSEMBLY LINE means an arrangement of industrial equipment and
             workers in which the product passes from one specialized operation to
             another until complete, by either automatic or manual means.




                                            1151 - 1
Rule 1151 (Cont.)                                          (Amended November 1, 2024)


(c)    (4)    ASSOCIATED PARTS AND COMPONENTS means structures, devices,
              pieces, modules, sections, assemblies, subassemblies, or elements of any
              Motor Vehicle or Mobile Equipment that are designed to be a part of any
              Motor Vehicle or Mobile Equipment but that are not attached to any Motor
              Vehicle or Mobile Equipment at the time of the application of an
              Automotive Coating to such structure, device, piece, module, section,
              assembly, subassembly, or element. Associated Parts and Components do
              not include circuit boards.
       (5)    AUTOMOTIVE COATING means any Coating used or recommended for
              use in Motor Vehicles, Mobile Equipment, or Associated Parts and
              Components in refinishing, service, maintenance, repair, restoration, or
              modification, except metal plating activities, as applied, as a Ready-to-
              Spray Automotive Coating. Any reference to automotive refinishing or
              Automotive Coating on the container or in product literature constitutes a
              recommendation for use in Motor Vehicle, Mobile Equipment, and
              Associated Parts and Components refinishing.
       (6)    AUTOMOTIVE COATING COMPONENT means any portion of a
              Coating, including, but not limited to, a Reducer or Thinner, toner, hardener,
              or additive, that is used, or recommended for use, in an Automotive Coating.
              The raw materials used to produce the components are not considered
              Automotive Coating Components.
       (7)    AUTOMOTIVE GRAPHIC ARTS OPERATION means the application of
              logos, letters, designs, numbers, or graphics to a painted surface by brush,
              roller, or airbrush.
       (8)    AUTOMOTIVE REFINISHING FACILITY means any shop, business,
              location, or parcel of land where Motor Vehicles, Mobile Equipment, or
              Associated Parts and Components are coated, including autobody collision
              repair shops. Automotive Refinishing Facility does not include the original
              equipment manufacturing plant where the Motor Vehicle or Mobile
              Equipment is completely assembled.
       (9)    CLEAR COATING means any Automotive Coating that is formulated with
              materials that do not impart color and is specifically labeled and formulated
              for application over a Color Coating or a previous layer of a Clear Coating.
       (10)   COATING means a material that is applied to a surface and forms a film in
              order to beautify, preserve, repair, or protect such a surface.



                                             1151 - 2
Rule 1151 (Cont.)                                        (Amended November 1, 2024)


(c)    (11)   COLOR COATING means any pigmented Automotive Coating, excluding
              automotive Adhesion Promoters and Primers, that requires a subsequent
              Clear Coating, and that is applied over a Primer, Adhesion Promoter, or a
              previous layer of a Color Coating. Color Coatings include metallic and
              iridescent color coatings, which mean Automotive Coatings that contain
              more than 0.042 pounds per gallon (5 grams per liter) of metal or iridescent
              particles as applied, where such particles are visible in the dried film.
       (12)   ELECTROSTATIC SPRAY APPLICATION means any method of spray
              application of Automotive Coatings where an electrostatic attraction is
              created between the part to be coated and the paint particles.
       (13)   EMISSION CONTROL SYSTEM means any combination of capture
              systems and control devices used to reduce VOC emissions from
              Automotive Coating operations.
       (14)   EPOXY PRIMER means any Primer formulated with an epoxy resin and a
              hardener that is labeled and formulated for application directly to metal
              surfaces for adhesion, resistance to moisture and corrosion, and where the
              primary function is to bond to the base material and seal for subsequent
              work.
       (15)   EXEMPT COMPOUNDS are as defined in Rule 102 – Definition of Terms
              (Rule 102).
       (16)   GLOSS CLEAR COATING means any Automotive Coating that is
              formulated with materials that do not impart color, is specifically labeled
              and formulated for application over a Color Coating or a previous layer of
              a Clear Coating, and that registers a gloss of 70 units or greater on a 60-
              degree meter, according to ASTM Test Method D523 – Specular Gloss
              (ASTM Test Method D523).
       (17)   GRAMS OF VOC PER LITER OF COATING LESS WATER AND LESS
              EXEMPT COMPOUNDS (REGULATORY VOC), is the weight of VOC
              per combined volume of VOC and Coating solids and shall be calculated by
              the following equation:




                                            1151 - 3
Rule 1151 (Cont.)                                        (Amended November 1, 2024)


(c)    (17)          Grams of VOC per Liter of Coating, Less


                                                               Wv −Ww −Wex
                     Water and Less Exempt Compounds =
                                                                Vm −Vw −Vex



                     Where:     Wv       =    weight of volatile compounds in grams
                                              (includes water, Exempt Compounds,
                                              and VOCs)
                                Ww       =    weight of water in grams
                                Wex      =    weight of Exempt Compounds in grams
                                Vm       =    volume of material in liters
                                Vw       =    volume of water in liters
                                Vex      =    volume of Exempt Compounds in liters
       (18)   GRAMS OF VOC PER LITER OF MATERIAL (ACTUAL VOC), is the
              weight of VOC per volume of material and shall be calculated by the
              following equation:

                                                               Wv −Ww −Wex
                     Grams of VOC per Liter of Material =
                                                                    Vm

                     Where:    Wv        =    weight of volatile compounds in grams
                                              (includes water, Exempt Compounds,
                                              and VOCs)
                                Ww       =    weight of water in grams
                                Wex      =    weight of Exempt Compounds in grams
                                Vm       =    volume of material in liters

       (19)   HIGH-VOLUME, LOW-PRESSURE (HVLP) means spray application
              equipment designed to atomize 100 percent by air pressure only and is
              operated between 0.1 and 10 pounds per square inch gauge (psig) air
              atomizing pressure measured dynamically at the center of the air cap and at
              the air horns.
       (20)   MATTE CLEAR COATING means any Automotive Coating that is
              formulated with materials that do not impart color, is specifically labeled
              and formulated for application over a Color Coating or a previous layer of
              a Matte Clear Coating, and that registers a gloss of less than 70 units on a
              60-degree meter, according to ASTM Test Method D523.



                                             1151 - 4
Rule 1151 (Cont.)                                          (Amended November 1, 2024)


(c)    (21)   MAXIMUM INCREMENTAL REACTIVITY (MIR) means the measure
              of the photochemical reactivity of a VOC, which estimates the weight of
              ozone produced from a weight of VOC expressed as gram of ozone per gram
              of VOC (g O3/g VOC). MIR values for individual VOCs are specified in
              Sections 94700 and 94701, Title17, California Code of Regulations.
       (22)   MOBILE EQUIPMENT means any device that may either be drawn or
              driven on rails or a roadway including, but not limited to, trains, railcars,
              truck trailers, mobile cranes, bulldozers, street cleaners, and implements of
              husbandry or agriculture.
       (23)   MOTOR VEHICLE means any self-propelled vehicle, including, but not
              limited to, motorcycles, passenger cars, light-duty trucks, medium-duty and
              heavy-duty vehicles (as defined in Section 1900, Title 13, of the California
              Code of Regulations), vans, buses, golf carts, tanks, and armored personnel
              carriers.
       (24)   PRETREATMENT WASH PRIMER means any Automotive Coating that
              contains a minimum of 0.5 percent acid by weight and not more than 16
              percent solids by weight, is necessary to provide surface etching, and that
              is specifically labeled and formulated for application directly to bare metal
              surfaces to provide corrosion resistance and adhesion.
       (25)   PRIMER means any Automotive Coating that is specifically labeled and
              formulated for application to a substrate to provide 1) a bond between the
              substrate and subsequent coats, 2) corrosion resistance, 3) a smooth
              substrate surface, or 4) resistance to penetration of subsequent coats, for the
              purpose of applying a subsequent Automotive Coating. Primers may be
              pigmented and include Weld-Through Primers, Epoxy Primers, Primer
              Sealers, and Primer Surfacers.
       (26)   PRIMER SEALER means any Coating applied prior to the application of a
              topcoat for the purpose of color uniformity, or to promote the ability of an
              underlying Coating to resist penetration by the topcoat.
       (27)   PRIMER SURFACER means any Coating applied for the purpose of
              corrosion resistance or adhesion, and that promotes a uniform surface by
              filling in surface imperfections.
       (28)   PRIVATE LABELER is the person, company, firm, or establishment (other
              than the toll manufacturer) identified on the label of a Regulated Product.




                                             1151 - 5
Rule 1151 (Cont.)                                            (Amended November 1, 2024)


(c)    (29)   PRODUCT-WEIGHTED MIR (PW-MIR) means the sum of all weighted-
              MIR for all ingredients in a Regulated Product. The PW-MIR is the total
              product reactivity expressed to hundredths of a gram of ozone formed per
              gram of product (excluding container and packaging) and calculated
              according to the following equations:

              Weighted MIR (Wtd-MIR) ingredient = MIR x Weight fraction ingredient,

              and,

              PW-MIR = (Wtd-MIR)1 + (Wtd-MIR)2 +…+ (WtdMIR)n

              where,

                       MIR           = ingredient MIR; and
                       1,2,3,...,n
                                 = each ingredient in the product up to the total n
                                    ingredients in the product.
       (30)   READY-TO-SPRAY AUTOMOTIVE COATING means the Automotive
              Coating, mixed with any Automotive Coating Components as
              recommended by the manufacturer’s stated mix ratio.
       (31)   REDUCER OR THINNER means any solvent specifically labeled and
              formulated to reduce the viscosity of Automotive Coatings.
       (32)   REGULATED PRODUCT means any Automotive Coating or Automotive
              Coating Component.
       (33)   SINGLE-STAGE COATING means any pigmented Automotive Coating,
              (excluding automotive Adhesion Promoters and Primers), specifically
              labeled and formulated for application without a subsequent Clear Coating
              and that may be applied over an Adhesion Promoter, a Primer, or a Color
              Coating. Single-stage Coatings include single-stage metallic color coatings.
       (34)   SOLVENT CLEANING is as defined in Rule 1171 – Solvent Cleaning
              Operations (Rule 1171).
       (35)   SOUTH COAST AQMD TEST METHOD means a test method included
              in the manual of “Laboratory Methods of Analysis for Enforcement
              Samples,” which can be found on the South Coast AQMD website and are
              referenced in subdivision (i).
       (36)   SPOT REPAIR means repair of an area on a Motor Vehicle, Mobile
              Equipment, or Associated Parts and Components of one square foot (929
              square centimeters) or less.



                                              1151 - 6
Rule 1151 (Cont.)                                          (Amended November 1, 2024)


(c)    (37)   TEMPORARY PROTECTIVE COATING means any Automotive Coating
              specifically labeled and formulated for the purpose of temporarily
              protecting areas from overspray or mechanical damage.
       (38)   TINTED MID-COAT means a transparent color coating specifically
              labeled and formulated to add depth and color-match to a three-stage
              metallic or iridescent coating system.
       (39)   TRANSFER EFFICIENCY means the amount of Coating solids adhering
              to the object being coated divided by the total amount of Automotive
              Coating solids sprayed, expressed as a percentage.
       (40)   TRUCK BED LINER COATING means any Automotive Coating,
              excluding color and Single-stage Coatings, specifically labeled and
              formulated for application to a truck bed to protect it from surface abrasion.
       (41)   UNDERBODY COATING means any Automotive Coating specifically
              labeled and formulated for application to wheel wells, the inside of door
              panels or fenders, the underside of a trunk or hood, or the underside of the
              Motor Vehicle.
       (42)   UNIFORM FINISHING COATING means any Automotive Coating
              specifically labeled and formulated for application to the area around a Spot
              Repair for the purpose of blending a repaired area’s color or clear coat to
              match the appearance of an adjacent area’s existing Coating.
       (43)   VOLATILE ORGANIC COMPOUND (VOC) is as defined in Rule 102.
              For the purpose of this rule, tert-butyl acetate (t-BAc) is not a VOC when
              used in automotive coatings other than color coatings and clear coatings
              until the applicable prohibition timeline in Table 4.
       (44)    WELD-THROUGH PRIMER means an Automotive Coating designed and
              labeled exclusively to provide a bridging or conducting effect for corrosion
              protection following welding.

(d)    Requirements
       (1)    A person shall not apply any Automotive Coating to a Motor Vehicle,
              Mobile Equipment, or Associated Parts and Components of a Motor
              Vehicle or Mobile Equipment, that contains VOC in excess of the
              applicable limits specified in Table 1 - Table of Standards Regulatory VOC
              Content Limits for Automotive Coatings and Effective Dates (Table 1).
              Compliance with the applicable VOC content limits shall be based on VOC
              content, including any material added to the original Automotive Coating


                                             1151 - 7
Rule 1151 (Cont.)                                                        (Amended November 1, 2024)


(d)       (1)     supplied by the manufacturer, as applied, less water and Exempt
                  Compounds. Automotive Coatings formulated to comply with Phase I and
                  Phase II VOC limits shall not contain more than 0.01 weight percent of
                  either para-Chlorobenzotrifluoride (pCBtF) or t-BAc.

                           Table 1- Table of Standards
      Regulatory VOC Content Limits and Effective Dates for Automotive Coatings
                                                         Phase I
                                                         Limits
                                     Current
                                                        Effective                   Phase II Limits
                                     Limits(1)
    Coating Categories                                 November 1,
                                                          2024
                                                                                                   Effective
                                   g/L      lb/gal      g/L      lb/gal      g/L      lb/gal
                                                                                                     Date
Base Coatings
 Color Coating (2)                 420        3.5                            250        2.1        1/1/2030
 Tinted Mid-Coat                   420        3.5      750         6.3       250        2.1        1/1/2030
Clear Coatings
 Gloss Clear Coating               250        2.1      520         4.3       250        2.1        1/1/2030
 Matte Clear Coating               250        2.1      550         4.6
Primers and Sealers
 Pretreatment Wash
                                   660        5.5      780         6.5       660        5.5        1/1/2028
 Primer
 Epoxy Primer                      250        2.1      580         4.8       340        2.8        1/1/2028
 Primer Sealer                     250        2.1      550         4.6       250        2.1        1/1/2029
 Primer Surfacer                   250        2.1      580         4.8       250        2.1        1/1/2029
Other Coating Categories
 Adhesion Promoter                 540        4.5      840         7.0       720        6.0        1/1/2028
 Single-Stage Coating              340        2.8      600         5.0       340        2.8        1/1/2028
 Temporary Protective
                                    60        0.5
 Coating
 Truck Bed Liner
                                   310        2.6
 Coating
 Underbody Coating                 430        3.6
 Uniform Finishing
                                   540        4.5
 Coating
 Any Other Coating
                                   250        2.1
 Type
1      The specified limits remain in effect unless revised limits are listed in subsequent columns in the Table
       of Standards.
2      See Paragraph (d)(4) for Color Coatings supplied in half-pint or smaller containers.




                                                        1151 - 8
Rule 1151 (Cont.)                                             (Amended November 1, 2024)


(d)    (2)    On and after the effective date in Table 2, a person shall not manufacture,
              supply, sell, offer for sale, market, blend, distribute, possess, package, or
              repackage any Reducer or Thinner for use within the South Coast AQMD
              that contains VOCs in excess of the PW-MIR limit specified in Table 2.

                    Table 2– PW-MIR VOC Content Limit and Effective Date
                                 for Reducers and Thinners
                                             PW-MIR VOC Limit
                                               (g O3/g VOC)              Effective Date

                    Reducer and Thinner                1.50                 1/1/2030


       (3)    Most Restrictive Coating Category
              If anywhere on the container of any Automotive Coating; on any sticker or
              label affixed thereto; or in any sales, advertising, or technical literature, any
              representation or information indicates that the Automotive Coating may be
              used as, or is suitable for use as, more than one of the Automotive Coating
              categories listed in Table 1, then the lowest applicable VOC content limit
              shall apply.
       (4)    Alternative VOC Content Limits for Color Coatings
              In lieu of complying with the Phase I Color Coating VOC limit, and until
              January 1 2030, a person may elect to manufacture, supply, sell, offer for
              sale, market, blend, distribute, possess, package, or repackage any Color
              Coating for use within the South Coast AQMD, or apply a Color Coating to
              a Motor Vehicle, Mobile Equipment, or Associated Parts and Components
              of a Motor Vehicle or Mobile Equipment, that is supplied in half-pint or
              smaller containers, provided the Regulatory VOC content is no more than
              720 g/L and the Color Coating does not contain more than 0.01 percent by
              weight of either pCBtF or t-BAc.
       (5)    Alternative VOC Content Limits for Adhesion Promoters and Pretreatment
              Wash Primers
              In lieu of complying with the applicable Table 1 Phase II VOC limits for
              Adhesion Promoters and Pretreatment Wash Primers, a person may elect to
              manufacture, supply, sell, offer for sale, market, blend, distribute, possess,
              package, or repackage any Adhesion Promoter or Pretreatment Wash
              Primers for use within the South Coast AQMD, or apply an Adhesion



                                              1151 - 9
Rule 1151 (Cont.)                                           (Amended November 1, 2024)


(d)    (5)     Promoter or Pretreatment Wash Primer to a Motor Vehicle, Mobile
               Equipment, or Associated Parts and Components of a Motor Vehicle or
               Mobile Equipment, that complies with the PW-MIR limit in Table 3.

             Table 3 - Alternative PW-MIR VOC Content Limits and Effective Dates
                                            PW-MIR VOC Limits
                                               (g O3/g VOC)              Effective Date

                Adhesion Promoters                   2.00                   1/1/2028
                Pretreatment Wash
                                                     1.80                   1/1/2028
                      Primers

       (6)     Sell-Through and Use-Through Provision for Alternative Color Coating
               VOC Content Limit
               Any Color Coating that is manufactured prior to January 1, 2030, supplied
               in a half-pint or smaller container to comply with the alternative VOC limit
               pursuant to paragraph (d)(4), and that has a VOC content above 250 g/L,
               may be sold, supplied, or offered for sale until January 1, 2030, and used
               until January 1, 2033.
       (7)     Sell-Through and Use-Through Provision for VOC Content Limit
               Reductions
               Any Automotive Coating that is manufactured prior to the effective date of
               the applicable VOC content limit specified in Table 1, and that has a VOC
               content above that limit (but not above the limit in effect on the date of
               manufacture), may be sold, supplied, or offered for sale for up to 24 months
               after the applicable effective date and used up to 36 months after the
               applicable effective date.
       (8)     Sell-Through and Use-Through Provision for Reducers or Thinners
               Any Reducer or Thinner that is manufactured prior to January 1, 2030, may
               be sold, supplied, or offered for sale until January 1, 2032, and used until
               January 1, 2033.
       (9)     Transfer Efficiency
               A person shall apply Automotive Coatings to any Motor Vehicle, Mobile
               Equipment, or any Associated Parts and Components to a Motor Vehicle or
               Mobile Equipment using properly operating equipment, operated according
               to procedures recommended by the manufacturer, and in compliance with
               applicable permit conditions, if any, by one of the following methods:


                                             1151 - 10
Rule 1151 (Cont.)                                           (Amended November 1, 2024)


(d)    (9)       (A)    Electrostatic Spray Application;
                 (B)    HVLP spray;
                 (C)    Brush, dip, or roller; or
                 (D)    Any such other Automotive Coating application methods as
                        demonstrated, in accordance with the provisions of paragraph (i)(6),
                        to be capable of achieving equivalent or better Transfer Efficiency
                        than the Automotive Coating application method listed in
                        subparagraph (d)(9)(B), provided written approval is obtained from
                        the Executive Officer prior to use.
       (10)      Solvent Cleaning, Storage and Disposal of VOC-Containing Materials
                 Solvent Cleaning of application equipment, parts, products, tools,
                 machinery, equipment, general work areas, and the storage and disposal of
                 VOC-containing materials used in cleaning operations shall be carried out
                 pursuant to Rule 1171.

(e)    Alternative Compliance Options
       (1)    Emission Control System
              A person may comply with the provisions of paragraph (d)(1) by using an
              approved Emission Control System, consisting of collection and control
                 devices, provided such Emission Control System is approved pursuant to
                 Rule 203 – Permit to Operate, in writing, by the Executive Officer for
                 reducing VOC emissions. The Executive Officer shall approve such
                 Emission Control System only if the VOC emissions resulting from the use
                 of non-compliant Automotive Coatings will be reduced to a level equivalent
                 to or lower than that would have been achieved by compliance with the
                 terms of paragraph (d)(1). The required efficiency of an Emission Control
                 System at which an equivalent or greater level of VOC emission reduction
                 will be achieved shall be calculated by the following equation:

                                (𝑉𝑂𝐶𝐿𝑊𝑐 )     1 − (𝑉𝑂𝐶𝐿𝑊𝑛,𝑀𝑎𝑥 ⁄𝐷𝑛,𝑀𝑎𝑥 )
             𝐶. 𝐸. = [1 − {                 ×                           }] × 100
                              (𝑉𝑂𝐶𝐿𝑊𝑛,𝑀𝑎𝑥 )       1 − (𝑉𝑂𝐶𝐿𝑊𝑐 ⁄𝐷𝑐 )

             Where:
                          C.E.             =    Control Efficiency, percent




                                                1151 - 11
Rule 1151 (Cont.)                                         (Amended November 1, 2024)


(e)   (1)               VOCLWc         =    Regulatory VOC Limit, less water and less
                                            Exempt Compounds, pursuant to paragraph
                                            (d)(1).
                        VOCLWn,Max     =    Maximum Regulatory VOC content of non-
                                            compliant Automotive Coating used in
                                            conjunction with a control device, less
                                            water and Exempt Compounds.
                        Dn,Max         =    Density of VOC solvent, reducer, or thinner
                                            contained in the non-compliant Automotive
                                            Coating containing the maximum VOC.
                        Dc             =    Density of corresponding VOC solvent,
                                            reducer, or thinner used in the compliant
                                            Automotive Coating system = 880 g/L.

       (2)    Alternative Emission Control Plan
              A person may comply with the provisions of paragraph (d)(1) by means of
              an Alternative Emissions Control Plan, pursuant to Rule 108 – Alternative
              Emissions Control Plans.

(f)    Prohibition of Possession, Specification, Sale or Use
       (1)    No person that applies Automotive Coatings subject to this rule shall
              possess any Automotive Coating that does not comply with the
              requirements of paragraph (d)(1) when mixed with any Automotive Coating
              Component (as applied), unless one or more of the following conditions
              apply:
              (A)    The Automotive Coating is for use at a facility that utilizes an
                     approved Emission Control System pursuant to paragraph (e)(1) and
                     the Coating complies with the limits specified in permit conditions;
              (B)    The Automotive Coating is for use at a facility that operates in
                      compliance with an approved Alternative Emissions Control Plan
                      pursuant to paragraph (e)(2), and the Automotive Coating is
                      specified in the plan;
              (C)     The Automotive Coating is for use at a training center and the
                      Automotive Coating is used for educational purposes, provided that
                      the VOC emissions from all Automotive Coatings not complying




                                            1151 - 12
Rule 1151 (Cont.)                                        (Amended November 1, 2024)


(f)    (1)    (C)    with the VOC limits of paragraph (d)(1) do not exceed 12 pounds
                     per day; or
              (D)    The Automotive Coating is for use at a prototype Motor Vehicle
                     manufacturing facility and the Automotive Coating is supplied by
                     an Assembly-Line Motor Vehicle manufacturer specifically for use
                     in the refinishing of a prototype Motor Vehicle, provided that the
                     VOC emissions from all Automotive Coatings not complying with
                     the VOC limits of paragraph (d)(1) exceed neither 21 pounds per
                     day nor 930 pounds in any one calendar year.
       (2)    No person shall solicit from, specify, or require any other person to use in
              the South Coast AQMD any Automotive Coating that, when applied as
              supplied or thinned or reduced according to the manufacturer's
              recommendation for application, does not comply with the:
              (A)    Applicable VOC limits required by paragraph (d)(1) for the specific
                     application, unless:
                     (i)    The Automotive Coating is located at a facility that utilizes
                            an approved Emission Control System pursuant to paragraph
                            (e)(1), and the Automotive Coating complies with the limits
                            specified in permit conditions;
                     (ii)   The Automotive Coating is located at a facility that operates
                            in compliance with an approved Alternative Emissions
                            Control Plan pursuant to paragraph (e)(2), and the
                            Automotive Coating is specified in the plan;
                     (iii) The Automotive Coating is specifically exempt pursuant to
                            subdivision (k) of this rule; or
                     (iv)   The Automotive Coating complies with the alternative PW-
                            MIR VOC limits in Table 3; or
              (B)    Requirements of paragraph (f)(7).
       (3)    No person shall supply, sell, offer for sale, market, blend, package,
              repackage or distribute any Automotive Coating for use within the South
              Coast AQMD subject to the provisions in this rule that, when applied as
              supplied or thinned or reduced according to the manufacturer's
              recommendation for application, does not comply with the:




                                            1151 - 13
Rule 1151 (Cont.)                                        (Amended November 1, 2024)


(f)    (3)    (A)    Applicable VOC limits required by paragraph (d)(1) for the specific
                     application, unless:
                     (i)    The Automotive Coating is for use at a facility that utilizes
                            an approved Emission Control System pursuant to
                            paragraph(e)(1), and the Coating complies with the limits
                            specified in permit conditions;
                     (ii)   The Automotive Coating is for use at a facility that operates
                            in accordance with an approved Alternative Emissions
                            Control Plan pursuant to paragraph(e)(2), and the
                            Automotive Coating is specified in the plan;
                     (iii)   The Automotive Coating is specifically exempt pursuant to
                             subdivision (k) of this rule; or
                      (iv)   The Automotive Coating complies with the alternative PW-
                             MIR VOC limits in Table 3; or
              (B)     Requirements of paragraph (f)(7).
       (4)    No person shall solicit from, specify, require, offer for sale, sell, or
              distribute to any other person for use in the South Coast AQMD any
              Automotive Coating application equipment that does not comply with the
              requirements of paragraph (d)(9).
       (5)    No person shall offer for sale, sell, supply, market, or distribute an HVLP
              spray gun for use within the South Coast AQMD unless the person provides
              accurate information to the spray gun recipient regarding the maximum inlet
              air pressure to the spray gun that would result in a maximum air pressure of
              10 psig air pressure, measured dynamically at the center of the air cap and
              at the air horns, based on:
              (A)     The manufacturer’s published technical material on the design of the
                      spray application equipment;
              (B)     A demonstration of the operation of the spray application equipment
                     using an air pressure tip gauge from the manufacturer of the gun;
                     and
              (C)    The information shall either be permanently marked on the gun, or
                     provided on the company's letterhead or in the form of technical
                     literature that clearly identifies the spray gun manufacturer, the
                     seller, or the distributor.




                                            1151 - 14
Rule 1151 (Cont.)                                        (Amended November 1, 2024)


(f)     (6)    The requirements of paragraphs (f)(1) through (f)(4) shall apply to all
               written or oral agreements executed and entered into under the terms of
               which an Automotive Coating or an Automotive Coating application
               equipment shall be used at any location within the South Coast AQMD.
        (7)    Carcinogenic Materials and Exempt Compounds
               No person shall manufacture, supply, sell, offer for sale, market, blend,
               distribute, package, or repackage a Regulated Product for use within the
               South Coast AQMD, or apply any Regulated Product within the South
               Coast AQMD, that contains any of the following chemicals in
               concentrations greater than the limits indicated:
               (A)      1.0 ppm of cadmium;
               (B)      5.0 ppm of hexavalent chromium;
               (C)      0.01 percent by weight of Group II Exempt Compounds, excluding
                        volatile methylated siloxanes (VMS);
               (D)      0.1 percent by weight of any VMS;
               (E)      0.01 percent by weight of pCBtF and t-BAc for Regulated Products
                        subject to the applicable Phase I or Phase II VOC limits; or
               (F)      0.01 percent by weight of pCBtF and t-BAc pursuant to the
                        applicable effective dates in Table 4.

                     Table 4: pCBtF and t-BAc Prohibition Timeline
                             Prohibition         Sell-through        Use-through
          Category
                            Effective Date        End Date            End Date
       Color Coatings     November 1, 2025 November 1, 2026        January 1, 2028
      All Other Coating
                             May 1, 2025         May 1, 2026         July 1, 2027
          Categories

(g)     Recordkeeping Requirements
        (1)    Recordkeeping for VOC Emissions
               Records of Regulated Product usage shall be maintained pursuant to Rule
               109 – Recordkeeping for Volatile Organic Compound Emissions, and shall
               at a minimum include the following information:
               (A)     Regulated Product name and manufacturer;
               (B)     Application method as recommended;
               (C)     Automotive Coating category and mix ratio specific to the
                       Automotive Coating;


                                             1151 - 15
Rule 1151 (Cont.)                                          (Amended November 1, 2024)


(g)    (1)    (D)    Actual VOC and Regulatory VOC content of the Regulated Product;
              (E)    Documentation such as manufacturer specification sheets, material
                     safety data sheets, technical data sheets, or any other air quality data
                     sheets that demonstrate the material is intended for use as an
                     Automotive Coating or Automotive Coating Component;
              (F)    Current manufacturer specification sheets, material safety data
                     sheets, technical data sheets, or air quality data sheets, that list the
                     Actual VOC and Regulatory VOC content, for each Ready-to-Spray
                     Automotive Coating (based on the manufacturer’s stated mix ratio)
                     and Automotive Coating Components; and
              (G)    Purchase records identifying the Automotive Coating category,
                     name, and the total volume of all Regulated Products used.
       (2)    Recordkeeping Requirements for Emission Control System
              Any person using an Emission Control System shall maintain daily records
              of key system operating parameters that will demonstrate continuous
              operation and compliance of the Emission Control System during periods
              of VOC emission-producing activities. “Key system operating parameters”
              are those parameters necessary to ensure or document compliance with
              paragraph(e)(1), including, but not limited to, temperatures, pressure drops,
              and air flow rates.
       (3)    Recordkeeping Requirements for Coatings complying with paragraph (f)(3)
              Any person that supplies, sells, offers for sale, markets, blends, packages,
              repackages or distributes Automotive Coatings that exceed the VOC limits
              in paragraph (d)(1) by complying with paragraph (f)(3) shall keep the
              following records for at least five years and make them available to the
              Executive Officer upon request:
              (A)     Regulated Product name and manufacturer;
              (B)     Application method as recommended;
              (C)    Automotive Coating category and mix ratio specific to the
                     Automotive Coating;
              (D)    Actual VOC and Regulatory VOC content of the Regulated Product;
              (E)    Documentation such as manufacturer specification sheets, material
                     safety data sheets, technical data sheets, or any other air quality data




                                             1151 - 16
Rule 1151 (Cont.)                                          (Amended November 1, 2024)


(g)    (3)    (E)    sheets that demonstrate that the material is intended for use as an
                     Automotive Coating or Automotive Coating Component;
              (F)    Current manufacturer specification sheets, material safety data
                     sheets, technical data sheets, or air quality data sheets, that list the
                     Actual VOC and Regulatory VOC content, for each Regulated
                     Product;
              (G)    Purchase records identifying the Automotive Coating category,
                     name, and the total volume of all Regulated Products; and
              (H)    For sale to an end-user:
                     (i)     The name and address of the person receiving the
                             Automotive Coating;
                     (ii)    An acknowledgement warranting that the sale to an end-user
                             will comply with paragraph (f)(3); and
                     (iii)   If the Coating is for use outside the South Coast AQMD,
                             acknowledgement by the purchaser that this statement is
                             correct.

(h)    Administrative and Reporting Requirements for Automotive Coating
       Manufacturers
       (1)    Compliance Statement Requirement
              For each individual Automotive Coating, Automotive Coating Component,
              and Ready-to-Spray mixture (based on the manufacturer’s stated mix ratio),
              the manufacturer shall include the following information on a product data
              sheet, or an equivalent medium:
              (A)     The Actual VOC and Regulatory VOC content for Automotive
                      Coatings (in grams per liter);
              (B)     The weight percentage of volatiles, water, and Exempt Compounds;
                      and
              (C)     The density of the material (in grams per liter).
       (2)    Labeling Requirements for Coating Manufacturers
              The manufacturer of Regulated Products, with the exception of Reducers or
              Thinners, shall include on all containers:
              (A)    The applicable Automotive Coating category;




                                            1151 - 17
Rule 1151 (Cont.)                                       (Amended November 1, 2024)


(h)    (2)    (B)    The Actual VOC and Regulatory VOC content, as supplied (in
                     grams of VOC per liter of material and in grams of VOC per liter of
                     material, less water and Exempt Compounds);
              (C)    The PW-MIR VOC content of an Adhesion Promoter or
                     Pretreatment Wash Primer if the manufacturer of an Adhesion
                     Promoter or Pretreatment Wash Primer elects to comply with PW-
                     MIR VOC limits in paragraph (d)(5); and
              (D)    On and after November 1, 2025, all Regulated Products shall display
                     the date of manufacture of the Automotive Coating or a code
                     indicating the date of manufacture. The manufacturers shall file an
                     explanation of each code with the Executive Officer.
       (3)    Labeling Requirements for Reducers and Thinners
              The manufacturer of Reducers and Thinners subject to this rule shall
              include on all containers:
              (A)    The Actual VOC for solvents, as supplied (in grams of VOC per
                     liter of material); and
              (B)    On and after January 1, 2030, the PW-MIR.
       (4)    General Quantity and Emission Report (QER)
              The manufacturer or private labeler of Regulated Products shall submit to
              the South Coast AQMD a QER for Regulated Product sales into or within
              the South Coast AQMD according to the schedule in Table 5. The QER for
              a manufacturer or private labeler of Regulated Products shall include the
              following information:
              (A)    Product manufacturer (as listed on the label);
              (B)    Product name and code;
              (C)    Applicable Rule 1151 category;
              (D)    Actual VOC, Regulatory VOC content, and PW-MIR, if applicable;
              (E)    Whether the product is waterborne or solvent-based;
              (F)    Total annual volume sold into or within the South Coast AQMD,
                     including products sold through distribution centers located within
                     or outside the South Coast AQMD, reported in gallons for all
                     container sizes for the years listed in Table 5;
              (G)    For any Regulated Product with VOC content higher than the
                     applicable VOC content limits in paragraph (d)(1), indicate whether
                     the product has been sold under any of the following provisions:



                                           1151 - 18
Rule 1151 (Cont.)                                       (Amended November 1, 2024)


(h)    (4)    (G)    (i)   Sell-through provision pursuant to paragraphs (d)(6), (d)(7),
                           and (d)(8);
                    (ii)   Exempted pursuant to subdivision (k); or
                    (iii) Complying with subdivision (e) and
              (H)   Multicomponent Automotive Coatings shall be reported as the
                    Ready-to-Spray Automotive Coating, including the maximum
                    Actual VOC content, maximum Regulatory VOC content, and sales
                    volume.
       (5)    QER Reporting Timeline
              A manufacturer and Private Labeler of Regulated Products shall submit the
              QER required pursuant to paragraph (h)(4) according to the reporting
              timeline in Table 5:

                                Table 5 – QER Reporting Timeline
                            Reporting Deadlines
                     Manufacturers & Private Labelers             Reported Years
                              September 1, 2030                      2028, 2029
                              September 1, 2035                      2033, 2034
                              September 1, 2040                      2038, 2039

(i)    Test Methods
       (1)   VOC Content of Automotive Coatings
             The VOC content of Automotive Coatings shall be determined by:
             (A)    United States Environmental Protection Agency (U.S. EPA)
                    Reference Test Method 24 – Determination of Volatile Matter
                    Content, Water Content, Volume Solids and Weight Solids of
                    Surface Coatings, Code of Federal Regulations, Title 40 Part 60,
                    Appendix A with the Exempt Compounds’ content determined by
                    South Coast AQMD Test Method 303 – Determination of Exempt
                    Compounds; or
              (B)   South Coast AQMD Test Method 304 – Determination of Volatile
                    Organic Compounds (VOCs) in Various Materials.
       (2)    Exempt Perfluorocarbon Compounds
              The following classes of compounds shall be analyzed as Exempt
              Compounds for compliance with paragraph (d)(1), only at such time as




                                           1151 - 19
Rule 1151 (Cont.)                                        (Amended November 1, 2024)


(i)    (2)    manufacturers specify which individual compounds are used in the
              formulation of the Automotive Coating and identify the test methods, which
              have been approved by the U.S. EPA, California Air Resources Board
              (CARB) and the South Coast AQMD prior to such analysis, that can be used
              to quantify the amounts of each exempt compound:
              (A)    Cyclic, branched, or linear, completely fluorinated alkanes;
              (B)    Cyclic, branched, or linear, completely fluorinated ethers with no
                     unsaturations;
              (C)    Cyclic, branched, or linear, completely fluorinated tertiary amines
                     with no unsaturations; and
              (D)    Sulfur-containing perfluorocarbons with no unsaturations and with
                     sulfur bonds only to carbon and fluorine.
       (3)    Determination of Metallic Particles in Metallic Color Coatings
              The metal content of metallic Color Coatings shall be determined by South
              Coast AQMD Test Method 311 – Determination of Percent Metal in
              Metallic Coatings by Spectrographic Method.
       (4)    Acid Content in Pretreatment Automotive Coatings
              The acid content of Pretreatment Wash Primers shall be determined by
              ASTM Test Method D1613 – Acidity in Volatile Solvents and Chemical
              Intermediates Used in Paint, Varnish, Lacquer, and Related Products.
       (5)    Gloss Determination
              The gloss of Automotive Coatings shall be determined by ASTM Test
              Method D523.
       (6)    Transfer Efficiency
              The Transfer Efficiency of alternative Automotive Coating application
              methods, as defined by paragraph (c)(39), shall be determined in accordance
              with the most current versions of the South Coast AQMD method “Spray
              Equipment Transfer Efficiency Test Procedure for Equipment User” and
              South Coast AQMD “Guidelines for Demonstrating Equivalency With
              District Approved Transfer Efficiency Spray Gun.”
       (7)    Determination of Efficiency of Emission Control Systems
              A person that elects to comply with the provision of paragraph (d)(1) using
              an Emission Control System as specified in paragraph (e)(1) shall:
              (A)     Determine the efficiency of the collection device in the Emission
                      Control System by using:



                                            1151 - 20
Rule 1151 (Cont.)                                          (Amended November 1, 2024)


(i)    (7)    (A)    (i)    South Coast AQMD’s “Protocol for Determination of
                            Volatile Organic Compounds (VOC) Capture Efficiency;”
                            or
                     (ii)   Any other method approved by the U.S. EPA, CARB, and
                            the South Coast AQMD Executive Officer.
              (B)    Determine the efficiency and the VOC content in the Emission
                     Control System exhaust gases, measured and calculated as carbon
                     by:
                     (i)    U. S. EPA Test Method 25 - Determination of Total Gaseous
                            Nonmethane Organic Emissions as Carbon;
                     (ii)    U. S. EPA Test Method 25A - Determination of Total
                             Gaseous Organic Concentration Using a Flame Ionization
                             Analyzer;
                     (iii)   South Coast AQMD Method 25.1 - Determination of Total
                             Gaseous Non-Methane Organic Emissions as Carbon; or
                     (iv)    South Coast AQMD Method 25.3 - Determination of Low
                             Concentration   Non-Methane     Non-Ethane    Organic
                             Compound Emissions from Clean Fueled Combustion
                             Sources.
              (C)    Determine emissions of Exempt Compounds by:
                     (i)    U.S. EPA Test Method 18 – Volatile Organic Compounds
                            by Gas Chromatography; or
                     (ii)   CARB Method 422 – Determination of Volatile Organic
                            Compounds in Emissions from Stationary Sources.
       (8)    Equivalent Test Methods
              Other test methods determined to be equivalent by the Executive Officer,
              CARB, and the U.S. EPA, and approved in writing by the Executive Officer
              may also be used.
       (9)    Multiple Test Methods
              When more than one test method or set of test methods are specified for any
              testing, a violation of any requirement of this rule established by any one of
              the specified test methods or set of test methods shall constitute a violation
              of the rule.




                                             1151 - 21
Rule 1151 (Cont.)                                       (Amended November 1, 2024)


(j)    Rule 442 Applicability
       Any Automotive Coating, Automotive Coating operation, or facility that is exempt
       pursuant to subdivision (k) from all or a portion of the VOC limits of
       subdivision (d) shall comply with the provisions of Rule 442 – Usage of Solvents.

(k)    Exemptions
       (1)   The provision of this rule shall not apply to:
             (A)    Any Automotive Coating applied to Motor Vehicles or Mobile
                    Equipment, or their Associated Parts and Components, during
                    manufacture on an Assembly Line that is subject to a VOC limit in
                     Rule 1115 - Motor Vehicle Assembly Line Coating Operations;
              (B)    Any Automotive Coating that is expressly and exclusively offered
                     for sale, sold, or manufactured for use outside of the South Coast
                     AQMD or that is for shipment to other manufacturers for
                     reformulation or repackaging;
              (C)    Any Aerosol Coating Product; and
              (D)    Any Automotive Coating that is supplied, sold, offered for sale,
                     marketed, manufactured, blended, packaged or repackaged for use
                     within the South Coast AQMD in 0.5 fluid ounces or smaller
                     containers and is applied by brush or air brush to repair minor
                     surface damage and imperfections for touch-up operations.
       (2)    Automotive Coatings applied for educational purposes at Automotive
              Coating training centers, that are owned and operated by Automotive
              Coating manufacturers, provided that the VOC emissions emitted at the
              Automotive Coating training center from all Automotive Coatings not
              complying with the VOC limits of paragraph (d)(1) do not exceed 12
              pounds per day shall be exempt from:
              (A)    The requirements of paragraph (d)(1); and
              (B)    The prohibition of pCBtF and t-BAc in subparagraphs (f)(7)(E) and
                     (f)(7)(F) until November 1, 2034.
       (3)    The requirements of paragraph (d)(1) shall not apply to Automotive
              Coatings supplied by an assembly-line Motor Vehicle manufacturer for use
              by a prototype Motor Vehicle manufacturing facility in the finishing of a
              prototype Motor Vehicle, provided that the VOC emissions at the prototype
              Motor Vehicle manufacturing facility from all Automotive Coatings not




                                           1151 - 22
Rule 1151 (Cont.)                                       (Amended November 1, 2024)


(k)    (3)    complying with the VOC limits of paragraph (d)(1) exceed neither 21
              pounds per day nor 930 pounds in any one calendar year.
       (4)    The requirements of paragraph (d)(9) shall not apply to Automotive Graphic
              Arts Operations, Truck Bed Liner Coatings, or Underbody Coatings.
       (5)    The labeling requirements of paragraph (h)(2) shall not apply to Regulated
              Products formulated to comply with the Phase I VOC content limits until
              November 1, 2025.




                                           1151 - 23
