Messages to Grow and Uproot: Narrative Strategy Amid Attacks on Diversity, Equity, Inclusion, and Racial Justice | Race Forward Skip to main content Main navigation Learn About Us Our Story Our Mission, Vision, and Values Our Strategic Plan Annual Reports 2024 2022-23 Projects, Programs, & Initiatives Butterfly Lab Colorlines Government Alliance on Race and Equity H.E.A.L. (Honest Education Action and Leadership) Together Housing and Land Justice Narrative Place-Based Strategies (Co-governance) Policy Innovation Lab Services for Organizations Our Board Our Team Get Tools and Resources Understanding Racial Equity Events Cultural Week of Action Facing Race Conference Just Narratives Training Racial Equity Series H.E.A.L. Together Training Government Webinars (#RaceAnd) Podcasts Toolkits Reports Ways to Give Open Search Donate Now Submit Close Search Breadcrumb Resources Toolkits Messages To Grow and Uproot: Narrative Strategy Amid Attacks On Diversity, Equity, Inclusion, and Racial Justice Messages to Grow and Uproot: Narrative Strategy Amid Attacks on Diversity, Equity, Inclusion, and Racial Justice "Narrative IS power. The stories and messages we repeat over time shape policies, outcomes, culture and material conditions." — Race Forward Race Forward's new guide equips organizations with the tools to counter harmful narratives while strengthening messages that advance racial equity and justice. Don't let harmful narratives go unchallenged. Equip your organization with the tools to fight back and build the narrative power our movement needs. Download the Guide This guide is part of Race Forward's commitment to supporting organizations at the forefront of the narrative struggle for racial justice. It’s perfect for diversity, equity and inclusion practitioners, communications professionals, organizational leaders, community advocates, and anyone defending equity work in their organization or community. What You'll Learn: Master the Narrative Pyramid Understand how deep narratives drive policy change and learn to build comprehensive narrative strategies that connect values to messages. Craft Strategic Messages Navigate risks while staying true to equity principles. Get practical guidance on when to be explicit about race and when to use bridge language. Counter Harmful Narratives Access ready-to-use message frameworks that directly address anti-equity talking points while reinforcing narratives of justice and solidarity. Key Features: Reflection and Assessment Tool to sharpen your messaging strategy Sample messages you can adapt for your organization Communication considerations for navigating high-risk environments Real examples of how Race Forward applies narrative strategy Download the Guide Footer Careers Contact Us Press Privacy Policy ©1999–2025 Race Forward. All rights reserved. Donate Now Sign Up For Our Newsletter Charity Navigator Candid Youtube Instagram LinkedIn Bluesky Facebook Threads