                                                                                                     DAN     JOHNSON

                                                                                                                  DIRECTOR


                                                     DEPARTMENT      OF   TRANSPORTATION    AND     DEVELOPMENT
                                                                                  DEVELOPMENT     SERVICES    BUILDING
                                                             150    Beavercreek   ROAD   Orecon     City,    OR     97045

February 22, 2024
                                                      BCC Agenda Date/Item:

Board of County Commissioners
Clackamas County

     Approval of contract #9069 with Eagle Creek Rock Products, LLC for purchase of
 aggregate rock products. Total Contract Value of $225,000.00 not to exceed $75,000.00
        annually through December 31, 2026. Funding through County road fund.
                         No County General Funds are involved.

 Previous Board            02/20/2024 Request for Consent
 Action/Review
 Performance               -Build a strong infrastructure
 Clackamas                 -Ensure safe, healthy and secure communities
 Counsel Review            Yes: Andrew Naylor         Procurement Review | Yes
 Contact Person            Paul Runyan                Contact Phone        503-650-3265

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY: This contract with Eagle Creek Rock Products, LLC will allow
Transportation Maintenance crews the ability to purchase aggregate materials to repair and
maintain the roads within the County to help ensure a safer infrastructure for the public. This is
one of three aggregate rock contracts coming before the board for approval. Having multiple
aggregate rock vendors geographically located in different areas of the County provides the
ability to select vendors in closer proximity to job sites there by reducing costs.

PROCUREMENT          PROCESS: This contract was advertised in accordance with ORS and LCRB
Rules on November 27, 2023 through RFQ 2023-100. The County received responses from
three (3) vendors: Knife River Corporation-Northwest, Eagle Creek Rock Products, LLC and
Yoder Quarry, LLC. All three (3) vendors have finalized their Clackamas County Goods and
Services agreements. Transportation Maintenance will be using all three (8) vendors due to the
various locations.
RECOMMENDATION:           Staff recommends that the Board of County Commissioners approve
Contract #9069 with Eagle Creek Rock Products, LLC for aggregate rock products.


Respectfully submitted,

Dan Jonnsonw
Dan Johnson                                                        For Filing Use Only
Director of Transportation &
Development




                 Pp. 503.742.4400      F. 503.742.4272         WWW.CLACKAMAS.US
  A                                   CLACKAMAS COUNTY
CLACKAMAS                        GOODS AND SERVICES CONTRACT
                                              Contract #9069


This Goods and Services Contract (this “Contract”) is entered into between Eagle Creek Rock Products,
LLC (“Contractor”), and Clackamas County, a political subdivisions of the State of Oregon (“County”),
on behalf of its Department of Transportation, for the purposes of providing Aggregate Rock Products.

ARTICLE L.

1.   Effective Date and Duration. This Contract shall become effective upon signature of both parties
     and shall remain in effect until December 31, 2026, or until completion of all obligations provided
     herein, whichever is later.

2.   Scope of Work. The Contractor shall provide the goods and services identified in Exhibit A (the
     “Work”), attached hereto and incorporated by reference herein. Work shall be performed in
     accordance with a schedule approved by the County.

3.   Consideration. The County agrees to pay Contractor, from available and authorized funds, a sum
     not to exceed Two Hundred Twenty-Five Thousand Dollars ($225,000.00), with an annual sum not
     to exceed Seventy Five Thousand Dollars ($75,000.00), for performing the Work required by this
     Contract. Consideration rates are on a time and materials basis in accordance with the rates and costs
     specified in Exhibit B. If any interim payments to Contractor are made, such payments shall be made
     only in accordance with the schedule and requirements in Exhibit B.

4.   Invoices and Payments. Unless otherwise specified, Contractor shall submit monthly invoices for
     Work performed. Invoices shall describe all Work performed with particularity, by whom it was
     performed, and shall itemize and explain all expenses for which reimbursement is claimed. The
     invoices shall include the total amount billed to date by Contractor prior to the current invoice. If
     Contractor fails to present invoices in proper form within sixty (60) calendar days after the end of the
     month in which the services were rendered, Contractor waives any rights to present such invoice
     thereafter and to receive payment therefor. Payments shall be made to Contractor within forty-five
     (45) days following the County’s review and approval of invoices submitted by Contractor.
     Contractor shall not submit invoices for, and the County will not be obligated to pay, any amount in
     excess of the maximum compensation amount set forth above. If this maximum compensation
     amount is increased by amendment of this Contract, the amendment must be fully effective before
     Contractor performs Work subject to the amendment. Payment information will be reported to the
     Internal Revenue Service (“IRS”) under the name and taxpayer ID number submitted. (See LR.S.
     1099 for additional instructions regarding taxpayer ID numbers.) Information not matching IRS
     records will subject Contractor payments to backup withholding.

     Invoices shall reference the above Contract Number and be submitted to:
     Dtdtminvoice@clackamas.us

5.   Travel Expense Reimbursement. Authorized: [_] Yes                XX] No
      If travel expense reimbursement is authorized in this Contract, such expenses shall only be
      reimbursed at the rates in the County Contractor Travel Reimbursement Policy, hereby incorporated
      by reference, in effect at the time of the expense is incurred.

6.   Contract Documents. This Contract consists of the following documents which are listed in
     descending order of precedence and are attached and incorporated by reference, this Contract, Exhibit
     A and Exhibit B.
                                                     Page |
7.      Contractor and County Contacts.
     Contractor Administrator: Kristen Broadhurst          County Administrator: Carla Phelps
     Phone: 503-637-4300                                   Phone: 503-650--3771
     Email: Eaglecreekrock@eaglecreekrock.com              Email: CPhelps@Clackamas.us


ARTICLE ILI.

1.     Access to Records. Contractor shall maintain books, records, documents, and other evidence, in
       accordance with generally accepted accounting procedures and practices, sufficient to reflect properly
       all costs of whatever nature claimed to have been incurred and anticipated to be incurred in the
       performance of this Contract. County and their duly authorized representatives shall have access to
       the books, documents, papers, and records of Contractor, which are directly pertinent to this Contract
       for the purpose of making audit, examination, excerpts, and transcripts. Contractor shall maintain
       such books and records for a minimum of six (6) years, or such longer period as may be required by
       applicable law, following final payment and termination of this Contract, or until the conclusion of
       any audit, controversy or litigation arising out of or related to this Contract, whichever date is later.

       Availability of Funds. Any continuation or extension of this Contract after the end of the fiscal
       period in which it is written is contingent on a new appropriation for each succeeding fiscal period
       sufficient to continue to make payments under this Contract, as determined by the County in its sole
       administrative discretion.

       Captions. The captions or headings in this Contract are for convenience only and in no way define,
       limit, or describe the scope or intent of any provisions of this Contract.

       Compliance with Applicable Law. Contractor shall comply with all applicable federal, state and
       local laws, regulations, executive orders, and ordinances, as such may be amended from time to time.

       Governing Law. This Contract, and all rights, obligations, and disputes arising out of it, shall be
       governed and construed in accordance with the laws of the State of Oregon and the ordinances of
       Clackamas County without regard to principles of conflicts of law. Any claim, action, or suit
       between County and Contractor that arises out of or relates to the performance of this Contract shall
       be brought and conducted solely and exclusively within the Circuit Court for Clackamas County, for
       the State of Oregon. Provided, however, that if any such claim, action, or suit may be brought in a
       federal forum, it shall be brought and conducted solely and exclusively within the United States
       District Court for the District of Oregon. In no event shall this section be construed as a waiver by the
       County of any form of defense or immunity, whether sovereign immunity, governmental immunity,
       immunity based on the Eleventh Amendment to the Constitution of the United States or otherwise,
       from any claim or from the jurisdiction of any court. Contractor, by execution of this Contract, hereby
       consents to the personal jurisdiction of the courts referenced in this section.

       Hazard Communication. Contractor shall notify County prior to using products containing
       hazardous chemicals to which County employees may be exposed, which includes any hazardous,
       toxic, or dangerous substance, waste, or material that 1s the subject of environmental protection legal
       requirements or that becomes regulated under any applicable local, state or federal law, including but
       not limited to the items listed in the United States Department of Transportation Hazardous Materials
       Table (49 CFR §172.101) or designated as hazardous substances by Oregon Administrative Rules,
       Chapter 437, or the United States Environmental Protection Agency (40 CFR Part 302), and any
       amendments thereto. Upon County’s request, Contractor shall immediately provide Safety Data
       Sheets for the products subject to this provision.
                                                       Page 2
7.   Responsibility for Damages; Indemnity. Contractor shall be responsible for all damage to property,
     injury to persons, and loss, expense, inconvenience, and delay which may be caused by, or result
     from, any act, omission, or neglect of Contractor, its subcontractors, agents, or employees. The
     Contractor agrees to indemnify and defend the County, and its officers, elected officials, agents, and
     employees, from and against all claims, actions, losses, liabilities, including reasonable attorney and
     accounting fees, and all expenses incidental to the investigation and defense thereof, arising out of or
     based upon Contractor’s acts or omissions in performing under this Contract.

     However, neither Contractor nor any attorney engaged by Contractor shall defend the claim in the
     name of County, purport to act as legal representative of County, or settle any claim on behalf of
     County, without the approval of the Clackamas County Counsel’s Office. County may assume its
     own defense and settlement at its election and expense.

     Independent Contractor Status. The service(s) to be rendered under this Contract are those of an
     independent contractor. Although the County reserves the right to determine (and modify) the
     delivery schedule for the Work to be performed and to evaluate the quality of the completed
     performance, County cannot and will not control the means or manner of Contractor’s performance.
     Contractor is responsible for determining the appropriate means and manner of performing the Work.
     Contractor is not to be considered an agent or employee of County for any purpose, including, but not
     limited to: (A) The Contractor will be solely responsible for payment of any Federal or State taxes
     required as a result of this Contract; and (B) This Contract 1s not intended to entitle the Contractor to
     any benefits generally granted to County employees, including, but not limited to, vacation, holiday
     and sick leave, other leaves with pay, tenure, medical and dental coverage, life and disability
     insurance, overtime, Social Security, Workers' Compensation, unemployment compensation, or
     retirement benefits.

     Insurance. Contractor shall secure at its own expense and keep in effect during the term of the
     performance under this Contract the insurance required and minimum coverage indicated below. The
     insurance requirement outlined below do not in any way limit the amount of scope of liability of
     Contractor under this Contract. Contractor shall provide proof of said insurance and name the County
     as an additional insured on all required liability policies. Proof of insurance and notice of any material
     change should be submitted to the following address: Clackamas County Procurement Division, 2051
     Kaen Road, Oregon City, OR 97045 or procurement@clackamas.us.

          [XX] Required — Commercial General Liability: Combined single limit, or the equivalent, of
          not less than $1,000,000 per occurrence, with an annual aggregate limit of $2,000,000 for
          Bodily Injury and Property Damage.

          [_] Required — Professional Liability: Combined single limit, or the equivalent, of not less
          than $1,000,000 per claim, with an annual aggregate limit of $2,000,000 for damages caused
          by error, omission or negligent acts.

          [><] Required — Automobile Liability: Combined single limit, or the equivalent, of not less
          than $1,000,000 per accident for Bodily Injury and Property Damage.

     The policies shall be primary insurance as respects to the County. Any insurance or self-insurance
     maintained by the County shall be excess and shall not contribute to it. Any obligation that County
     agree to a waiver of subrogation is hereby stricken.

10. Limitation of Liabilities. This Contract is expressly subject to the debt limitation of Oregon
    counties set forth in Article XI, Section 10, of the Oregon Constitution, and is contingent upon funds
    being appropriated therefore. Any provisions herein which would conflict with law are deemed
    inoperative to that extent. Except for liability arising under or related to Article II, Section 14 or
    Section 21, neither party shall be liable for (4) any indirect, incidental, consequential or special
                                                     Page 3
    damages under this Contract or (11) any damages of any sort arising solely from the termination of this
    Contact in accordance with its terms.

11. Notices. Except as otherwise provided in this Contract, any required notices between the parties shall
    be given in writing by personal delivery, email, or mailing the same, to the Contract Administrators
    identified in Article 1, Section 6. If notice is sent to County, a copy shall also be sent to: Clackamas
    County Procurement, 2051 Kaen Road, Oregon City, OR 97045, or procurement@clackamas.us.
    Any communication or notice so addressed and mailed shall be deemed to be given five (5) days after
    mailing, and immediately upon personal delivery, or within 2 hours after the email is sent during
    County’s normal business hours (Monday — Thursday, 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.) (as recorded on the
    device from which the sender sent the email), unless the sender receives an automated message or
    other indication that the email has not been delivered.

12. Ownership of Work Product. All work product of Contractor that results from this Contract (the
    “Work Product’) is the exclusive property of County. County and Contractor intend that such Work
    Product be deemed “work made for hire” of which County shall be deemed the author. If for any
    reason the Work Product is not deemed “work made for hire,” Contractor hereby irrevocably assigns
    to County all of its right, title, and interest in and to any and all of the Work Product, whether arising
    from copyright, patent, trademark or trade secret, or any other state or federal intellectual property
    law or doctrine. Contractor shall execute such further documents and instruments as County may
    reasonably request in order to fully vest such rights in County. Contractor forever waives any and all
    rights relating to the Work Product, including without limitation, any and all rights arising under 17
    USC § 106A or any other rights of identification of authorship or rights of approval, restriction or
    limitation on use or subsequent modifications. Notwithstanding the above, County shall have no
    rights in any pre-existing Contractor intellectual property provided to County by Contractor in the
    performance of this Contract except to copy, use and re-use any such Contractor intellectual property
    for County use only.

13. Representations of Warranties.       Contractor represents and warrants the following:
    A.   Contractor has the power and authority to enter into and perform this Contract;
    B.   This Contract, when executed and delivered, shall be a valid and binding obligation of Contractor
         enforceable in accordance with its terms;
    C.   Contractor shall, at all times during the term of this Contract, be qualified, professionally
         competent, and duly licensed to perform the Work;
    D.   Contractor is an independent contractor as defined in ORS 670.600.
         If providing goods, all goods provided by Contractor under this Contract shall meet all standards
         and specifications set forth in Exhibit A, that the goods shall be merchantable, and shall be fit for
         County’s intended use, described in Exhibit A. As necessary, the County agrees to provide
         Contractor reasonable access to the goods for purposes of repair or replacement under this
         warranty. Failure of Contractor to promptly correct problems pursuant to this warranty shall be
         deemed a material breach of this Contract.
    E.   If providing services, the services provided by Contractor under this Contract will be performed
         in a workmanlike manner and in accordance with the highest professional standards.
    The warranties set forth in this section are in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other warranties
    provided.

14. Delivery and Inspections.




                                                     Page 4
       Goods furnished under this Contract will be subject to inspection and test by the County at times
       and places determined by the County in its sole discretion. If the County finds the goods furnished
       to be incomplete or not in compliance with the Contract, the County, in its sole discretion, may
       either reject the goods, require Contractor to correct any defects without charge, or negotiate with
       Contractor to sell the goods to the County at a reduced price. If Contractor is unable or refuses to
       cure any defects within a time deemed reasonable by the County, the County may reject the goods,
       terminate the Contract, and pursue any and all rights and remedies available to County at law, in
       equity, or under this Contract. Nothing in this paragraph shall in any way affect or limit the
       County’s rights as a buyer, including the rights and remedies relating to rejection under ORS
       72.6020 and revocation of acceptance under ORS 72.6080.

15. Survival All rights and obligations shall cease upon termination or expiration of this Contract, except
    for the rights and obligations set forth in Article II, Sections 1, 5, 6, 7, 10, 12, 13, 15, 16, 17, 18, 21,
    22, 23, 27, and 31, and all other terms and conditions which by their context are intended to survive
    termination of this Contract.

16. Severability. If any term or provision of this Contract is declared by a court of competent
    jurisdiction to be illegal or in conflict with any law, the validity of the remaining terms and provisions
    shall not be affected, and the rights and obligations of the parties shall be construed and enforced as if
    the Contract did not contain the particular term or provision held to be invalid.

17. Subcontractors and Assignments. Contractor shall not enter into any subcontracts for any of the
    work required by this Contract, or assign or transfer any of its interest in this Contract by operation of
    law or otherwise, without obtaining prior written approval from the County. In addition to any
    provisions the County may require, Contractor shall include in any permitted subcontract under this
    Contract a requirement that the subcontractor be bound by this section and Article II, Sections 1, 7, 8,
    13, 22, and 31, as if the subcontractor were the Contractor. County’s consent to any subcontract shall
    not relieve Contractor of any of its duties or obligations under this Contract.

18. Successors in Interest. The provisions of this Contract shall be binding upon and shall inure to the
    benefit of the parties hereto, and their respective authorized successors and assigns.

19. Tax Compliance and Certifications. The Contractor shall comply with all federal, state and local
    laws, regulation, executive orders and ordinances applicable to this Contract. Contractor represents
    and warrants that it has complied, and will continue to comply throughout the duration of this
    Contract and any extensions, with all tax laws of this state or any political subdivision of this state,
    including but not limited to ORS 305.620 and ORS chapters 316, 317, and 318. Any violation of this
    section shall constitute a material breach of this Contract and shall entitle County to terminate this
    Contract, to pursue and recover any and all damages that arise from the breach and the termination of
    this Contract, and to pursue any or all of the remedies available under this Contract or applicable law.

20. Termination. This Contract may be terminated for the following reasons: (A) by mutual agreement
    of the parties or by the County (1) for convenience upon thirty (30) days written notice to Contractor,
    or (11) at any time the County fails to receive funding, appropriations, or other expenditure authority
    as solely determined by the County; or (B) if contractor breaches any Contract provision or is
    declared insolvent, County may terminate after thirty (30) days written notice with an opportunity to
    cure.

    Upon receipt of written notice of termination from the County, Contractor shall immediately stop
    performance of the Work. Upon termination of this Contract, Contractor shall deliver to County all
    documents, Work Product, information, works-in-progress and other property that are or would be
    deliverables had the Contract Work been completed. Upon County’s request, Contractor shall

                                                      Page 5
    surrender to anyone County designates, all documents, research, objects or other tangible things
    needed to complete the Work.

21. Remedies. If terminated by the County due to a breach by the Contractor, then the County shall have
    any remedy available to it at law, in equity, or under this Contract including, but not limited to, any
    remedy available under ORS Chapter 72. If this Contract is terminated for any other reason,
    Contractor’s sole remedy is payment for the goods and services delivered and accepted by the
    County, less any setoff to which the County is entitled.

22. No Attorney Fees. In the event any arbitration, action or proceeding, including any bankruptcy
    proceeding, is instituted to enforce any term of this Contract, each party shall be responsible for its
    own attorneys’ fees and expenses.

23. No Third Party Beneficiaries. County and Contractor are the only parties to this Contract and are
    the only parties entitled to enforce its terms. Nothing in this Contract gives, is intended to give, or
    shall be construed to give or provide any benefit or right, whether directly, indirectly or otherwise, to
    third persons unless such third persons are individually identified by name herein and expressly
    described as intended beneficiaries of the terms of this Contract.

24. Time is of the Essence. Contractor agrees that time is of the essence in the performance of this
    Contract.

25. Foreign Contractor. If the Contractor is not domiciled in or registered to do business in the State of
    Oregon, Contractor shall promptly provide to the Oregon Department of Revenue and the Secretary
    of State, Corporate Division, all information required by those agencies relative to this Contract. The
    Contractor shall demonstrate its legal capacity to perform these services in the State of Oregon prior
    to entering into this Contract.

26. Force Majeure. Neither County nor Contractor shall be held responsible for delay or default caused
    by fire, terrorism, riot, acts of God, or war where such cause was beyond, respectively, County’s or
    Contractor’s reasonable control. Contractor shall, however, make all reasonable efforts to remove or
    eliminate such a cause of delay or default and shall upon the cessation of the cause, diligently pursue
    performance of its obligations under this Contract.

27. Waiver. The failure of County to enforce any provision of this Contract shall not constitute a waiver
    by County of that or any other provision.

28. Public Contracting Requirements. Pursuant to the public contracting requirements contained in
    Oregon Revised Statutes (“ORS”) Chapter 279B.220 through 279B.235, Contractor shall:
            a. Make payments promptly, as due, to all persons supplying to Contractor labor or
               materials for the prosecution of the work provided for in the Contract.
            b. Pay all contributions or amounts due the Industrial Accident Fund from such Contractor
                or subcontractor incurred in the performance of the Contract.
            c. Not permit any lien or claim to be filed or prosecuted against County on account of any
                labor or material furnished.
            d. Pay the Department of Revenue all sums withheld from employees pursuant to ORS
                316.167.
            e. As applicable, the Contractor shall pay employees for work in accordance with ORS
               279B.235, which 1s incorporated herein by this reference. The Contractor shall comply
               with the prohibitions set forth in ORS 652.220, compliance of which is a material
                element of this Contract, and failure to comply is a breach entitling County to terminate
               this Contract for cause.


                                                     Page 6
              f.   Ifthe Work involves lawn and landscape maintenance, Contractor shall salvage, recycle,
                   compost, or mulch yard waste material at an approved site, if feasible and cost effective.

29.   [RESERVED]
30.   [RESERVED]
31. Merger. This Contract constitutes the entire agreement between the parties with respect to the subject
    matter referenced herein. There are no understanding, agreements, or representations, oral or written,
    not specified herein regarding this Contract. Contractor, by the signature hereto of its authorized
    representative, acknowledges having read and understood this contract and Contractor agrees to be
    bound by its terms and conditions.

32. Execution and Counterparts. This Contract may be executed in several counterparts (electronic or
      otherwise), each of which shall be an original, all of which shall constitute the same instrument.

33. Amendment. This Contract may only be modified in writing signed by the parties.


By their signatures below, the parties to this Contract agree to the terms, conditions, and content
expressed herein.

 Eagle Creek Rock Products, LLC                                Clackamas County
 25375 SE Talons Road
 Eagle Creek, OR 97822
                                        19/792
                          @




 Authorizé@Signature                         Date              Chair                                  Date

 StaCy FANE                   - OWNLIK
 Name / Title (Printed)                                        Recording Secretary

  1385667-99
  Oregon Business Registry #                                   Approved as to Form:
                                                                       Jaf                  01/22/2024
  DLLC/OREGON                                                          “7
  Entity Type / State of Formation                             County Counsel                         Date




                                                      Page 7
          EXHIBIT A
RFQ #2023-100 Asphaltic Concrete
    Issued: November 27, 2023




              Page 8
                                                                      Procurement Division
                                                                      Public Services Building
                  ee.                                                      2051 Kaen Road
                                                                       Oregon City, OR 97045
CLACKAMAS                                                             (503) 742-5444 (Office)
       COL
         N T            Yy



                               REQUEST FOR QUOTES (RFQ) #2023-100
                                     Issue Date: November 27, 2023

Project Name:                     Aggregate Rock Products
Quote Due Date/Time:              December 12, 2023, 2:00 PM PST
Procurement Analyst:              Mike Faris                 Email:     Mfaris@Clackamas.us


             SUBMIT          QUOTES VIA EQUITY HUB’S BID LOCKER LOCATED                          AT
                               https://bidlocker.us/a/clackamascounty/BidLocker.

              PLEASE NOTE: EMAIL SUBMISSIONS WILL NOT BE ACCEPTED.

1.   ANNOUNCEMENT AND SPECIAL INFORMATION
     Quoters are required to read, understand, and comply with all information contained within this
     Request for Quotes (“RFQ”). All quotes are binding upon Quoter for sixty (60) days from the Quote
     Due Date/Time. Quotes received after the Quote Due Date/Time may not be considered. If
     authorized in the RFQ and resulting contract, travel and other expense reimbursement will only be
     reimbursed in accordance with the Clackamas County Travel Reimbursement Policy in effect at the
     time the expense 1s incurred. The Policy may be found at
     https://www.clackamas.us/finance/terms.   html.

     RFQ Documents can be downloaded from OregonBuys at the following address:
     https://oregonbuys. gov/bso/ Document No. S-C01010-00008765. Prospective Quoters will need to
     sign in to download the information and that information will be accumulated for a Plan Holder's List.
     Prospective Quoters are responsible for obtaining any addenda or clarifying questions from
     OregonBuys.

     Submitting Quotes: Bid Locker
     Quotes will only be accepted electronically via a secure online submission service, Bid Locker. Email
     submissions to Clackamas County email addresses will no longer be accepted.
         A. Completed quote documents must arrive electronically via Bid Locker located at
             https://bidlocker.us/a/clackamascounty/BidLocker.
         B. Bid Locker will electronically document the date and time of all submissions. Completed
             documents must arrive by the deadline indicated above or as modified by Addendum.
             LATE QUOTES WILL NOT BE ACCEPTED.
         C. Quoters must register and create a profile for their business with Bid Locker in order to
             submit for this project. It is free to register for Bid Locker.
         D. Quoters with further questions concerning Bid Locker may review the Vendor’s Guide
             located at https://www.clackamas.us/how-to-bid-on-county-projects .

     All questions regarding this RFQ are to be directed to the Procurement Analyst named above. Quoters
     may not communicate with County employees or representatives about the RFQ during the
     procurement process until the Procurement office has notified Quoters of the selected Quoter.
     Communication in violation of this restriction may result in rejection of a Quoter.




Revised 10/2023                                   Page |
2.   SCOPE
     The purpose of this RFQ is to obtain competitive market prices on various aggregate rock products,
     loaded, FOB supplier’s site. The County Transportation Maintenance Division (or other County
     departments) will use the resulting price agreement for purchases on an as needed basis.

     The County may award multiple contracts as a result of this RFQ. If multiple contracts are awarded,
     the County will generally use the firm with the best price, closest to the project site, in the sole
     determination by the County.

     Price Adjustments: The resulting contract(s) will be for a period of December 1, 2023 (or the date the
     contract(s) is executed) through December 21, 2026. Contractor(s) may request pricing changes
     (increase or decrease) twice a year between April 1-10 and November 1-10 of each year of the
     contract. The County will not consider requests not received during the above referenced request
     periods. The County’s intent is to ensure that it is paying competitive market rates for products. Price
     adjustments will be executed by way of an amendment signed by both the County and the
     vendor. Price adjustments must be sent to the Project Manager as identified within the final
     contract.

     Ordering Process: Once a contract is established, the County will periodically contact the contractor
     to fulfill orders. Contractor will invoice the County monthly for all sales. The County reserves the
     right to pay by credit card at the point of sale (without additional fee or charge). All invoices shall be
     NET 30 and subject to ORS 293.462. At the time of order, the County representative shall indicate
     the point of contact for invoicing.

     Requirements:
         A. Measurement: Measurement of aggregate rock products will be by the ton based upon weigh
            tickets from certified scales except in situations that the County gives prior approval for the
            use of another measurement standard.
         B. Prices: Prices quoted will be for purchases of aggregate rock, loaded, FOB supplier’s site.
         C. Materials: Aggregate rock supplied shall conform to the State of Oregon’s Standard
            Specifications for Highway Construction, 2021 Edition. Aggregate rock not meeting the
            required specification will be rejected.
         D. Business Pickup Locations: Suppliers pickup locations of materials quoted should be located
            within the tri-county lines (Clackamas, Multnomah, and Washington County).


3.   SAMPLE CONTRACT
     Submission of a Quote in response to this RFQ indicates Quoter’s willingness to enter into a contract
     containing substantially the same terms of the below referenced contract, which can be found at:
     https://www.clackamas.us/finance/terms.html, with the below indicated requirements. No action
     or response to the sample contract is required under this RFQ.    The applicable sample contract is the:

     Goods & Services Contract (unless checked, item does not apply)
     [_] Professional Liability: combined single limit, or the equivalent, of not less than $1,000,000 per
         occurrence, with an annual aggregate limit of $2,000,000 for damages caused by error, omission
         or negligent acts.
     ><] Commercial General Liability: combined single limit, or the equivalent, of not less than
         $1,000,000 per occurrence, with an annual aggregate limit of $2,000,000 for Bodily Injury and
         Property Damage.
     x] Automobile Liability: combined single limit, or the equivalent, of not less than $500,000 per
         occurrence for Bodily Injury and Property Damage.




Revised 10/2023                                  Page 2
4.    QUOTE
      Quotes should be short and concise with the following information:


                  Company experience in these types of projects;
                  Company hours;
          TOW
                  Company locations (list if multiple sites);
                  Prices — Complete Fee Sheet Attached; and
                  Clackamas County Certifications Form;

5.    EVALUATION
      The quote received from the lowest responsive responsible Quoter will be awarded a contract. The
      "lowest responsive responsible Quoter" is the lowest Quoter who has substantially complied with all
      requirements of the Request for Quote and who can be expected to deliver promptly and perform
      reliably in the determination of Clackamas County.




Revised 10/2023                                    Page 3
                                      CLACKAMAS COUNTY
                                   INSTRUCTIONS TO QUOTERS

Quotes are subject to the applicable provisions and requirements of the Clackamas County Local Contract
Review Board Rule C-047-0270 (Intermediate Procurements) and Oregon Revised Statutes.

                                           QUOTE PREPARATION
         QUOTE FORMAT: Quotes must be must be submitted as indicated in the RFQ.
    pom




         CONFORMANCE TO RFQ REQUIREMENTS: Quotes must conform to the requirements of
         the RFQ. Unless otherwise specified, all items quoted are to be new, unused and not
         remanufactured in any way. Any requested attachments must be submitted with the quote and in
         the required format. Quote prices must be for the unit indicated on the quote. Failure to comply
         with all requirements may result in quote rejection.
         ADDENDA: Only documents issued as addenda by Clackamas County serve to change the RFQ
         in any way. No other directions received by the Quoter, written or verbal, serve to change the
         RFQ document. NOTE: IF YOU HAVE RECEIVED A COPY OF THE RFQ, YOU SHOULD
         CONSULT OREGONBUYS (https://oregonbuys. gov/bso/view/login/login. xhtml) TO ENSURE
         THAT YOU HAVE NOT MISSED ANY ADDENDA OR ANNOUNCEMENTS. QUOTERS
         ARE NOT REQUIRED TO RETURN ADDENDUMS WITH THEIR QUOTE. HOWEVER,
         QUOTERS ARE RESPONSIBLE TO MAKE THEMSELVES AWARE OF, OBTAIN AND
         INCORPORATE ANY CHANGES MADE IN ANY ADDENDA ISSUED, AND TO
         INCORPORATE ANY CHANGES MADE BY ADDENDUM INTO THEIR FINAL QUOTE.
         FAILURE TO DO SO MAY, IN EFFECT, MAKE THE QUOTER'S QUOTE NON-
         RESPONSIVE, WHICH MAY CAUSE THE QUOTE TO BE REJECTED.
         USE of BRAND or TRADE NAMES: Any brand or trade names used by Clackamas County in
         the specifications are for the purpose of describing and establishing the standard of quality,
         performance and characteristics desired and are not intended to limit or restrict competition.
         Quoters may submit quotes for substantially equivalent products to those designated unless the
         RFQ provides that a specific brand is necessary because of compatibility requirements, etc. All
         such brand substitutions shall be subject to approval by Clackamas County.
         PRODUCT IDENTIFICATION: Quoters must clearly identify all products quoted. Brand name
         and model or number must be shown. Clackamas County reserves the right to reject any quote
         when the product information submitted with the quote is incomplete.
         FOB DESTINATION: Unless specifically allowed in the RFQ, QUOTE PRICE MUST BE
         F.0.B,. DESTINATION with all transportation and handling charges included in the Quote.
         DELIVERY: Delivery time must be shown in number of calendar days after receipt of purchase
         order.
         EXCEPTIONS: Any deviation from quote specifications, or the form of sample contract
         referenced in this RFQ, may result in quote rejection at County’s sole discretion.
         SIGNATURE ON QUOTE: Quotes must be signed by an authorized representative of the
         Quoter. Signature on a quote certifies that the quote is made without connection with any person,
         firm or corporation making a quote for the same goods and/or services and 1s in all respects fair
         and without collusion or fraud. Signature on a quote also certifies that the Quoter has read and
         fully understands all quote specifications, and the sample contract referenced in this RFQ
         (including insurance requirements). No consideration will be given to any claim resulting from
         quoting without comprehending all requirements of the RFQ.
     10. QUOTE MODIFICATION: Quotes, once submitted, may be modified in writing before the
         time and date set for quote closing. Any modifications should be signed by an authorized
         representative, and state that the new document supersedes or modifies the prior quote. Quoters
         may not modify quotes after quote closing time.
     11. QUOTE WITHDRAWALS: Quotes may be withdrawn by request in writing signed by an
         authorized representative and received by Clackamas County prior to the Quote Due Date/Time.
         Quotes may also be withdrawn in person before the Quote Due Date/Time upon presentation of
         appropriate identification.
     12. QUOTE SUBMISSION: Quotes may be submitted by returning to Clackamas County
         Procurement Division in the location designated in the introduction of the RFQ; however, no oral
Revised 10/2023                                Page 5
          or telephone quotes will be accepted. Envelopes, or e-mails containing Quotes should contain the
          RFQ Number and RFQ Title.

                                    QUOTE EVALUATION AND AWARD
     1.   PRIOR ACCEPTANCE OF DEFECTIVE PROPOSALS: Due to limited resources,
          Clackamas County generally will not completely review or analyze quotes which fail to comply
          with the requirements of the RFQ or which clearly are not the best quotes, nor will Clackamas
          County generally investigate the references or qualifications of those who submit such quotes.
          Therefore, neither the return of a quote, nor acknowledgment that the selection is complete shall
          operate as a representation by Clackamas County that an unsuccessful quote was complete,
          sufficient, or lawful in any respect.
     2.   DELIVERY: Significant delays in delivery may be considered in determining award if early
          delivery is required.
     3.   CASH DISCOUNTS: Cash discounts will not be considered for award purposes unless stated in
          the RFQ.
     4.   PAYMENT: Quotes which require payment in less than 30 days after receipt of invoice or
          delivery of goods, whichever is later, may be rejected.
     5.   INVESTIGATION OF REFERENCES: Clackamas County reserves the right to investigate
          references and or the past performance of any Quoter with respect to its successful performance
          of similar services, compliance with specifications and contractual obligations, and its lawful
          payment of suppliers, sub-contractors, and workers. Clackamas County may postpone the award
          or execution of the contract after the announcement of the apparent successful Quoter in order to
          complete its investigation. Clackamas County reserves the right to reject any quote or to reject all
          quotes at any time prior to Clackamas County's execution of a contract if it is determined to be in
          the best interest of Clackamas County to do so.
     6.   CLARIFICATION: Clackamas County reserves the right to seek clarification of each Quote, or
          to make an award without further discussion of Quotes received.
     7.   METHOD OF AWARD: Clackamas County reserves the right to make the award by item,
          groups of items or entire quote, whichever is in the best interest of Clackamas County.
     8.   QUOTE REJECTION: Clackamas County reserves the right to reject any and all quotes for any
          reason including, but not limited to, a Quoter’s failure to constitute as a responsible bidder under
          ORS 279B.110 and LCRB C047-640-1-c-F-iil.
     9.   QUOTE RESULTS: Quoters who submit a quote will be notified of the RFQ results. Awarded
          quote files are public records and available for review by submitting a public records request or
          by appointment.




Revised 10/2023                                  Page 6
          RFQ #2023-100 AGGREGATE             ROCK PRODUCTS                 FEE SHEET

                              COMPANY         NAME:

                  MATERIAL/DESCRIPTION                   COST PER TON
                  1/4”-0 CRUSHED ROCK




                                                      Pi |A|A|A|A|A|A|A|A
                  %”-0 CRUSHED ROCK
                  1”-0 CRUSHED ROCK
                  3”-0 CRUSHED ROCK
                  4-12” CRUSHED DRAIN
                  RIP RAP
                  MASON SAND
                  FILL SAND
                  WINTER SAND %”-0 CLEAN
                  CRUSHED AGGRGATE
                  TOP SOIL




                                                      A




Revised 10/2023                      Page 7
    EXHIBIT B
Contractor’s Quote




       Page 9
                                                                               ‘




               Mf                 Eacie Creex
                                         PRODUCTS
                  PO Box 381   Eagle Creek Rock Products, LLC   503-637-4300




                                    Products List
                      3/4- Crushed Rock $17.50 per ton

                      1 %- Crushed Rock $20.00 per ton

               3-5”- Crushed Rock “Jaw Run” $20.00 per ton

                  2-3” Open Crushed Rock $23.00 per ton

                               Sand        $15.50 per ton

                         Pea Gravel          $18.50        per ton

                   %” Round Drain rock              $17.50         perton

                  1 % Round Drain Rock                $18.50        per ton

                     Reject (fill material) $12.50 per ton
      (1-4 yards, all products are $25 per ton. Must be picked up at one time)

                                   Dirt Dump          Fees

    ($25.00 minimum, no organics, no garbage, no contaminates — concrete ok)

                                         $8.50/yd

                               Vac Truck Dump              Fees

(No catch basins, petroleum products, bentonite, chemicals, or other contaminates)

                    500-—800-Gal Vac Truck $175 per load

                      1,200-Gal Vac Truck $225 per load

                      2,000-Gal Vac Truck $275 per load

            25375 SE Talons Rd _ Eagle Creek, OR 97022
