               Workbook
                     for


How to Form and Sustain a DE! Committee

             Presented By

             Lillian A. Tsai
            TsaiComms LLC
                     For



                  ™h ERSITY:
                              tatew
                 \   Uregon




                     QUITY &
                “ANGLUSION
                                 AY   ce
                      021 Confer


            September 17, 2021
Workshop Goals
= To understand the process of forming and sustaining a DEI Committee with
   accountability and transparency.
» Identify and clarify the motivations, roles, responsibilities and expectations of
   members.
» Understand what could sabotage the committee’s work and how to dispel the top
   two.
" Take away helpful tips and check lists.


Agenda

A.   Getting Started
            » Checklist to Guide Efforts
            = DEl Organizational Assessment
            "=" Recruitment, Membership Criteria
            » What are the Roles of a DEI Committee?
            # Individual Roles

B. Getting Grounded
           # Onboarding exercise
                =»   Barriers/Saboteurs to Success

C. Sustaining        Momentum
                »    Mission/Purpose Statement examples
                =»   Measurable   Goals and Action Plan



A.   Getting Started

           Checklist for Forming & Sustaining a Diversity, Equity and             Inclusion Committee

     Exercise Instructions:
     Check off the items and sub items that you're considering, are currently working on or
     already completed.

     1.     We have conducted an organization-wide DEI assessment.
               Oo Yes
               Oh No
               O) Scheduled but not started
               O Thinking about it

     2.     We have executive sponsorship and buy in from the top.
               Oo Yes
               Oh No
               O) Don’t know



          TsaiComms LLC © All Rights Reserved    - State of Oregon Diversity Conference — 9-17-21
                            Publish or distribute only with TsaiComms’ consent.
                                            www.tsaicomms.com
  We have executive or leadership/management representation on the Committee.
     Oo Yes
     Oh No
     O) Don’t know

  We are given time away from our jobs by our manager/supervisor to work on this
  committee and not penalized for our absence in any way.
      O Yes
      O No
      O Don’t know

  We know where our budget will come from.
        O          Yes
        O          No
        O          Don’t know

  We have/plan to have a committee purpose/mission statement and know what our roles
  are as a Committee.
      O Yes
      O No
      O Don’t know

  We have agreed upon individual roles and responsibilities for our members:
     () Each member understands their own personal motivation and comfort level to do
         DEI work
         We understand the expectations of each member of this committee
      OOOOO0O00O




         | understand the underlying cultural values that shape my life
         | understand the challenges | face when | and/or my team falls short
         We have agreed upon terms for the chair (co-chairs), and members
         We ensure there is as much diversity as possible in our representation
         We have set parameters around attendance
         We have agreed on how we will handle attrition and succession planning
         We have set criteria for membership

  We have established joint agreements and values (aka ground rules) for engagement
  and commitment, e.g.
  e   Listen actively to understand.
  e    Challenge ourselves to courageously engage in inclusive and respectful dialog.
  e    Stories and experiences matter.
  e    Commit to personal and professional growth and learning.
  e     Etc.

  We know what our goals and measurable outcomes are. We also know:
        What we want to accomplish in the short term vs. long term
      OOOOO00O




        How will we measure what we accomplish
        How we will maintain focus
        What will derail/sabotage us
        What barriers we might face from the get-go and how will we sustain ourselves
        What impact we want to make


TsaiComms LLC © All Rights Reserved            - State of Oregon Diversity Conference — 9-17-21   3
                          Publish or distribute only with TsaiComms’ consent.
                                          www.tsaicomms.com
     10. We have a communication plan on how we will communicate our progress internally to
         who we are accountable to, the rest of our organization, and externally to interested
         parties. And stakeholders.
              O Yes
              O No
              O Don't know

Self Reflection:

For 3 minutes on your own, check off the items and sub items that you've already completed,
considering, or are working on. Notice a theme or pattern to what's checked/unchecked.

With your committee when you return to your agency, you might also consider conducting this
exercise on your own. If that’s the case, after everyone has self reflected, compare your
answers looking for similarities/differences, challenges and possible strategies in achieving any
of the items on the list. Then ask yourselves:

            ¢      What did we notice about our checked items?
            ¢«     Were there any surprises?
            ¢«     How many items have we already completed or considered?
            «      What items have we not completed or considered?
            ¢      What might our answers say about where we are?

1.   DEI Organizational Assessment Includes:
            "   Qualitative and quantitative data
                   Confidential   1:1 interviews with leadership,   managers,    supervisors
                   Small confidential focus groups and/or affinity groups
                   1:1 employee interviews
            =»     Anonymous online survey
                   Findings and recommendations
                   Goals and Action Plan
                     ¥   DEI Committee

2.   Recruiting Members
             =  How many members should we have?
             =  How long are their terms?
             =  How do we stagger them?

     What are our criteria for membership?
            =   Representation could be cross-functional, multi-level, diverse backgrounds
            ="  Passion for DEIB
            =»  Knowledge, education and/or lived experience
            =   Commitment and accountability
            =   Open to learning
            ="  Good communicator
            =   Courage to be humble, vulnerable, adaptable and uncomfortable
            »   Etc.




      TsaiComms LLC © All Rights Reserved         - State of Oregon Diversity Conference — 9-17-21   4
                           Publish or distribute only with TsaiComms’ consent.
                                           www.tsaicomms.com
3.     Common         Roles of DEI Committees

       »       Assists in implementation of the Org Assessment
       «       Takes the lead in creating the DEI vision, mission statement, equity lens, goals and
               action plan for your agency
       »       Makes recommendations to leadership
       »       “Ambassadors” & awareness education (e.g. brown bags, books, videos, conferences,
               events, resources, etc.)
       =»      Resource for recruitment, hiring, retention, surfacing issues internally and making
               recommendations on how to address them

Sample Tasks:

e      Assist the Agency Director in creation of the DEI strategy, key goals and an action plan with
       milestones and metrics.

e      Broadly build and share knowledge on DEI successes and impact — build the “business
       case” for DEI.

e      Work with Learning & Development and/or the Human Resources department to identify
       specific DE] education content to be included in employee training and professional
       development.

e      Create content and custom DEI messages for the Communications team to deliver to
       leadership, middle managers, and the general employee population.

e      Provide information and education about diversity, equity and inclusion that relates to the
       agency's mission and vision.

e      Recommend ways to strengthen retention by ensuring that needs and concerns of staff are
       understood and met, especially those from underrepresented and/or marginalized groups.

e      Operationalize mentoring for BIPOC and/or disadvantaged employees.

e      Identify and address emerging issues that impact diversity, equity and inclusion at the
       agency.

4.     Individual Member          Responsibilities

               | understand my own personal motivation and comfort level.
     9




               | Know what our goals and measurable outcomes are.
               | understand the expectations of each member of this committee.
     *oQa90T




               | understand the underlying cultural values that shape my life.
               | understand the challenges we face when | and/or our team falls short.
               We have agreed upon terms for the chair (co-chairs), and members.
               We ensure there is as much diversity as possible in our representation.
     “sa




               We have set parameters around attendance.
               We have agreed on how we will handle attrition and succession planning.



            TsaiComms LLC © All Rights Reserved     - State of Oregon Diversity Conference — 9-17-21
                               Publish or distribute only with TsaiComms’ consent.
                                               www.tsaicomms.com
 Self Reflection:        Individual Member     Responsibilities:


 «»     Take 3 minutes and check off items that you or your committee have completed.
 »      Putin the chat box:

         v¥       What did you notice about what isn’t completed?
         Y        How do you think this might affect the ongoing success of your committee and/or
                  your membership?
         v        What can you do to raise awareness of these items?

. GETTING GROUNDED

 Onboarding/Trust Building

 Conduct relationship and trust building exercises to identify and learn about each others’
 backgrounds, and committee members’ strengths and areas for growth.

 »      3-minute introductions through a DEI lens:
            ¥ How has my upbringing/background shaped who | am today?
            ¥ How has it influenced my interest in DEI work?

 »      Team and Trust Building Exercise
              ¥     Coat of Arms Exercise

 Goals of Coat of Arms             Exercise:


 =      To clarify personal motivations to do DEI work
 =      To understand expectations of myself and my team mates
 =      To understand the challenges I/we will face when things go side ways
 =      To agree on “rules for engagement”

 Coat of Arms           Exercise   Instructions:


 =»     Review the Coat of Arms diagram (see below on page 7)
 »      Take 3-4 minutes to self reflect and write down your answers to the statements posed in
        each of the 5 sections of the coat of arms.
 »      Jot down whatever comes to mind.

 Step #2:


 ="     How difficult/easy was it to answer these questions?
 »      Share your answers in the chat as | call out each section title.




      TsaiComms LLC © All Rights Reserved          - State of Oregon Diversity Conference — 9-17-21   6
                            Publish or distribute only with TsaiComms’ consent.
                                            www.tsaicomms.com
                       Personal motivation to              Expectations of myself &
                       do DEI work ...                     other members of this team
                       7                                   re: DEI...




                       Underlying values that              Challenges | face when |
                       shape my life ...                   (and/or my team) fall short ...




                                   Essential     DEI beliefs for this team...




Establish Joint Agreements,         Values for Engagement       and Commitment

     «     We listen actively to understand.
     »     We challenge ourselves to courageously engage in healthy and respectful discourse.
     =     Our stories and experiences matter.
     »     We commit to personal and professional growth and learning.
     »     Etc.

5.   Barriers to Success


     =     By understanding what might hinder      a Committee's efforts upfront helps you prepare for
           worst case scenarios.

     «     Identifying these factors helps you proactively think about strategies on how to dispel
           them quickly.


         TsaiComms LLC © All Rights Reserved     - State of Oregon Diversity Conference — 9-17-21        7
                           Publish or distribute only with TsaiComms’ consent.
                                           www.tsaicomms.com
Reflecting on What              Might Sabotage Your DEI Committee               Efforts

Goals:


   »     Identify factors that might be hindering your committee’s effectiveness
   »     Stimulate analysis and discussion of committee functioning
   »     Provide information useful in designing plans for strengthening how the
         committee operates

List of Saboteurs

                     Lack of a sustained team of Committee members
        >




                     Unclear mandate, purpose and mission/charter
        RrH




                     No ground rules/agreements for operating
        Fw




                     Little accountability and commitment for task accomplishment
                     Lack of urgency
        Pa




                     Single issue advocacy from individual members
                     Frequent meetings but not consistently attended by everyone
        on




                     Fear of resistance and unwillingness to take risk
                     Lack of foundational DEI knowledge and/or education
        co




         10.         Management resistant to release time for Committee members
         11.         Inadequate measurement and evaluation
         12.         Not gathering and using measurable data to determine direction
         13.         Absence of demonstrable executive and managerial support and
                     participation
         14.         Little emphasis on strategic and operational application


Instructions for Reflecting on the List of Saboteurs

   »     On the Saboteur’s List above, take 3-5 minutes and check the items that you believe (or
         anticipate) might derail your committee’s efforts. List them here:
               ©)

               .@)

               ©)

   =     How many of these do you believe can be more easily resolved?
               ©)

               .@)

               .@)


       TsaiComms LLC © All Rights Reserved           - State of Oregon Diversity Conference — 9-17-21   8
                                Publish or distribute only with TsaiComms’ consent.
                                                www.tsaicomms.com
    »      Which of these might be harder to resolve?
              @)

              .@)

              .@)



    =      How will you prioritize which ones need to be resolved first?
              ©)

              .@)

              .@)



    »      If unsure about how to prioritize, ask:
                o   “The most important thing our committee needs to do now is....”
                o   “The most important thing | can do to help our committee move forward is...”

    «=     Record your answers.
    »      Suggestion: Conduct this exercise with your committee and come to agreement on
           strategies to resolve any or all of the identified barriers.


Steps to Break Down        Saboteurs    Items   1 - 11

Theme:       Sustaining Membership and Commitment

Steps:
    1.     Immediate onboarding, trust and relationship building among members is crucial.
    2.     Establish joint agreements, values for engagement (ground rules).
    3.     Identify and agree on the committee’s main role.
    4.     Establish and agree on individual responsibilities
    5.     Draft and finalize a mission/purpose statement or charter.
    6.     Identify top 3-5 priorities and goals to work on with timelines and accountability
           measures. Revisit these every 3-6 months. Adjust as necessary.
    7.     Communicate your progress frequently and widely.



Steps to Break Down        Saboteurs    - Items    12 - 14

Themes: Lack of measurable data to garner executive sponsorship, support and
participation

step 1:
    »   Conduct a DEI assessment of your agency’s current culture: what's working, what could
           be different, where are the gaps?

    «      Data collected about your employees’ experience and the state of your culture will help
           you establish goals, objectives and a baseline for your DEI initiative to prove to

         TsaiComms LLC © All Rights Reserved      - State of Oregon Diversity Conference — 9-17-21
                           Publish or distribute only with TsaiComms’ consent.
                                           www.tsaicomms.com
           executive leadership there are gaps.

     «     Identify the top 2-3 themes and offer suggestions on how to resolve some of them.

step 2:
    »   Identify a credible and committed senior leader who has demonstrated an interest and
        passion for championing DEI.



C.   Sustaining     Momentum

            Mission/Purpose Statement
            Identify priority goals and action plan
            Communicate progress
     10.    Quarterly Check ins


Mission/Purpose        of a DEI Committee

     »     A mission is what you stand for and how you'll function.
     «     |tis your reason and purpose for existing and for coming together.



Sample      DEI Committee     Mission   Statement #1

The Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion (DEI) Committee oversees execution of the FASEB DEI!
Strategic Plan. It is charged with developing and monitoring strategies to guide the Federation’s
efforts to foster diverse, equitable, and inclusive research, training, and professional
environments within FASEB and its member societies, and to engage in collaborative
partnerships with external organizations to promote DEI across the biological and biomedical
sciences. The DEI Committee will report biannually to the Board of Directors.

                      (Federation of American Societies for Experimental Biology)



Sample      DEI Committee     Mission   Statement #3

The DEI Committee works to integrate best practices for diversity, equity, and inclusion into
agency policies and programs. The Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion Committee serves as an
advisory body to the DLCD Management and Policy Teams. The DEI Committee will provide
research, recommendations, event support, and policy guidance to the DLCD leadership as
requested and as outlined in the DE! Committee annual work plan.

                        (Dept. of Land Conservation & Development, Jan. 2020)




         TsaiComms LLC © All Rights Reserved     - State of Oregon Diversity Conference — 9-17-21   10
                           Publish or distribute only with TsaiComms’ consent.
                                           www.tsaicomms.com
Identifying Goals and Priorities

1.   Develop goals and objectives (action plan) with person/team, timeline and
     measurable outcomes on how you will achieve your mission/purpose.

     Communications plan (frequency, when, what, who writes, progress, audience)

     Check in on progress regularly

     Succession plan/ongoing recruitment for members, chair/co-chair



What are some      of YOUR   goals and priorities?

1.
NM
YS
FF
a




Keys to Success

     Careful, thoughtful planning before you start is essential to sustainability and
     SUCCESS

     Getting executive buy-in and participation is key

     Individual commitment to be a change agent a must have

     Understand this is a journey and a process

     Have fun!




      TsaiComms LLC © All Rights Reserved   - State of Oregon Diversity Conference — 9-17-21   11
                       Publish or distribute only with TsaiComms’ consent.
                                       www.tsaicomms.com
