     perMENT Og                                  U.S. DEPARTMENT           OF HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT
s ily %                                                                   WASHINGTON, DC 20410-5000
= Anti * 2
= TM:Ban,   D Eve’
                     ie)
                           =




OFFICE OF PUBLIC AND INDIAN HOUSING



Special Attention of:                                                                  PIH Notice 2023-07, Revision 1
Office Directors of Public Housing;
Regional Directors: Public Housing                                                     Issued: October 26, 2023
Agencies                                                                                       Originally issued April 4, 2023

                                                                                       Expires: This notice remains in
                                                                                       effect until amended, superseded, or
                                                                                       rescinded.

                                                                                       Cross References:              PIH 2022-18, PIH
                                                                                       Notice 2022-14, PIH Notice 2021-10, PIH
                                                                                       Notice 2021-08, PIH Notice 2020-04, PIH Notice
                                                                                       2020-01, PIH Notice 2019-08, PIH Notice 2019-
                                                                                       01/H-2019-02, PIH Notice 2018-12, PIH Notice
                                                                                       2018-09, PIH Notice 2017-20, PIH Notice 2017-
                                                                                       06, PIH Notice 2015-17, PIH Notice 2013-28,
                                                                                       PIH Notice 2011-28


SUBJECT:                        Implementation of the Federal Fiscal Year (FFY) 2023 Funding Provisions for
the Housing Choice Voucher Program

                                                                 Table of Contents
1.          PURPOSE ...........ccccsssssssssssssssssssscssssssssnsesssnscsscssccssccsscssscsscssessssssesssssessessssssssssssssssscssscssssssssees 2
2.          ORGANIZATION .............ccccccccccscsscssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssscsssssssssccsscssessesssssssssssssssssssnees 2
3.          SUMMARY. ..............ccccccccsccsccccccescsscsssessesssssssssssssssssssssssssssessssssssssssccssscsscesesssssssssessesssssssseeees 2
4.          CALCULATION                     OF CY 2022 HAP RENEWAL                            FUNDING ............csscsssescssccccccccccceeeeees 3
5.          TENANT               PROTECTION              VOUCHERS              (TPVS).............cccccsssssssscscsccsscsscsssssssssssssssssssssseees 5
6.          FUNDING               FOR ADMINISTRATIVE                        COSTS .............. ccccccccrtccccceccsscescsssesssssssssssssssees 7
7.          HUD-VASH                FUNDING. ..................ccccccsccsscssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssscssssssscsssssscsscssesssessees 18
8.          TRIBAL               HUD-VASH          RENEWALS              ...........ccsssscsscsscccsscsscssccccccsscssccsscsscsscesssssssssssssssssssseeses 19
9,          MAINSTREAM                    VOUCHERS .........cccsssssssssssssssccsccssssssssssccsscssccssscsscsscsssssssssescssssssssssssseases 19
10. FAMILY                       UNIFICATION             PROGRAM              (FUP )..........cccccssssssssssssssssccsescsccccccccsccscesessessssssees 20
11. NEW                        HCV INCREMENTAL                 VOUCHER.              .................cccccsssssssssssssssssssssssccsssssssssesscsscsssses 20
12. $200 MILLION HAP SET-ASIDE ELIGIBLE CATEGORIES AND SUBMISSION
REQUIREMENT .............ccccccssssccsssccnsccccnssccscsccssscessscsessscenscssensesenssssssessssssesssssesessenssssonsssonees 20
13. MOVING            TO WORK            AGENCIESW................ssccsssscsssccsssscesscesscccencecessssssssssesssscssssonssssonsees 35
14. MOVING            TO WORK            NEW COHORT                  AGENCIES ............cscsecsccesccesscccesssconscesonsees 35
15. EXCLUDED              PROGRAMS ................ssscssssocnsccvsscsccssccesseccessscesssccnscsconscssenssesssesssssosseonssees 35
16. HCV FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT .............ccssccsssccssccccscsccnscccnscscenscssssssssscssesssssosssconssees 35
17. HAP DISBURSEMENTS AND FRONTLOADING                                                  ..........cesctccncreccnccceccccesseceosesconecees 35
18. USE OF HAP AND HAP RNP/HUD-HELD PROGRAM                                                       RESERVES.................ssce0e 36
19. USES OF ADMINISTRATIVE FEES ...............cssccsccccsscccesssccnscccensescencsssscessessossseenscees 36
20. VMS/FASS REPORTING AND DATA INTEGRITY 1.0.0...                                                             cccccencccennccrcnesonceeonnes 36
21. PROHIBITION ON OVER-LEASING ................sccssssoossconcevcsecccssccesscssssssconssesenssossssosees 36
22. USE OF OUTSIDE SOURCES OF FUNDS. ...............csscccsssscessccnsccencccesscsssessesssssssesennes 37
23. PAPERWORK                 REDUCTION ACT. ..0...........csccsssccscrccsscccsssccnscccsnesessssesssssssseenscssonesonees 37
24. FURTHER INFORMATION                             ...............ssccsssscssssccsccccsssccsscsconsscensccssnsssessssessessossscenssssonsseonees 37
APPENDIX A ...........ccccsccsssccnsccccnccccscccvssescossscenscscensesesssssnssessscsnsssonseessnsssesesesssssosessencssonsseooees 38
APPENDIX B ..............ssscosssccnsccccncsccsccccsscccosssccnscssonsscssnssssnssesssssesessenssssensesesssesssssosseenscssonsseoenes 44
APPENDITX C............ccscccosssccnsccccncsccscccvsscscosssccnsscensesssscsscnesesssscnnessenseessnsesesessesssssosssensessonsseoees 45
APPENDITX D...............ssccosssccnsccccncccccscccscccessccsnssssenscssenssensssesssssesssssnscssonsesssnssssssssesssssosessonsssoes 456
APPENDIEX E ..............sscccsssccnsccccncsccscccccseccossscenscssonsscsssssssessesssccenssenscesensssosssessessosesecnssssonsssonees 47
APPENDITX L ..............sscccsssccnsccccnccccsccvcnccesssccnssconsccsssessssessesssssessssenscessnsesesssesssssossssnsssonsssoees 52


1.   Purpose. This notice implements the Housing Choice Voucher (HCV) program funding
     provisions of the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2023 (Public Law 117-328), referred to
     hereafter as “the 2023 Act,” enacted on December 29, 2022.                                   The 2023 Act establishes the
     allocation methodology for calculating housing assistance payments (HAP) renewal funds,
     new incremental vouchers, and administrative fees.

2.   Organization. This notice is grouped into two parts. Sections 3 through 15 describe the
     funding made available under the 2023 Act and the Department of Housing and Urban
     Development’s (HUD) implementation of the provisions related to the allocation of that
     funding. Sections 16 through 22 provide other important information regarding the
     administration of the public housing agency’s (PHA’s) HCV Program.

3.   Summary. The HCV Program is HUD’s largest rental assistance program. Funding is
     provided through the 2023 Act, which HUD allocates to PHAs in accordance with such Act
     as described in this notice.

     The 2023 Act requires HUD to provide renewal funding based on validated Voucher
     Management System (VMS) leasing and cost data for the prior calendar year (CY) (January
     1, 2022 — December 31, 2022).
     The CY 2023 total amount appropriated by Congress to fund the HCV Program is split up by
     budget line items as follows:

     CY 2023 Appropriations

     HAP Renewal Funding!                                                 $26,394,500,000
     Tenant Protection Vouchers”                                             $337,000,000
     Administrative Fees                                                   $2,777,612,000
     Tribal HUD-VASH!                                                          $7,500,000
     Mainstream Vouchers                                                      $606,500,000
     Veterans Affairs Supportive Housing                                       $50,000,000
     Family Unification Program                                               $30,000,000
     New HCV Incremental Vouchers                                             $50,000,000
     Total Available CY 2023 Appropriations                               $30,253,112,000

     This notice provides information on how HUD calculates HAP renewal funding for the
     PHA’s HCV Program. In addition, each PHA has received or will receive a funding letter
     with the individual PHA’s specific funding calculations attached. If a PHA has questions
     related to the calculations or this notice, the PHA should contact its Financial Analyst (FA) at
     the Financial Management Center (FMC).

     This year’s Set-aside applications will only be accepted through DocuSign. PHAs are
     encouraged to pay particular attention to the Set-Aside funding provisions (listed in Section
     12) and the links to the document that provides instructions, a link to video tutorial and
     access to the application appendices in DocuSign.

     PHAs administering Mainstream Vouchers should pay specific attention to the
     Mainstream Set-Aside funding provisions (Sections 9 and 12) that describes the
     Mainstream Voucher HAP Set-Aside.

4.   Calculation of CY 2023 HAP Renewal Funding. The 2023 Act requires that HUD apply a
     re-benchmarking renewal formula based on validated leasing and cost data in VMS for CY
     2022 (January 1, 2022, to December 31, 2022) to calculate each PHA’s renewal allocation.



' The 2023 Act provides $23.7 billion for HAP Renewal Funding and an additional $2.654 billion for emergency
funding as a supplemental amount, equaling the $26.4 billion of HAP Renewal Funding. Additionally, the Act
provides up to $7.5 million for Tribal HUD-VASH renewal grants. The amount for HAP Renewals has been
reduced here accordingly.
> The 2023 Act specifies the following uses for the $337 million: “section 8 rental assistance for relocation and
replacement of housing units that are demolished or disposed of pursuant to section 18 of the Act, conversion
of section 23 projects to assistance under section 8, relocation of witnesses (including victims of violent crimes) in
connection with efforts to combat crime in public and assisted housing pursuant to a request from a law enforcement
or prosecution agency, enhanced vouchers under any provision of law authorizing such assistance under section 8(t)
of the Act, Choice Neighborhood vouchers, mandatory and voluntary conversions, and tenant protection assistance
including replacement and relocation assistance or for project-based assistance to prevent the displacement of
unassisted elderly tenants currently residing in section 202 properties financed between 1959 and 1974 that are
refinanced pursuant to Public Law   106-569, as amended...”
    The renewal provisions of the Act are stated in Appendix A, Consolidated Appropriations
    Act, 2023 (Public Law 117-328).

    HUD is providing renewal funding as follows:

         Step 1: A new HAP funding baseline is established based on all validated leasing and
         cost data (not to exceed unit months available under the Annual Contributions Contract
          (ACC) in VMS for CY 2022).°

         Step 2: As required by the 2023 Act, HUD adjusts allocations for the first-time
         renewals of tenant protection vouchers and special purpose vouchers (SPVs), such as
         HUD-Veterans Affairs Supportive Housing (HUD-VASH) vouchers, Family Unification
         Program (FUP), Foster Youth to Independence (FYI), and Non-Elderly Disabled (NED)
         vouchers for which the initial increment expires in CY 2023. Affected PHAs’ renewal
         funding allocation enclosures indicate the amount of additional funding provided for CY
         2023 for first-time renewal of increments not initially funded for twelve months. Note:
         Reissuance of relocation tenant protection vouchers (TPVs) (see Section 6 of PIH Notice
         2018-09) and of vouchers originally issued to families under the Disaster Voucher
         Program/Disaster Housing Assistance Payments-IKE (DVP/DHAP-IKE) is not
         permitted. The Consolidated Annual Contributions Contract (CACC) will be reduced by
         the CY 2022 sunset units for DVP/DHAP Ike vouchers and relocation TPVs. The CY
         2022 costs associated with these units will also be reduced from the HAP funding
         baseline in Step 1.

         Step 3: HUD applies the Renewal Funding Inflation Factor (RFIP), adjusted for
         localities, to PHA’s calculated 12-month renewal requirement after all adjustments have
         been applied under Steps | and 2 above. The RFIFs are published by HUD’s Office of
         Policy, Development and Research (PD&R) and can be found at
         https://www.huduser.gov/portal/datasets/rfif/rfif.
                                                        html.

         Step 4: HUD determines the total HAP renewal funding eligibility for all PHAs and
         compares that amount to the total HAP renewal funds available per the 2023 Act to
         determine a proration factor. This proration factor is then applied to each PHA’s CY
         2023 eligibility. A proration of less than 100% is applied if the nationwide eligibility
         exceeds the available HAP renewal funding.

         Step 5: The 2023 Act provides that HUD may offset PHAs’ CY 2023 allocations based
         on the excess amounts of PHAs’ restricted net position (RNP), including HUD-held
         program reserves (in accordance with VMS data in CY 2022 that is verifiable and
         complete), as determined by the Secretary. The 2023 Act further provides the offset
         may be used to prevent the termination of rental assistance for families as the result of
         insufficient funding, as determined by the Secretary, and to avoid or reduce the proration
         of renewal funding allocations. PIH will perform a small offset impacting a limited

> Tn rare instances where vouchers were transferred from one PHA to another during the re-benchmarking period,
the leasing and cost data of the PHAs will be adjusted to ensure that the leasing and costs represented by the
transferred vouchers are properly accounted for in the eligibility determinations.
           number of MTW and non-MTW PHAs for reallocation in CY 2023. Detailed
           calculations of the offsets will be provided to impacted PHAs in the renewal allocation
           enclosure. Offsets will come from excess program reserves reconciled through
           December 31, 2023, and HUD takes a number of factors and conditions into account in
           determining what constitutes excess reserves. Appendix B to this notice, CY 2023
           Offset for Reallocation, is an example of the offset enclosures that will be provided to
           PHAs and specifically describes this calculation as well as the categories of reserve
           funds that are protected from the offset.

5.   Tenant Protection Vouchers (TPVs).

     a.   Definition.    TPVs are provided to protect HUD-assisted families from hardship as the
          result of a variety of actions that occur in HUD’s Public Housing (Low-Rent),
          Multifamily Housing portfolios, and Moderate Rehabilitation properties.* Therefore, if
          the PHA applies for and is awarded replacement TPVs, it must offer the replacement
          TPVs in the form of tenant-based assistance (or as project-based assistance for certain
          conversion actions) to eligible families impacted by the conversion.” HUD’s current
          policy is to also provide replacement TPVs for vacant units that were occupied by an
          assisted family in the previous 24 months. However, depending on demand and funding
          availability, HUD may need to subsequently suspend the allocation of replacement TPVs
          for vacant units, and/or may need to reduce the initial increment term and associated
          funding to cover a period that is less than 12 months. These actions, if necessary, would
          only apply to future TPV funding allocations. HUD will alert PHAs should any of these
          cost saving measures need to be implemented.

     b.   Funding.      As noted above, the 2023 Act provides $337 million for TPVs.

     c.   Continued Applicability of PIH Notice 2018-09. Except as specifically revised in
          Section 5a and 5d of this notice, the programmatic and policy guidance in Section 6 of
          PIH Notice 2018-09, Implementation of the Federal Fiscal Year (FFY) 2018 Funding
          Provisions for the Housing Choice Voucher Program, continues to apply to TPVs.

     d.   Eligibility for Replacement TPVs (Vacant Units). Under PIH 2018-09, replacement
          TPVs were only provided for occupied units.° This policy is revised for purposes of the
          CY 2023 funding available under this Notice so that, in addition to providing replacement
          TPVs for occupied units, HUD will also provide replacement TPVs for vacant units that


“ TPV allocations qualify as either “replacement” or “relocation” vouchers. TPV allocations for relocation vouchers
must only be used by the family impacted by the conversion action and never include vouchers for vacant units. For
information on replacement and relocation TPV allocations, see Section 6 of PIH 2018-09.
> This statement supersedes the last sentence in footnotes 5 and 6 of PIH 2018-09, which stated that     a PHA cannot
offer impacted residents another form of comparable housing (1.e., another public housing unit, a RAD unit) if it
applies for and receives TPVs for the Public Housing action. While the PHA is required to offer the replacement
TPV to the eligible impacted family, in the context of Public Housing conversions, the PHA has discretion, at the
time of the TPV offer, to inform all families that the family is not required to accept the TPV, and that, if the family
chooses, at the family’s sole discretion, not to accept the TPV, the PHA intends to offer the family another form of
housing.
© This policy also applied for certain prior year funding, per PIH 2019-08, 2020-04, 2021-10, and 2022-14.
         were occupied by an assisted family within the previous 24 months that are no longer
         available as assisted housing (although, as discussed in in section 5a above, HUD may
         subsequently need to suspend this policy). The examples below demonstrate how this
         policy works:

           i.    For Public Housing Actions, vacant units that were occupied by an assisted
                 family within the previous 24 months from the time of the Special Application
                 Center (SAC) approval or the Choice Neighborhoods Initiative (CNI) award date.
                 For example: on February 1, 2023, PHA A was approved for
                 demolition/disposition of 25 public housing units. Of the 25 units in property A,
                 5 units were last occupied on February 1, 2021. The remainder of the units
                 continue to be occupied. Replacement TPV funding may be provided for all 25
                 units (vacant and occupied) because the 5 vacant units were last occupied within
                 24 months from the SAC approval.

          ii.    For Multifamily Housing Actions, vacant units that were occupied within the
                 previous 24 months from the eligibility event. For example: on February 1, 2023,
                 the prepayment of a section 236 mortgage in property A triggered eligibility for
                 TPVs. Of the 25 units in property A, 5 were last occupied on February 1, 2021.
                 The remainder of the units continue to be occupied. Replacement TPV funding
                 may be provided for all 25 units (vacant and occupied) because the 5 vacant units
                 were last occupied within 24 months from the eligibility event.

    e.   TPV Set-Aside.      The 2023 Act provides that no less than $5,000,000 of the $337 million
         appropriated for TPVs may be set-Aside to provide TPVs to certain at-risk households in
         low-vacancy areas.     On February 15, 2019, HUD issued PIH Notice 2019-01/H-2019-02,
         Funding Availability for Set-Aside Tenant Protection Vouchers.              HUD has determined
         that since the law has not changed, the terms and conditions of PIH Notice 2019-01/H-
         2019-02 will apply to 2023 funds.

    f.   TPV Funding.’ HUD calculates TPV funding for all eligible TPV actions based on the
         average Per Unit Cost (PUC) in the PHA’s HCV program. If the PHA that will
         administer the TPVs has concerns regarding the sufficiency of the TPV funding based on
         its average PUC, the PHA can request an upfront increased PUC along with the TPV
         funding application or request higher TPV funding after the PHA has already submitted
         the TPV funding application. In either case, the PHA must submit the request by email to
         the PHA’s Portfolio Management Specialist at the HUD PIH Field Office, with copy to
         the Field Office’s Public Housing Director. If the PHA does not know their assigned
         Portfolio Management Specialist, the PHA may email the Field Office’s Public Housing
         Director for assistance. The PHA must justify the requested increase by providing
         evidence of rent amounts that result in higher HAP costs and a justification explaining
         that the rents are reasonable.*    At a minimum, the PHA must submit its rent


7 The information provided in this section applies to all TPV actions, including those in the Public Housing and
Multifamily Housing portfolios.
8’ Rent reasonable requirements are found in regulation at 24 CFR 982.507 and 24 CFR 983.303, as applicable. Rent
reasonableness guidance may be found in the Rent Reasonableness Chapter of the HCV Guidebook.
      reasonableness analysis and a budget authority gap analysis that includes the following
      data:
              Unit Type/Bedroom Size
              Count of Units by Type/Bedroom Size
              Contract Rent
             Utility Allowance (if owner paid)
             Monthly Total (Contract Rent + Utility Allowance)
             Resident Rent
             Monthly/Annual subsidy need by unit and property

     Once the Field Office receives the PHA’s request, it will review it to confirm that actual
     and/or projected subsidy costs are appropriately calculated and may follow-up with the
     PHA if additional information is needed. If the Field Office determines that the increased
     PUC is appropriate, they will notify HCV FMD of the revised need via a Field Office
     memo. The Field Office emails this memo, along with the PHA’s supporting
     documentation (and the TPV funding application, if applicable), to
     PIHConversionActions    @ hud. gov.

     The following additional requirements apply where the PHA is submitting its request for
     increased TPV funding subsequent to the TPV award:
         e The following additional information must be submitted with the request:
             Monthly/Annual subsidy provided in the TPV award and ACC letter reflecting the
             TPV award.
         e PHAs can apply for higher PUCs during the time of their initial funding increment.
             The effective date for TPV increments is provided in the amended ACC letter sent
            from the FMC to PHAs.      Once the initial funding increment is renewed, no
            additional PUC will be provided.

  Note that all additional TPV funding is subject to available appropriations.   Questions
  concerning the TPV adjustment process described above may be sent to
  PIHConversionActions @hud. gov.

. Funding for Administrative Costs. The 2023 Act provides $2,777,612,000 for
  administrative expenses of PHAs administering the HCV Program (see Appendix A for
  Appropriations text). The 2023 Act also provides that this funding may be used for “other
  expenses” of PHAs administering the Section 8 tenant-based rental assistance program.
  HUD issued detailed guidance on the use of ongoing administrative fees for expenses related
  to assisting families to lease units in PIH Notice 2022-18. Of the appropriated amount, no
  less than $2,747,612,000 will be available for ongoing administrative fees and fees for new
  vouchers and up to $30,000,000 will be made available to allocate to PHAs that need
  additional funds to administer their Section 8 programs.

      a. Ongoing Administrative Fees and Administrative Fees for New Vouchers.

         Ongoing administrative fees and administrative fees for new vouchers are allocated
         based on leasing. These administrative fees are calculated for CY 2023 as provided
     for by Section 8(q) of the United States Housing Act, and related Appropriation Act
     provisions, as in effect immediately before the enactment of the Quality Housing and
     Work Responsibility Act (QHWRA)        of 1998 (Public Law 105-276).     Under this
     calculation, PHAs are allocated a fee amount for each voucher that is under HAP
     contract as of the first day of each month.

     i.   Proration and Reconciliation of Administrative Fees: HUD is developing and
          will post the CY 2023 Administrative Fee rates to enable PHAs to calculate
          potential fee eligibility and to manage portability billings. An announcement will
          be made when they become available on HUD’s website. Use the link below to
          access them:
          https://www.hud.gov/program_offices/public_indian_housing/programs/hcv/guid
          ance_and_ notices.

          HUD disburses administrative fees to PHAs each month based on actual leasing
          reported in VMS in prior months. Each PHA’s administrative fee eligibility is
          reconciled after every quarter based on actual reported leasing, adjusted by an
          estimated proration based on total annual funding for administrative fees. HUD
          determines the estimated proration level by comparing each quarter’s national
          eligibility for administrative fees to one quarter (1/4) of the appropriated amount
          available for ongoing administrative fees. HUD will disburse any amount due to
          the PHA and will offset any amount due from the PHA via a reduction from a
          subsequent administrative fee payment. A final reconciliation will be completed
          after the December 2023 leasing data is reported in VMS, at which time the final
          pro-ration for CY 2023 will be determined.

          HUD is using IMS-PIC 50058 leasing data in CY 2023 to determine HAP and
          administrative fee monthly disbursements as we transition to the Enterprise
          Voucher Management System (eVMS). HUD completed a pilot in 2022 and will
          alert each PHAs when their payments are calculated based on IMS-PIC leasing
          data. Additional information will be provided through separate guidance.

b. Blended Rate Administrative Fees and Higher Administrative Fee Rates:

     i.   Blended Rate Administrative Fees: PHAs serving multiple administrative fee
          areas may, in lieu of the fee determined for their agency, request a blended rate
          based on the actual location of their assisted units. The blended rate will be used
          for the entire CY 2023.

              How to Submit Requests:       PHAs must submit applications electronically.

              Electronic Mail (email) Requests: PHA requests for Blended Rate Fees
              must be submitted to HUD at the following mailbox:

              PIHFinancialManagementDivision@hud.gov. The subject line of the e-mail
              must read as follows: PHA Number, Request for Blended Rate
             Administrative Fees (e.g., TXO0/, 2023 Request for Blended Rate
             Administrative Fees).

             Deadline to Submit Requests:       Requests for Blended Rate Administrative
             Fees must be received no later than 5 p.m., per the PHA’s time zone,
             Friday, July 14, 2023.

il.   Higher Administrative Fee Rates: A PHA that operates over a large area,
      defined as two or more counties, may request higher administrative fees. An
      approved higher administrative fee rate will apply only to CY 2023 and is
      applicable to the HCV Program and Mainstream Vouchers. The PHA will be
      required to submit evidence of actual costs at the end of the CY to enable HUD
      to determine if the entire approved increase was needed. Excess funds will be
      offset by HUD via a reduction in a future disbursement. A PHA that received
      higher administrative fee for CY 2022 will be expected to complete the
      reconciliation with their FMC/FA prior to their CY 2023 higher rate request being
      approved.

      Submission Requirements for Higher Administrative Fee Rates: To request
      higher fees, an agency must submit the following financial documentation to the
      PHA’s assigned FA at the FMC:

         e     Actual Unrestricted Net Position (UNP) (administrative fee reserves)
               balance as of December 31, 2022.
         e      Actual administrative costs for the HCV Program for CY 2022 in
                sufficient detail to allow for review.
         e      The PHA’s CY 2023 HCV Program administrative budget, including
                anticipated reasonable and necessary administrative costs broken out in
                sufficient detail to allow for review (positions and salaries, detailed travel
                costs, overhead and pro-rations, etc.). There is no HUD form, nor a
                mandated format, for this budget.
         e      An explanation of why the unit month and budget authority utilization in
                CY 2022 was below 95 percent of the unit month and budget authority
                available for renewal units (if this occurred).
         e     If the PHA has made withdrawals from the Administrative Fee reserves
               per official guidance provided in PIH Notice 2015-17: Uses and
               Reporting of Admin Fee Reserves, certification is required. Should there
               be no withdrawals at this point, a statement that none were made is
               required.
         e     An explanation as to why the projected CY 2023 administrative fees are
               insufficient to cover expected program operating costs.
         e     Certification by the executive director of the PHA that the data is accurate.

             HUD reserves the right to reduce the documentation required.
                                                                                              10


                 To request a higher administrative fee rate, PHAs must provide the above
                 information to the FMC.    The required information must be received no later
                 than 5 p.m., per the PHA’s time zone, Friday, July 14, 2023.      PHAs must
                 submit applications electronically.

                 Electronic Mail (email) Requests:     PHA requests for a higher
                 administrative fee rate must be submitted to HUD at the following mailbox:

                 FinancialManagementCenter@hud.gov. Subject line must read as
                 follows: PHA Number, (e.g., TX001) 2023 Request for Higher
                 Administrative Fee.

C.   Special Fees.   As stated above, HUD   will make up to $30,000,000 available to allocate to
     PHAs that need additional funds to administer their Section 8 programs. A portion of the
     $30,000,000 administrative fee set-aside may be used for ongoing administrative fees to
     increase the national fee proration, should HUD determine during the course of the
     calendar year (after the submission deadlines outlines below) that the entire $30,000,000
     may not be needed for additional administrative costs. HUD will consider requests for
     other unanticipated increases in administrative fees on a case-by-case basis. Please note
     that requests for additional fees because of a lower national fee proration will not be
     accepted. Special fees are not applicable to Mainstream Vouchers or Emergency
     Housing Vouchers (EHVs). These funds may be provided for the following purposes:

       1.   HCV Homeownership Fees: HUD increased the special fees from $200 per
            closing to $1,000 per closing, starting with closings reported in month of
            September 2023. The increase will not be applied retroactively. The special fee
            is for every homeownership closing reported in the Public Housing Information
            Center (PIC) for HCV families who have become homeowners through the HCV
            Homeownership program, Moving-To-Work (MTW) Homeownership program,
            and the Family Self-Sufficiency program (HCV only). These special fees are
            allocated to the PHAs administering the vouchers, or FSS program, after the
            homebuyers’ closings are reported in PIC and closing dates are provided to the
            FMC staff. PHAs do not need to apply for these funds as HUD provides these
            fees automatically based on PIC data and closing dates confirmations. HUD will
            also fund a one-time $500 special fee for each newly created HCV
            Homeownership Program at any PHA in CY 2023.

      il.   Special Fees for PHAs that Administer TPVs in Connection with Multifamily
            Housing Conversion Actions: For multifamily housing conversions, a special
            (one-time) fee of $200 will be provided for each unit occupied on the date of the
            eligibility event. PHAs do not need to apply for these funds as HUD provides
            these fees automatically based on PIC data. This special fee will also be allocated
            to PHAs that agree to administer vouchers on behalf of a Multifamily Choice
            Neighborhoods Grantee.
                                                                                             11


ill.   Special Fees for Portability: Receiving PHAs with numbers of portability
       vouchers that comprise a significant portion of their vouchers under lease are
       eligible for a special fee. PHAs must have been administering a number of port-
       in vouchers equal to 20% or more of the PHA’s total number of leased vouchers
       as of December 31, 2022, to be eligible for special portability fees.   For each
       eligible port-in voucher, the receiving PHA will receive 12 months of funding
       equal to 15% of the PHA’s 2023 Column A rate for administrative fees. This is a
       one-time award of special fees and will be calculated based on PHA portability
       data found in PIC for actions through December 31, 2022, and leased data from
       the VMS as of December 31, 2022 (from the same VMS database used to
       determine the 2023 HCV renewal allocations). PHAs do not need to apply for
       these funds as HUD provides these fees automatically based on PIC data and the
       VMS data used for the 2023 renewal allocation. PHAs were advised via email on
       January 5, 2023, of the deadline date of no later than 4 p.m., Friday, March
       31°, 2023, to ensure all PIC data was updated and successfully submitted.

1V.    Special Fees for Audit Costs for Declaring Major HCV Programs per Notice
       2021-08, and for HCV Voluntary Transfers per PIH Notice 2018-12: Please
       refer to Section 4, PIH Notice 2021-08 or a superseding notice published by
       HUD: Financial Reporting requirements for the HCV Program Submitted
       through the Financial Assessment Subsystem (FASS) for Public Housing and the
       Voucher Management System (VMS), and Section 6, PIH Notice 2018-12:
       Process for PHA Voluntary Transfers and Consolidations of Housing Choice
       Vouchers, Mainstream Vouchers, PBV and Project-Based Certificates, for the
       eligibility requirements and process to request special fees under this category.
       PIH Notice 2021-08, Section 4. For those general-purpose governments that have
       not declared their HCV related programs as a major fund for financial statement
       purposes or as a major enterprise fund under Code of Federal Regulations (CFR),
       Title 2, Subtitle A, Chapter II, Part 200, Subpart F; Audit Requirements, the audit
       obtained may not be sufficient for HUD to properly monitor its financial and
       compliance interest in these entities.

       Therefore, for HUD to gain an acceptable level of assurance, these PHAs may be
       directed to procure Independent Public Accountant (IPA) services for financial and
       compliance procedures as specified by HUD. This additional work is normally
       completed as part of the audit and is specifically known as “Auditor Agreed Upon
       Procedures”. Annually, these PHAs must contact the PIH Office of Housing
       Voucher Programs (OHVP), Financial Management Division (FMD) at
       PIHFinancialManagementDivision @hud.gov to confirm whether they must procure
       an IPA service.   If the PIH OHVP, FMD determines that IPA services must be
       performed, HUD will provide Set-Aside funding, if available, to reimburse the
       agency for any additional audit costs unless sufficient UNP exists, in which case
       these funds may be used for the special purpose audit cost.

       PIH Notice 2018-12, Section 6. While reviewing the transfer of UNP to the
       receiving/consolidated PHA, the HUD Field Office will ensure the divesting PHA
                                                                                         12


has properly procured and entered into a contract with an independent public
accountant to conduct its close-out audit, and has the funds available to cover it,
HUD may assign additional administrative fee funding. This is subject to
availability of funds and justifiable circumstances, from the Administrative Fee Set-
Aside funds to cover close-out audit costs and may conduct a final close-out or
forensic audit of a divesting PHA, either prior to or following the
transfer/consolidation. The HUD Field Offices must contact the Housing Voucher
Financial Management Division at PIHFinancialManagementDivision @hud.gov to
confirm availability of additional administrative fee funding; however, the divesting
PHA’s available administrative fee, UNP, and/or other non-federal funds must be
considered first and restricted for this purpose.

Special Fees Needed for Administration of Section 8 Tenant-Based Rental
Assistance Program: PHAs that are or will experience increased administrative
expenses and need additional funds to administer their Section 8 HCV Programs
in CY 2023, including as a result of administration of tenant protection rental
assistance, disaster related vouchers, HUD-VASH           vouchers, Small Area Fair
Market Rents (SAFMR), and other special purpose incremental vouchers, as
shown in this section under Guidance for Special Fee Applications Per Category,
can request special fees. Applications must be related to cost increases for
vouchers currently in the PHA’s inventory.

To qualify for additional funding under these categories, PHAs must experience
or be able to identify future increased administrative expenses as a result of the
administration of tenant protection rental assistance, HUD-VASH          vouchers, FUP
including FYI, disaster-related vouchers, SAFMR, and other special purpose
incremental vouchers. Requests for other unanticipated administrative fee
funding increases will be considered on a case-by-case basis at the Secretary’s
discretion. Please carefully review the applicable application criteria when
preparing your application for these funds.

Please note, HUD will limit the total award amount for all categories combined to
a percentage of the PHA’s estimated CY 2023 administrative fee funding. The
maximum percentage of the award will be based on the PHA’s size as outlined
below:


                                              Maximum
                               Number of|      Award
                PHA Size          Units       Percentage
                   Small          1 - 249           12%
                 Medium         250 — 499           6%
                                  500 or
                   Large           more             A%
                                                                                             13


      Additionally, HUD reserves the right to deny or limit the award amount based on
      a PHA’s administrative fee reserves to ensure fair and reasonable distribution of
      funds. HUD reserves the right to fund one, some, or all of the categories.

      Reporting and recording of awarded Special Fees are included as part of the
      PHA’s HCV administrative financial records under CFDA 14.871.

      Applications for Special Fees under the HUD-VASH and FUP categories must
      be received no later than 5 p.m., per the PHA’s time zone, Friday, July 7,
      2023. Applications for Special Fees under Category 3, Disaster Related and
      Category 4, Secretary’s Discretion must be received no later than 5 p.m., per
      the PHA’s time zone, Tuesday, October 31, 2023. All applications must be sent
      to 2023SpecialFees@hud.gov. The subject line of the email should include the
      PHA Number and the specific Special Fee category of applications, for example,
      TXO01 FUP Special Administrative Fee Funding Application. HUD reserves the
      right to contact PHAs for clarification of items provided with the application.
      Clarifications or corrections must be received by HUD within the time frame
      specified in the notification.

      The following information must be included for each category the PHA applies
      to be considered for funding under each requested category:

          e    The application page that identifies the categories for application that is
               certified by signature (form at Appendix C to this document);
          e   A letter signed by the appropriate PHA official, clearly indicating the
              amount being requested, the calculation used to determine the amount of
              the request, and the estimated UNP (Administrative fee reserve) balance
               as of the day of the request;
          e    A statement describing an activity that is being proposed, underway or has
               been completed;
          e   A description of the local need that the activity will serve;
          e    Data on the number of families that the activity will help;
          e    How the activity will lead to an increase in leasing success rates and/or
               reduce processing time, or other program benefit;
          e    Documentation to support the cost of each line item the PHA is requesting
               funding for; the supporting documentation could be an invoice/receipt, job
               posting, an estimate based on what the activity has cost in a prior year
               along with documentation of the prior year costs, etc.; and
          e    Budget justification to support the request. The budget justification must
               support the need for additional administrative expenses. The expenses
               must be above what can be supported by the PHA’s earned or anticipated
               ongoing administrative fees for the year and must be demonstrated within
               the provided budget justification. An example budget justification is
               provided in Appendix D to this document.

Guidance for Special Fee Applications per Category:
                                                                                                  14



A.   Category 1 — HUD-VASH               Special Fees

Purpose of the HUD-VASH Program:

For eligible homeless veterans and their families, the HUD-VASH             Program combines the
HUD HCY rental assistance program with case management and clinical services
provided The Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) at its medical centers and community
clinics.   HUD-VASH          assists homeless veterans, and their families afford decent, safe,
and sanitary housing through the distribution of housing vouchers. Beneficiaries are
selected based on certain requirements including health care eligibility, homelessness
status, and income.

Eligible Activities/Expenses. Under this notice, PHAs may apply for HUD-VASH
Special Fees to support necessary additional administrative expenses incurred to increase
lease-up success rates or decrease the time it takes for a veteran to locate and move-in to
aunit. To apply for these funds, applicants must justify or document actions specifically
for administering the HUD-VASH program.

Under this notice, eligible activities/expenses could include, but are not limited to:

     e     Hiring temporary staff to process Request for Tenancy Approvals (RFTA) forms;
     e     Hiring temporary staff to conduct Housing Quality Standards (HQS) inspections,
           or pre-inspect units that HUD-VASH clients are likely to rent;
     e     Hiring temporary staff to provide HUD-VASH clients with housing search
           assistance;
     e     Hiring temporary staff to serve as a Portability Coordinator for HUD-VASH
           clients;
     e     Hosting a “HUD-VASH Day,” a one-stop resource for intake, issuing provisional
           vouchers, etc.;
     e     Hosting Landlord Recruitment Fairs and other activities to engage landlords to
           participate in the HUD-VASH program;
     e     Holding extra briefings for HUD-VASH clients; and
     e  Other services to ensure that HUD-VASH clients can move into their new homes
        with a voucher in the shortest time-period possible.
B.   Category 2 — Family Unification Program Special Fees

Purpose of the FUP:
FUP is a program under which HCVs are provided to two different populations:
           1. Families for whom the lack of adequate housing is a primary factor in:
                   a. The imminent placement of the family’s child or children in out-of-
                         home care, or
                   b. The delay in the discharge of the child or children to the family from
                      out-of-home care.
                                                                                             15



        2. Otherwise eligible youths who have attained at least 18 years and not more
        than 24 years of age and who have left foster care, or will leave foster care within
        90 days, in accordance with a transition plan described in section 475(5)(H) of the
        Social Security Act and is homeless or is at risk of becoming homeless at age 16
        or older. As required by statute, FUP vouchers issued to youth are limited to 36
        months unless the youth meets the requirements to receive an extension of
        assistance under the Fostering Stable Housing Opportunities (FSHO) amendments
        (Section 103 of Division Q of the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021 (Public
        Law 116- 260)).   FSHO amended section 8(x) of the U.S. Housing Act of 1937
        and provides FUP youth an extension of the 36-month time limit for up to an
        additional 24 months if they meet certain requirements. FSHO applies to FUP
        youth who first leased or leases a unit after the date of enactment of FSHO,
        December 27, 2020. PHAs administer FUP in partnership with Public Child
        Welfare Agencies (PCWAs) who are responsible for referring FUP families and
        youths to the PHA for determination of eligibility for rental assistance.

        3. The 2020, 2021, 2022, and 2023 Acts included assistance to be targeted to
        foster youth. HUD refers to this targeted FUP assistance as the Foster Youth to
        Independence (FYI) initiative. FYI is a program under which HCV assistance is
        provided, to otherwise eligible youths who have attained at least 18 years and not
        more than 24 years of age and who have left foster care, or will leave foster care
        within 90 days, in accordance with a transition plan described in section
        475(5)(H) of the Social Security Act, and is homeless or is at risk of becoming
        homeless at age 16 or older. As required by statute, FYI vouchers are limited to
        36 months unless the youth meets the requirements to receive an extension of
        assistance under the Fostering Stable Housing Opportunities (FSHO) amendments
        (Section 103 of Division Q of the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021 (Public
        Law 116- 260)).   FSHO amended section 8(x) of the U.S. Housing Act of 1937
        and provides FYI youth an extension of the 36-month time limit for up to an
        additional 24 months if they meet certain requirements. FSHO applies to FYI
        youth who first leased or leases a unit after the date of enactment of FSHO,
        December 27, 2020.    PHAs administer FYI in partnership with PCWAs        who are
        responsible for referring youths to the PHA for determination of eligibility for
        rental assistance.

Eligible Activities/Expenses. Under this notice, PHAs may apply for FUP Special Fees
to support necessary additional administrative expenses incurred to achieve either of the
following activities:

    e   Full (100%) FUP/FYI voucher utilization; and
    e   Increase access to the program for FYI/FUP-eligible youth.

To apply for these funds, applicants must justify or document actions specifically for
administering the FUP/FYI.    Under this notice, eligible activities/expenses could include,
but are not limited to:
                                                                                                16


      e   Establishing a new/revised Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with the
          PCWA and other partners;
      e   Working with community partners to establish and implement a system to identify
          eligible youth not currently within the PCWA’s caseload in cooperation with the
          Continuum of Care (CoC), including integrating the prioritization and referral
          process for eligible youth not currently in the PWCA’s system into the local
          CoC's coordinated entry process;
      e   Hiring temporary staff to process RFTA forms;
      e   Hiring temporary staff to conduct HQS inspections or pre-inspect units that
          FUP/FYI clients are likely to rent;
      e   Hiring temporary staff to provide FUP/FYI clients with housing search assistance;
      e   Hosting a “FUP/FYI Day,” a one-stop resource for intake, issuing provisional
          vouchers, etc.;
      e   Hosting Landlord Recruitment Fairs and other activities to engage landlords to
          participate in FUP/FYI;
      e   Holding extra briefings for FUP/FYI clients;
      e   Other services to ensure that FUP/FYI clients can move into their new homes
          with a voucher in the shortest time period possible; and
      e   Training PCWA,    CoC, and other community partners on FUP/FYI and the HCV
         Program.
      Category 3 — Disaster Related Special Fees

      In the event of a future allocation of disaster vouchers during CY 2023, PIH will
      provide eligibility and application guidance for disaster related vouchers’ special fees
      at that time.

      Category 4 — Application for other Special Fees under The Secretary’s
      Discretion

      Purpose of the Secretary’s Discretion Set-Aside:
      The purpose of this set-aside is to provide additional administrative fee funding to
      cover administrative expenses incurred as the result of a situation outside of the
      specific categories described within this notice. HUD will consider requests for
      other unanticipated increases in Administrative Fees on a case-by-case basis.
      Please note that requests for additional fees because of a lower national fee proration
      will not be accepted.

      Eligible Activities/Expenses. Activities and expenses considered eligible under
      Administrative Fees that are not covered under another special fee category are
      eligible for funding under the Secretary’s Discretion.

Vi.       Special Fees for SAFMR and SAFMR-Based Exception Payment Standards:
          HUD is making special fee funding of up to $25,000 available for reimbursement
          of costs associated with the adoption (or in the process of adopting) of SAFMRs,
          pursuant to the final rule, Establishing a More Effective Fair Market Rent (FMR)
          System; Using Small Area Fair Market Rents (SAFMR) in the HCV Program
                                                                                               17


   Instead of the Current 50" Percentile FMRs, 24 CFR Part 888, 982, 983, 985,
   Docket No. FR-5855-F-03, dated             January 17, 2017.   PHAs that adopted SAFMRs
   prior to October 1, 2022, are not eligible to apply.

   HUD is also making special fee funding of up to $15,000 available for
   reimbursement of costs associated with establishment of SAFMR-based exception
   payment standards under 24 CFR 982.503(b)(1)(iii).             PHAs are only eligible to
    apply if these exception payment standards cover the majority of zip codes in the
    PHA’s service area that have SAFMRs            above the metropolitan FMR, will result
    in the PHA administering different payment standards for at least three different
    geographic areas, and were not established prior to October 1, 2022.

Eligible Activities/Expenses.          General costs could be related to activities that may
include, but are not limited to, the following:
    «   Additional outreach to families and landlords on new FMR methodology and
        payment standards;
    e   Development of additional briefing materials;
    ¢   Hiring of additional staff;
    e   Staff training;
    e   Changes to rent reasonableness determinations methodology; and
    e   Required software modifications needed to accommodate the inclusion of the
        SAFMR adoption and SAFMR-based exception payment standards.
        a. Requirements for Reimbursement Requests under the SAFMR adoption
              subcategory must include the following:
           1. Completed Appendix C, identifying category a.;
             . SAFMR Payment Standard Schedule;
           3. Board Resolution, confirming adoption of the SAFMR (for agencies that
                  adopt SAFMRs); and
             4.   Supporting documentation showing expenses incurred (or estimated) for
                  software or other costs associated with SAFMRs adoption in the form of
                  a paid invoice (or bill).

        b.     Requirements for Reimbursement Requests under SAFMR-based
               exception payment standard subcategory must include the following:
             1. Completed Appendix C, identifying category b.;
             2. SAFMR-Based Payment Standard Schedule; and
             3. Supporting documentation showing expenses incurred (or estimated) for
                 SAFMR-based exception payment standards in the form of a paid
                  invoice (or bill).

    HUD will award funding based on the supporting documentation provided within
    the request. HUD reserves the right to prorate awards for PHAs that implement
    SAFMR-based exception payment standards if sufficient funds are not available
    to fully cover all awards.

    Applications for Special Fees under the SAFMR category must be received no
    later than 5 p.m., per the PHA’s time zone, Tuesday, October 31, 2023. All
                                                                                                 18


           applications must be sent to 2023SpecialFees@hud.gov. The subject line of the
           email should include the PHA Number and the SAFMR category, for example,
           TXOO1 SAFMR Special Administrative Fee Funding Application. HUD reserves
           the right to contact PHAs for clarification of items provided with the application.
           Clarifications or corrections must be received by HUD within the time frame
           specified in the notification.

     ii.   Newly Designated Mandatory SAFMRs:             On October 25, 2023, HUD
           published, “Small Area Fair Market Rents in the Housing Choice Voucher
           Program Metropolitan Areas Subject to Small Area Fair Market Rents (FR-6426-
           N-O1).” Under this notice, which has an implementation date of October 1, 2024,
           HUD designated 41 new metropolitan FMR areas that must implement SAFMRs.

           PHAs operating in newly designated mandatory SAFMRs will receive $10,000 in
           special administrative fee to offset transition costs. PHAs do not need to apply
           for these funds as HUD will disburse them automatically based on PHAs’ location
           in a designated mandatory SAFMR area. Eligible transition costs could be related
           to activities that may include, but are not limited to, the following:
           e   Additional outreach to families and landlords on new FMR methodology and
               payment standards;
               Development of additional briefing materials;
               Hiring of additional staff;
               Staff training;
               Changes to rent reasonableness determinations methodology; and
               Required software modifications needed to accommodate SAFMRs.


    iii.   Special Fees for New Incremental Vouchers: A forthcoming operational notice
           will describe the special administrative fee funding for these vouchers.

    iv.    Planning for housing Mobility-related Services: HUD is making available
           Special Fees under this Category for PHAs to develop a housing mobility-related
           services plan. A forthcoming PIH notice will describe the housing mobility-
           related services planning requirements as well as the application process.


            HUD-VASH Funding. The 2023 Act provides $50,000,000 for new incremental
vouchers for the HUD-VASH program. Of the $50,000,000 total, at least $40,000,000 will
be used for new incremental HUD-VASH vouchers, and up to $10,000,000 will be made
available for administrative fees and other HUD-VASH program costs. The $40,000,000 in
new incremental funding will be added to the approximately $54 million available from prior
year funding for a total of approximately $94 million to be made available for PHAs in 2023.
As provided by the 2023 Act, vouchers will be awarded based on geographic need and PHA
administrative performance. HUD will issue comprehensive guidance on both the 2023
HUD-VASH voucher allocation and the HUD-VASH administrative funding at a later date.
All PHAs are responsible for tracking new units and funding for special purpose vouchers
(SPVs), such as HUD-VASH       vouchers, to include new incremental vouchers and renewals.
                                                                                               19


  HUD-VASH funds can only be used for the intended purposes and are not subject to MTW
  fungibility provisions.

. Tribal HUD-VASH Renewals. The 2023 Act provides up to $7,500,000 as a set-aside from
  the HAP renewal account for renewal grants and associated administrative fees for the Tribal
  HUD-VASH program. This program provides rental assistance and supportive services to
  Native American Veterans who are homeless or at-risk of homelessness living in Indian
  Country. Guidance on the Tribal HUD-VASH program is provided by HUD’s Office of
  Native American Programs.

. Mainstream Vouchers. The 2023 Act provides $606,500,000 for renewal funding and
  administrative fees for Mainstream units. The renewal funding will be re-benchmarked
  during CY 2023. Renewals are calculated based on validated Mainstream Vouchers leasing
  and HAP expenses reported in VMS for the period January 1, 2022, to December 31, 2022.
  PHA funding for Mainstream units is limited to such calendar year eligibility and HUD-held
  Mainstream reserves. As with the regular voucher program, PHAs may not over-lease. (See
  Section 21, below, for more information on over-leasing.) As in previous appropriations
  Acts, the 2023 Act further clarifies that all existing Mainstream Voucher assistance shall be
  provided to non-elderly persons with disabilities upon turnover. PIH Notice 2020-01
  provides further guidance.

  Administrative fees are disbursed based on the most recent Mainstream Voucher leasing data
  reported in VMS, and fee reconciliations are performed on a quarterly basis. In addition, the
  2023 Act requires that the administrative and other non-HAP expenses of the PHAs
  administering these vouchers shall be funded under the same terms and be subject to the
  same pro rata administrative fee reductions that apply to all other PHAs administering
  vouchers under the HCV Program. Consistent with the HCV Program, PHAs are not eligible
  to receive re1mbursement for hard-to-house fees and audit costs. HUD issued detailed
  guidance on the use of ongoing administrative fees for expenses related to assisting families
  to lease units in PIH Notice 2022-18.

  All PHAs are responsible for tracking new units and new funding for SPVs. Mainstream
  funds can only be used for the intended purposes. These funds are not subject to MTW
  fungibility provisions.

  The 2023 Act provides up to $10 million for a Mainstream Voucher HAP Set-Aside for the
  following categories of eligibility, based on need as determined by the Secretary:

                     (1) Category 1 — Prevention of Terminations Due to Insufficient
                         Funding (Shortfall), for PHAs that despite taking reasonable cost
                         savings measures, as determined by the Secretary, would otherwise be
                         required to terminate the rental assistance for Mainstream families as a
                         result of insufficient funding; and,

                     (2) Category 2 — Unforeseen Circumstances, for adjustments in the
                         allocation for PHAs, after applications for an adjustment by a PHA
                                                                                                  20


                           that experienced a significant increase, as determined by the Secretary,
                           in Mainstream renewal costs resulting from unforeseen circumstances.

   The HAP Set-Aside application process and calculation methodology provided within
   Section 12 of this notice is applicable to Mainstream Vouchers as well. More specifically,
   Section 12A for Category 1, Shortfall, of the HCV Program Set-Aside applies to Category 1,
   Shortfall, of the Mainstream Voucher Set-side. Section 12B provides detailed information
   and instructions for applying under Category 2a, Unforeseen Circumstances, for the HCV
   Program Set-Aside, and applies to Category 2, Unforeseen Circumstances, under the
   Mainstream Voucher Set-Aside as well.

10. Family Unification Program (FUP).     The 2023 Act provides $30,000,000 for new
   incremental voucher assistance for the FUP. Of this amount, HUD plans to award
   $5,000,000 for FUP through a NOFO.       The remaining $25,000,000 is limited to use on behalf
   of FUP-eligible youth under the Foster Youth to Independence (FYI) initiative. Of that
   amount HUD will make available up to $15,000,000 non-competitively through a PIH notice.
   At least $10,000,000 will be awarded through a NOFO.

   The 2023 Act also provides that any PHA administering voucher assistance appropriated in a
   prior Act under the FUP, or competitively under the 2023 Act, that determines that it no
   longer has an identified need for such assistance upon turnover, shall notify the Secretary,
   and the Secretary shall recapture such assistance from the agency and reallocate it to any
   other PHA(s) based on need for FUP voucher assistance.       This includes assistance made
   available under the FYI initiative. In addition, HUD will review PHA’s utilization of any
   non-competitive amounts and awards and will recapture and reallocate any unused amounts
   in accordance with the 2023 Act. HUD will implement these provisions through guidance at
   a later date.

   All PHAs are responsible for tracking new units and new funding for Special Purpose
   Vouchers.   FUP funds, including those made available under the FYI initiative, can only be
   used for the intended purposes.   These funds are not subject to MTW fungibility provisions.

11. New HCV Incremental Vouchers. The 2023 Act provides $50,000,000 for new
    Incremental Vouchers. A forthcoming operational notice will describe the eligibility
    formula, uses of funds, and reporting requirements for these vouchers.

12. $200 Million HAP Set-Aside Eligible Categories and Submission Requirements. The
    2023 Act provides $200,000,000 for the HAP Set-Aside. HUD has the authority to provide
    adjustments to PHAs’ allocation for Set-Aside categories 1 through 7 as described within this
    section.

   Awards   will be made   to eligible PHAs    in accordance   with need,   as determined by HUD,
   following an application by the PHA as described throughout this section of the notice. Awards
   could be reduced, in whole or in part, if PHAs have available reserves (RNP and/or HUD-held
   reserves) above a reasonable threshold, as defined by the Secretary, and/or prorated if the $200
   million is insufficient to cover all awards. Additionally, HUD reserves the right to fund one,
                                                                                               21


some, or all categories. HUD reserves the right to prioritize categories with the greatest need
and prorate remaining categories depending on the amount of funds remaining.

The order categories are presented in does not reflect priority; however, HUD reserves the
right to prioritize or limit funding awards for Category 1 — Prevention of Terminations Due
to Insufficient Funding (Shortfall). PHAs may apply for more than one category of
funding and the funding provided within categories 2 — 7 does not impact the award amount
of the other categories (applicable only to categories 2 — 7).
EHVs are not eligible for this funding. Mainstream Vouchers are not eligible for this
funding; however, Mainstream Vouchers are eligible to apply for the $10 Million
Mainstream Voucher Set-Aside by following the application instructions and requirements
included within this section for Category 1 — Prevention of Terminations Due to
Insufficient Funding (Shortfall) and Category 2a — Unforeseen Circumstances.

HOW     TO SUBMIT REQUESTS           - PHAs must submit requests via DocuSign, which
includes the completion of online forms for Appendices F, G, H, I, J, and K along with all
required documentation and calculations (as applicable) by the category and by the deadline
dates identified within this notice. Instructions on applying to the HAP Set-Aside through
DocuSign, a link to the video tutorial on the DocuSign application process, as well as links
to the DocuSign application forms by category can all be accessed through the following
link: HCV Set-aside Applicant DocuSign Instructions.

PHAs are urged to confirm application data and attachments for completeness and accuracy
prior to submission to avoid having to resubmit applications. For PHAs that submit more
than one application for a specific category, HUD will automatically delete the older
applications and keep the most recent application received.

HUD will reject incomplete applications.    DocuSign will not process applications without
signatures; therefore, HUD will not receive them for review.   Executive Directors will
receive a confirmation email from the DocuSign system within the same day as the
submission.

The CY 2023 Quick Reference and Timeline Sheet for HAP Set-Aside Funds is included as
Appendix L.

     SET-ASIDE CATEGORIES AND ELIGIBILITY AND SUBMISSION
     REQUIREMENTS:

A.   Category 1 — Prevention of Terminations Due to Insufficient Funding (Shortfall):
     This category of HAP Set-Aside is for PHAs that, despite taking reasonable cost savings
     measures as determined by the Secretary, would otherwise be required to terminate
     participating families from the program due to insufficient funds, also known as funding
     shortfalls. This category may also be funded in whole or in part through the offset
     described in section 4, step 5 above, but the requirements, application process, and
     appendices of this notice apply regardless of the funding source, and use of the term $200
     Million HAP Set-Aside” with respect to this category should be understood to also
                                                                                         22


reference any offset funds used for this purpose. While Mainstream Vouchers are not
eligible for the $200 Million HAP Set-Aside, PHAs follow these same requirements
when applying for the Mainstream Voucher Set-Aside funding as discussed in Section 9,
above. PHAs administering EHVs are not eligible to apply for this funding.

   To be eligible for funding under this category, the PHA must meet the criteria
   outlined below and must submit Appendix F through DocuSign.

   In addition to PHAs applying for HAP Set-Aside funding to prevent terminations in
   the regular HCV Program due to insufficient funding, the information and
   instructions included within this Set-Aside is also applicable to PHAs applying for
   Shortfall funding under the $10 Million Mainstream Voucher Set-Aside mentioned in
   Section 9 of this notice. A PHA administering Mainstream Vouchers may apply for
   and receive Mainstream Voucher shortfall funds in accordance with the requirements
   described below.

   In cases where the Mainstream PHA also administers regular HCVs, the shortfall
   determination is program specific (e.g., in determining whether the PHA is in a
   confirmed shortfall with respect to Mainstream Vouchers, only Mainstream Voucher
   funding and HAP expenses are taken into consideration, not the PHA’s regular HCV
   funding and HAP expenses).

   A PHA that is experiencing a shortfall in the regular HCV Program and Mainstream
   Vouchers must indicate the application is covering a request for funds for both
   Mainstream and regular HCVs by checking both boxes on Appendix F. Set-Aside
   funding awarded to the PHA is specific to either the Mainstream Vouchers or regular
   HCVs and may not be used interchangeably by the PHA. For example, shortfall
   funding awarded for Mainstream Vouchers may not be used for regular HCVs. HUD
   will indicate the specific amount and the type of voucher the funding is designated for
   in the award letter.

   Note: In determining a shortfall for HCV and/or Mainstream Vouchers and the
   amount of funding to be provided, HUD will use the HCV Two-Year Projection
   Tool. PHAs should refer to Appendix E of the notice, which provides the criteria
   HUD will use to determine if the PHA has a HUD-confirmed shortfall and the
   calculation of the shortfall amount. HUD’s Two-Year Forecasting Tool and the
   instructions for it can be found through a link on the Office of Housing Vouchers
   website.

   Depending on the number of applications and amount of total eligibility, HUD
   reserves the right to prioritize awards for the Prevention of Terminations Due to
   Insufficient Funding (Shortfall) category and may need to prorate eligibility for other
   categories of the Set-Aside.

   In egregious situations, for PHAs not following HUD Shortfall Prevention Team
   (SPT) guidance on voucher reissuance, HUD        reserves the right to further
                                                                                                   23


          require a PHA to rescind recently issued vouchers to attain full Set-Aside
          eligibility.

          PHAs with specific questions related to the calculation and determination of a HUD-
          confirmed shortfall should contact the SPT at: ShortfallInquiries@hud.gov. The
          subject line of the email must include the PHA’s number (for example, TX001).

          DOCUSIGN SUBMISSION REQUIRMENTS: PHAs must complete and sign
          Appendix F as applicable in DocuSign. To access instructions detailing the
          DocuSign application process, a link to the video tutorial on this process, as well as
          the link to apply for this category in DocuSign, please click on the following link:
          HCV Set-aside Applicant DocuSign Instructions.

          DEADLINE: The application period will remain open. PHAs that receive Set-
          Aside funds based on their current HAP costs that find additional funding is needed
          later in the year do not need to reapply to receive additional funding. The SPT will
          automatically determine the PHA’s eligibility for additional funding and HUD will
          provide the additional funding in accordance with its established Set-Aside funding
          priorities and available funding. PHAs that have concerns about potential shortfalls
          should be in contact with the HUD field office or SPT, regardless of whether they are
          currently in a shortfall situation.

B.   Category 2a -Unforeseen Circumstances:         PHAs should be aware that an unforeseen
     circumstance is an occurrence within or after the re-benchmarking period which the PHA
     could not reasonably have anticipated and was out of the PHA’s control. Funding
     adjustments for this category are based on cost increases occurring in CY 2023. In
     addition to PHAs applying for funding under the HAP Set-Aside, these instructions and
     requirements are applicable PHAs that are applying for Mainstream Voucher Set-Aside
     funding for Unforeseen Circumstances. In such instance the funding award calculation is
     based on the PHA’s Mainstream Voucher PUCs and UMLs, not the PHA’s regular HCV
     PUCs and UMLs. PHAs administering EHVs are not eligible to apply for this funding.

          In cases where the Mainstream PHA also administers regular HCVs, the Unforeseen
          Circumstances determination is program specific.

          A PHA that is requesting Set-Aside funding for Unforeseen Circumstances for both
          regular HCVs and Mainstream Vouchers must check both boxes on Appendix G.
          Set-Aside funding awarded to the PHA is specific to either the Mainstream Vouchers
          or regular HCVs and may not be used interchangeably by the PHA. For example,
          Unforeseen Circumstances funding awarded for Mainstream Vouchers may not be
          used for regular HCVs. HUD will indicate the specific amount and the type of
          voucher the funding is designated for in the award letter.

     i.      PHA Eligibility. The 2023 Act provides that the cost increase must be
             significant, as defined by the Secretary, for the PHA to be eligible for the
                                                                                                         24

               unforeseen circumstances category of the CY 2023 set-aide. HUD 1s establishing
               the following criteria for significant cost increase:

               The PHA’s latest validated 2023 PUC per VMS must be 102 percent or greater
               than the PUC HUD used to determine the PHA’s CY 2023 renewal funding (the
               CY 2023 Renewal PUC) to be eligible for funding.

       ii.     Funding Award Calculations for PHAs. For PHAs (both Non-MTW and
               MTW), the funding award amount will be calculated as follows:

               a.   HUD       determines the difference between the increased PUC and the PHA’s
                    CY 2023 HAP renewal PUC.         The increased PUC is calculated by dividing
                    HAP costs by unit months leased (UMLs) for the most recent month of total
                    HAP based on the most recent month. MTW New Cohort and non-MTW
                    PHA’s HCV CY 2023 HAP renewal PUC is located in the 2023 HCV renewal
                    Enclosure A, line 29, described as CY 2023 Inflated Per Unit Cost. The
                    PHA’s Mainstream Voucher CY 2023 HAP renewal PUC is located in the
                    2023 HCV renewal Enclosure A, line 12, describe as CY 2023 Inflated PUC.
                    MTW PHA’s PUC information is located by the prorated eligibility amount
                    on the PHA’s renewal enclosure.

               b.   The difference is then multiplied by the PHA’s most recent month’s UMLs
                    and then by the remaining months in 2023 to determine the total funding
                    amount.

               HUD will use the most recent validated VMS        data available to calculate PHA
               eligibility.

               PHA Example:          Unforeseen Circumstances HAP Set-Aside Award

Most Recent Month's PUC                                                       HUD will use the most
provided by the PHA (in this                                                  recent validated month of
example, July’s PUC)                                     $500                 VMS reporting
PHA’s CY 2023 PUC (2023 HCV
Renewal Enclosure A, line 29 for
Non-MTW and MTW New Cohort
PHA’s, described as CY 2023                                                   MTW    renewal enclosures
Inflated Per Unit Cost and 2023                                               have a different format.
Mainstream Renewal Enclosure A,                                               PUC information can be
line 12, described as CY 2023                                                 found by the prorated
Inflated PUC)                                            $405                 eligibility amount.
Difference between the PUCs                                             $95
Is the difference between to the 2
PUCs 2% or greater than the CY
2023 PUC (Line | divided by Line
2, must be greater than 1.02)?                            23%
                                                                                                     25


                                                                              HUD will use the most
                                                                              recent validated month of
Most Recent Month's Units leased                           300                VMS reporting
                                                                              Multiplied by the number of
Unit months leased (Line 5 * 6                                                month's remaining in CY
Months)                                                               1,800   2023.
Total Request (Line 3 * Line 6)                                   $171,000

               In this example the PHA’s PUC increased 23 percent which meets the eligibility
               criteria for application review due to significant increased costs. The PHA is
               eligible for $171,000. The next step is to ascertain if this is a Priority Application
               (the PHA’s HAP Program Reserve is less than two-months’ worth of HAP) ora
               Regular Application to determine when the funding will be made available.

               PHAs with two (2) months or more of reserves will not be considered for any
               funding under this category at this time.

           DOCUSIGN SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS: To access instructions detailing
           the DocuSign application process, a link to the video tutorial on this process, as well
           as the link to apply for this category in DocuSign, please click on the following link:
           HCV Set-aside Applicant DocuSign Instructions. Once in DocuSign PHAs are
           required to provide the following:

               a.   Completed and signed Appendix G form in DocuSign, CY 2023 Housing
                    Choice Voucher Program Application for $200 Million HAP Set-Aside for
                    Category 2a — Unforeseen Circumstances and Application for $10 Million
                    Mainstream Voucher HAP Set-Aside for Category 2 — Unforeseen
                    Circumstances in DocuSign.
               b.   The PHA must also attach a written narrative to their DocuSign application
                    describing the unforeseen circumstances and their relationship to the
                    significantly increased renewal costs in CY 2023. PHAs applying for
                    unforeseen circumstances under both their HCV Program and Mainstream
                    Vouchers, are required to provide a narrative for each.

           For applications under the unforeseen circumstances category, it is important to note
           that PHAs must submit all items (a. and b.) above by the application deadline for the
           application to be considered. Failure to provide any of the required documents
           and information within DocuSign as instructed will result in denial of the
           application.

           DEADLINE:       No later than 5 p.m., per the PHA’s time zone, Friday, September
           29%, 2023.

   C. Category 2b -Portability: To be eligible for funding under this category, the PHA must
      have experienced a significant increase in renewal costs due to portability for tenant-
       based rental assistance under Section 8 (r) of the Act.   EHVs and Mainstream Vouchers
       are not eligible for funding under this category.
                                                                                          26



 To determine eligibility and calculate funding under this category for regular HCVs,
 HUD will compare the average HAP Per Unit Cost (PUC) for the re-benchmarking
 period (January 1, 2022 to December 31, 2022) to the average Port-out Vouchers HAP
 PUC based on year-to-date reporting in PIC (as of April 1, 2023). If the portability
 average HAP exceeds 110% of the HCV Program-wide average HAP PUC for the re-
 benchmarking period, the PHA will be eligible for Set-Aside funding. The difference
 between the portability average PUC and 110% of the program-wide average PUC is
 multiplied by the year-to-date total unit months leased (UML) for the “Port Vouchers
 Paid” reported in PIC, extrapolated to 12 months.

     DOCUSIGN SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS: HUD calculates eligibility under
     this category, therefore, no additional documentation will be required or accepted
     other than Appendix H, CY 2023 Housing Choice Voucher Program Applications for
     $200 Million HAP Set-Aside for Categories2b — Portability; 3a — Project-Based
     Vouchers; 3b - MTW New Cohorts; 4 -HUD-VASH; 5 — Lower-than-average
     Leasing; and/or 7 — NLT Inspection Withheld Housing Assistance Payments, which
     must be completed, signed, and submitted through DocuSign by the deadline. To
     access instructions detailing the DocuSign application process, a link to the video
     tutorial on this process, as well as the link to apply for this category in DocuSign,
     please click on the following link: HCV Set-aside Applicant DocuSign Instructions.

     DEADLINE:       No later than 5 p.m., per the PHA’s time zone, Friday, June 16,
     2023.

. Category 3a -— PBVs: To be eligible for funding under this category, a PHA must show
  that vouchers were withheld from use during the CY 2022 re-benchmarking period to be
 available to meet   a commitment for PBV assistance under Section 8(0)(13) of the Act.
 Adjustments only apply to vouchers withheld pursuant to a PBV Agreement to Enter into
 a Housing Assistance Payments Contract (AHAP) for newly constructed or rehabilitated
 housing. Adjustments do not apply to existing housing, as there is no waiting period for
 existing housing PBV commitments and accordingly, there is no need to withhold
 vouchers for such commitments. Adjustments will not be made under any circumstances
 for units under an AHAP commitment that, when added to units under lease for CY 2022,
 exceed the PHA’s baseline units under ACC for CY 2022. (The PHA would not have
 been able to lease those withheld vouchers during CY 2023 due to the restriction on over-
 leasing.) EHVs and Mainstream Vouchers are not eligible for funding under this
 category.

     DOCUSIGN SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS: To access instructions detailing
     the DocuSign application process, a link to the video tutorial on this process, as well
     as the DocuSign link to apply and submit project information for this category, please
     click on the following link: HCV Set-aside Applicant DocuSign Instructions. All
     attachments as described in items 1 and 2 below should be attached to the
     corresponding Appendix I DocuSign submission. Once in DocuSign, PHAs are
     required to provide the following:
                                                                                               27



1.    AHAP: For each PBV commitment for which a request is being made under this
      category, the PHA must provide, from Part 1 of the executed Agreement to
      Enter into a HAP Contract (AHAP) for New Constructions/Rehabilitation,
      the following:

      a.     The page which identifies the parties to the AHAP (both the Housing
             Authority and the owner);
             Identification of the project;
     moaos



             Section 1.1A which identifies the effective date of the agreement;
             Section 1.1B which identifies the date of the commencement of the work;
             Section 1.1C which identifies the time for completion of the work;
             Exhibit C which identifies the units by size and applicable initial contract
             rents for the units to be project-based;
      g.     Ifthe project is to be completed in stages: Exhibit E that identifies the
             schedule of completion of stages (if applicable). (This exhibit shall identify
             the units in each stage.); and
      h.     Signature page that provides the signature of both the Housing Authority and
             the owner and the dates the AHAP was signed.

      HAP Contract:         To be eligible for HAP Set-Aside funding, the HAP contract
      must be executed within CY 2023. If the HAP Contract has not been executed
      by the application submission date, the PHA must state when the HAP contract
      will be executed. If the HAP contract has been executed by the application
      submission date, the PHA must provide, from PART             1 of the HAP Contract
      for New Constructions or Rehabilitation, the following:

      a.     The page which identifies the parties to the HAP Contract (both the Housing
             Authority and the owner);
      b.     Exhibit A which identifies the total number of units in the project covered by
             the HAP Contract; the initial Contract Rent to owner, and the number and
             description of the contract units;
      c.     Ifthe project is to be completed in stages: in addition to item b. described in
             the above AHAP section that states the requirement for the “identification of
             the project”, Exhibit A must also identify the units to be completed in each
             phase covered by the HAP Contract;
      d.     Exhibit   B which identifies the services, maintenance and utilities to be
             provided by the owner;
      e.     Exhibit C which identifies the utilities available in the contract unit, including
             a listing of utility services to be paid by the owner (without charges in
             addition to the rent to owner) and utilities to be paid by the tenant;
      f.     Section 2a which identifies the initial term of the contract; and
      g.     Signature page which provides the signature of both the Housing Authority
             and the owner and the dates the HAP was signed.
                                                                                              28


        3.   Completed and signed Appendix H in DocuSign to apply for PBV, CY 2023
             Housing Choice Voucher Program and Application for $200 Million HAP Set-
             Aside for Categories 2b — Portability; 3a — Project-Based Vouchers; 3b - MTW
             New Cohorts; 4 -HUD-VASH; 5 — Lower-than-average Leasing; and/or 7 — NLT
             Inspection Withheld Housing Assistance Payments; and

        4.   Completed and Signed Appendix I through DocuSign, CY 2023 Housing
             Choice Voucher Program - $200 Million HAP Set-Aside Category 3b - PBV-
             Project Data (for each project-based commitment). Please note that PHAs must
             submit separate Appendix I’s and attach corresponding required documents
             within DocuSign for each project that funding is requested.

        DEADLINE:        No later than 5 p.m., per the PHA’s time zone, Friday, June 16,
        2023.

E.   Category 3b-MTW New Cohorts: To be eligible for a funding adjustment under this
     category, PHAs must have received their MTW designation in CY 2021or 2022,
     demonstrate funds were obligated by the PHA but not expended during CY 2022, and
     provide supporting documentation that the obligated funds are for an MTW-eligible
     commitment/activity for the development of affordable housing. Adjustments only apply
     to obligations made and not expended in CY 2022 and supported planned expenditures in
     CY 2023. The funding adjustment will not exceed the delta between the PHA’s 2022
     renewal eligibility based on the re-benchmarking formula, and the CY 2023 maximum
     renewal eligibility based on total authorized units at the inflated PUC. These two totals
     are provided within the CY 2023 Renewal Funding Enclosure, Lines 9 and 12,
     respectively. Finally, for PHAs submitting obligations for more than one project, the
     adjustment per project may receive a proration if the total funding adjustment for the
     PHA exceeds the delta. EHVs and Mainstream Vouchers are not eligible for funding
     under this category.

        DOCUSIGN SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS: To access instructions detailing
        the DocuSign application process, a link to the video tutorial on this process, as well
        as the DocuSign link to apply and submit project information for this category, please
        click on the following link: HCV Set-aside Applicant DocuSign Instructions. For a
        PBV commitment, all attachments as referenced in items 3 and 4 below should be
        attached to the corresponding Appendix I DocuSign submission.       Once in DocuSign,
        PHAs are required to provide the following:

                    1.   A completed and signed Appendix H in DocuSign to apply for this
                         category, Application for $200 Million Set-Aside for Categories 2b —
                         Portability; 3a — Project-Based Vouchers; 3b - MTW New Cohorts; 4
                         - HUD-VASH; 5 — Lower-than-average Leasing; and/or 7 — NLT
                         Inspection Withheld Housing Assistance Payments, that clearly
                         indicates the PHA is applying under Category 3a — PBV;
                    2.   A signed and completed Appendix I through DocuSign, CY 2023
                         Housing Choice Voucher Program - $200 Million HAP Set-Aside —
                         Category 3b — MTW New Cohorts-Project Data (for each project-
                                                                                  29


            based commitment). Please note that PHAs must submit separate
            Appendix I’s and attach corresponding required documents
            within DocuSign for each project that funding is requested.
            The full list of requirements shown under “1. AHAP”’ in the
            submission requirements section for the above Category 3a PBV, for
            each PBV commitment for which a request is being made under this
            category; and,
            The full list of requirements shown under ‘2. HAP” as described in
            the submission requirements section for the above Category 3a PBV,
            for each PBV commitment for which a request is being made under
            this category.

DOCUSIGN      SUBMISSION       REQUIREMENTS:          To access instructions
detailing the DocuSign application process, a link to the video tutorial on this
process, as well as the DocuSign link to apply and submit project information for
this category, please click on the following link: HCV Set-aside Applicant
DocuSign Instructions. For MTW New Cohort PHAs applying for funding
obligated but not expended in CY 2022 for an MTW-eligible
commitment/activity development that is not a PBV commitment (such as
Public Housing or Local, Non-Traditional development) PHAs are required to
submit the following for each project:

       1.   A completed and signed Appendix H in DocuSign, Application for
            $200 Million HAP Set-Aside for Categories 2b — Portability; 3a —
            Project-Based Vouchers; 3b - MTW New Cohorts; 4 - HUD-VASH; 5
            — Lower-than-average Leasing; and/or 7 — NLT Inspection Withheld
            Housing Assistance Payments, that clearly indicates the PHA is
            applying under Category 3b - MT'W New Cohorts;
            A completed and signed Appendix J, CY 2023 Housing Choice
            Voucher Program — $200 Million HAP Set-Aside — Category 3b —
            MTW New Cohorts-Project Data, for each MTW-eligible development
            commitment for which a request is being made under this
            category;
            An approved Annual PHA Plan and MTW Supplement,
            identifying the PHA’s binding agreement indicating its planned use of
            HAP funding, for each MTW-eligible development commitment for
            which a request is being made under this category, attached to the
            corresponding Appendix J DocuSign form; and
            Documentation to demonstrate the PHA will require an outlay or
            expenditure of funds, immediately or in the future for the MTW-
            eligible development activity to include the submission of any
            completed HUD documentation to date as it relates to the
            development, for each MTW-eligible development commitment for
            which a request is being made under this category, also attached to the
            corresponding Appendix J DocuSign form.
                                                                                                    30


              DEADLINE:          No later than 5 p.m., per the PHA’s time zone, Friday,      June
              16, 2023.

F.   Category 4-HUD-VASH: For PHAs administering HUD-VASH vouchers that can
     demonstrate a need for adjustment funding for at least one of the following situations:

         1.   PUC    Increase:    For PHAs whose program-wide funded CY 2023 HAP PUC is
              less than their current HUD-VASH      HAP PUC, based on their latest HUD-VASH
              HAP expenses in CY 2023. HUD will calculate eligibility under this category.
              Eligibility is determined by comparing the highest HUD-VASH PUC for CY
              2022 to the program-wide funded prorated HAP PUC, then multiplying the
              difference between the PUCs by the funded UMLs.

              Leasing Increase: For PHAs whose total HUD-VASH leasing for CY 2023 will
              exceed the leasing level included in their renewal funding, plus the leasing that
              will be supported by the RNP and HUD-Held Program Reserves, HUD will
              calculate eligibility under this category. Eligibility is determined by adding
              UMLs for all the CY 2022 validated VMS data available to a projection for the
              remainder of the CY and comparing that total to the initial funded HUD-VASH
              UMLs    (limited to 100% of the PHAs UMAs), then multiplied by the CY 2023
              PUC.

        DOCUSIGN          SUBMISSION       REQUIREMENTS:         No additional documentation
        will be required or accepted other than a completed and signed Appendix H as
        applicable in DocuSign. To access instructions detailing the DocuSign application
        process, a link to the video tutorial on this process, as well as the link to apply for this
        category within DocuSign, please click on the following link: HCV Set-aside
        Applicant DocuSign Instructions.

        DEADLINE:          No later than 5 p.m., per the PHA’s time zone, Friday, September
        29%, 2023.

G. Category 5 — Lower-Than-Average Leasing: To be eligible for funding under this
   category, the PHA must be leasing a lower-than-average percentage of their authorized
   vouchers, have low amounts of budget authority in their net restricted asset accounts and
     HUD-held programmatic reserves, relative to other agencies, and must not be
     participating in the MTW demonstration. EHVs and Mainstream Vouchers are not
     eligible for funding under this category.

     To determine eligibility for this category of set-aside funds, HUD will consider Unit
     Months Leased (UMLs), Unit Months Available (UMAs), and reconciled reserves as of
     December 2022. Additionally, HUD will consider historical offset data.

     HUD will determine eligibility by:
            Excluding MTWs;
            Excluding non-MTW PHAs with above average UMLs/UMAs; and
                                                                                               31


          e    Of the remaining PHAs, excluding those with reserve levels that are above the
               median, based on PHA size.

  HUD will determine awards by the following tiers — fully funding each tier before
  moving to the next, until funds for this category are exhausted or all applicant PHAs are
  funded:
      e   Tier I: No reserves above the 4/6/12% reserve level based on size and no offsets
          since 2017;
      e   Tier II: No reserves above the 4/6/12% reserve level based on size and no offsets
          in 2021 or 2022;
      e   Tier III: Less than an additional 4% reserves above the 4/6/12% reserve level
          based on size and no offsets in 2021 or 2022; and
      e       Tier IV: Remaining eligible PHAs.

  PHAs must lease additional vouchers with this award. If PHAs need assistance with the
  number of vouchers for reissuance, they may contact their local field office
  representative. The field office will be able to assist with developing a leasing plan to
  maximize the use of this award. PHAs that apply to this category must be cognizant of
  their capacity to issue vouchers to families in the waiting list and the likelihood that
  families will use their vouchers successfully.

 DEADLINE:           No later than 5 p.m., per the PHA’s time zone, Friday, June 16, 2023.

 Note: The following link provides a list of PHAs that are eligible to apply for this
 category of HAP Set-Aside funding: Lower-than-average Leasing Eligibility List
 PHAs that are not included on this list should not apply as their applications will
 automatically be denied.

 DOCUSIGN SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS: To access instructions detailing the
 DocuSign application process, a link to the video tutorial on this process, as well as the
 DocuSign link to apply, please click on the following link: HCV Set-aside Applicant
 DocuSign Instructions. To be eligible for funding under this category, a PHA must
 submit a completed and signed Appendix H, CY 2023 Housing Choice Voucher
 Program Application for $200 Million HAP Set-Aside for Category 5 — Lower-than-
 average Leasing.

. Category 6 — Disaster: To be eligible for funding under this category, the PHA must
  have experienced increased costs or loss of units in an area for which the President
  declared a disaster under title [V of the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency
 Assistance Act (42 U.S.C. 5170 et seq.) in CY 2022 or CY 2023, except for the COVID-
 19 declaration. The funding provided through this category will address the impact
 disasters have had on CY 2023 expenses. EHVs and Mainstream Vouchers are not
 eligible for funding under this category.

     1.       Loss of Units Due to Disaster.   This adjustment is provided to assist the PHA in
              increasing the number of families under lease, not to exceed 100% of the PHA’s
                                                                                          32


     authorized units, to help address housing needs in the impacted community. HUD
     will use the most recently reported and validated month’s VMS data to determine
     the number of units currently under lease. HUD will use the higher of: (1) the
     PHA’s most recently reported and validated month’s VMS data or (2) the three-
     month average for the most recent reported and validated VMS data to determine
     the PUC to calculate the funding adjustment. However, if the PHA requests and
     HUD approves the PHA’s request for an increased PUC, the approved PUC will
     be used to calculate the increased leasing adjustment, as well as to make the
     increased PUC adjustment for the PHA’s HCV Program as a whole.

DOCUSIGN SUBMISSION REQUIREMENT: To access instructions detailing
the DocuSign application process, s link to the video tutorial on this process, as well
as the DocuSign link to apply for this category, please click on the following link:
HCV Set-aside Applicant DocuSign Instructions. To be eligible for funding under
the Loss of Units due to Disaster category, a PHA must submit the following
through DocuSign:

     a.   Completed and signed Appendix K in DocuSign, CY 2023 Housing Choice
          Voucher Program $200 Million HAP Set-Aside — Category 6 — Disaster, and
          attach the following items to the application;
     b.   Written narrative, detailing the impact of the disaster that has caused a loss of
          units, the PHA’s assessment of the availability of rental housing stock in the
          PHAs jurisdiction, a description of any plans in the jurisdiction to increase the
          availability of rental stock, which may include the PHA’s plan to project-base
          additional vouchers to increase the supply of units available to voucher
          families, and the number of families currently on the PHA’s HCV waiting list
          and if the waiting list is currently open or closed;
     c.   Evidence to support the narrative; and
     d.   The number of months impacted in CY 2023 by the loss of units.

2.   Increased Costs. The PHA may request an adjustment for a higher PUC. The
     requested PUC must be higher than the higher of the most recent reported and
     validated PUC in VMS or the most recent three-month average reported and
     validated in VMS. The requested adjustment must be supported by
     documentation that the PHA is required to include with their application. For
     example, the PHA may provide data supporting the higher requested PUC by
     providing PIC data for recent new admissions and/or recent movers or other data
     supporting its request for a funding adjustment.

DOCUSIGN SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS: To access instructions detailing
the DocuSign application process, a link to the video tutorial on this process, as well
as the DocuSign link to apply and the additional link to submit project information
for this category, please click on the following link: HCV Set-aside Applicant
DocuSign Instructions. To be eligible for funding under the Increased Costs due
to Disaster category, a PHA must submit the following through DocuSign:
                                                                                                  33


             a.   Completed and signed Appendix K in DocuSign, CY 2023 Housing Choice
                  Voucher Program - $200 Million HAP Set-Aside — Category 6 — Disaster, and
                  attach the following items to the application;
             b.   Written narrative detailing the impact the disaster had in causing the increased
                  costs, the PUC requested;
             c.   Evidence to support the narrative (how the requested PUC was determined);
                  and
             d.   The number of unit months impacted by the increased costs.

         For applications under the disaster category, category 6, it is important to note that
         PHAs must submit all items (a. through d.) above by the application deadline for the
         application to be considered. Failure to provide any of the required documents,
         including the PHA calculation of the increased costs, will result in denial of the
         application.

         DEADLINE:        No later than 5 p.m., per the PHA’s time zone, Friday, December
         29%, 2023.

I.   Category 7 — NLT Inspection Withheld Housing Assistance Payments:              To be eligible
     for funding under this category,   a PHA must demonstrate that after,   January 27, 2023,
     when HUD established the PHA’s HAP renewal funding baseline to calculate the CY
     2023 renewal allocation (Step 1 described in Section 4 of this notice), the PHA
     subsequently paid the owner housing assistance payments that were withheld during
     calendar year 2022 in accordance with the requirements of the non-life threatening (NLT)
     initial inspection option under section 8(0)(8)(A)(i1) of the United States Housing Act of
     1937.   EHVs and Mainstream Vouchers are not eligible for funding under this category.

         Under the NLT initial inspection option, a PHA may approve an assisted tenancy,
         execute a HAP contract, and begin making assistance payments on a unit that fails the
         initial inspection in cases where the unit only has NLT deficiencies. If the family
         accepts the unit with the NLT conditions, the owner has 30 days from the date of the
         PHA notification to correct the NLT conditions. If the NLT conditions are not
         corrected within 30 days of the PHA notifying the owner of the unit’s failure, the
         PHA must withhold any further assistance payments until those conditions are
         addressed and the unit fully complies with the housing quality standards. Once the
         unit is in compliance, the PHA must recommence making housing assistance
         payments to the owner. In addition, the PHA may choose to pay the owner
         retroactively for the period during which payments were withheld by releasing the
         withheld payments to the owner. PHAs have discretion over the maximum amount of
         time the PHA will withhold payments before ultimately terminating the HAP contract
         for owner non-compliance with HQS. However, the HAP contract may not continue
         beyond 180 days of the effective date of the HAP contract if the unit is not brought
         into compliance. For detailed guidance on the NLT initial inspection option, please
         see PIH Notice 2017-20, Housing Opportunity Through Modernization Act of 2016
         (HOTMA) — Housing Quality Standards (HQS) Implementation Guidance, issued
         October 27, 2017.
                                                                                         34



  Because these HAP costs that were withheld under the NLT initial inspection option
  in CY 2022 and paid retroactively after HUD established the PHA’s HAP renewal
  baseline for the CY 2023 renewal allocation are not currently reflected in the PHA’s
  renewal funding, the PHA is eligible for a funding adjustment under this Set-Aside
  category. In calculating the amount of HAP funding for which the PHA is eligible,
  HUD will adjust the retroactive HAP amount identified by the PHA by the appliable
  RFIF and the proration factor used to determine the PHA’s CY 2023 renewal
  allocation in Section 4 of this notice.

  The Appropriations Act specifies that this adjustment is for retroactive payments
  under the NLT initial inspection option. Accordingly, a retroactive payment that a
  PHA may have made under any other circumstance is not covered and the PHA is not
  eligible to apply for Set-Aside funding to cover that retroactive payment. In addition,
  Mainstream Vouchers are not eligible for funding under this category.

  DOCUSIGN SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS: To access instructions detailing
  the DocuSign application process, a link to the video tutorial on this process, as well
  as the DocuSign link to apply for this category, please click on the following link:
  HCV Set-aside Applicant DocuSign Instructions. PHAs are to submit the following
  documents to DocuSign:
  1. Completed and signed Appendix H in DocuSign, CY 2023 Housing Choice
       Voucher Program Applications for $200 Million HAP Set-Aside for Category 7 —
      NLT Inspection Withheld Housing Assistance Payments, and attach the below
      item to the DocuSign application;
  2. A spreadsheet identifying the amount of CY 2022 withheld HAP, by unit, by
      month, and the date of the retroactive payment was made to the owner in CY
       2023; and
  3.   PHAs are required to enter their HAP expense amounts for NLT Inspection
       Withheld HAP in VMS. Entries made after January 27, 2023, will include a
       Prior Month Correction (PMC) in the month which the HAP expense was
       incurred. Additionally, the PHA will enter a comment into the “Comments” field
       located in the “Expense/Comments” tab. The comment will reflect the amount of
       the HAP Expenses entered. Examples of PMC comments are as follows:

       Example 1: NLT withheld HAP expenses for July 2022 is $1,000
       (the above would be entered in the July 2022 Comments field)
       Example 2: NLT withheld HAP expenses for November 2022 = $1,250 (the
       above would be entered in the November 2022 Comments field)

  PMCs in VMS will match the information/documentation the PHA provides as
  required to be eligible for funding under this category of the Set-Aside.

DEADLINE:     No later than 5 p.m., per the PHA’s time zone, Friday, June 16, 2023.
                                                                                                   35


13. Moving To Work Agencies. The original 39 MTW agencies’ renewal funding is
    determined pursuant to their Standard MTW Agreements and appropriations requirements.
    HUD is directed by the 2023 Act to apply the same proration factor to the HCV HAP
    renewal allocations and administrative fee eligibility for MTW agencies as is applied to all
    other PHAs. All MTW agencies may utilize their funds in accordance with their Standard
    MTW Agreements or the MTW Operations Notice.

14. Moving To Work New Cohort Agencies. As is the case for non-MTW PHAs under current
    appropriations law, the HAP renewal funding eligibility for MTW agencies will be calculated
    based on each MTW agency’s actual expenses for the previous calendar year (known as the
    re-benchmark year). Unique to MTW agencies, however, the MTW agency’s actual
    expenses are: 1) the previous Calendar Year’s HAP expenses reported in the Voucher
   Management System (VMS), and 2) the previous CY’s eligible non-HAP MTW             expenses
   reported in VMS. For both HAP and non-HAP MTW expenses, the reported expenses must
   have been paid from an eligible source of funds as described in paragraph (c) of the MTW
   Operations Notice in order to be included in the HAP renewal funding formula. In addition,
   MTW HAP renewal funding is subject to an MTW Renewal Eligibility cap derived from the
   number of units authorized under the MTW agency’s ACC, as described in paragraph (d) of
   the MTW Operations Notice. The lower of the total combined HAP and non-HAP expenses
   or the MTW Renewal Eligibility cap will then be adjusted by the Renewal Funding Inflation
   Factor (RFIF) and any national proration that applies to the HCV renewal appropriation to
   determine the MTW agency’s actual CY HAP renewal funding. Moving to Work New
   Cohort Agencies are subject to offset. Additional information and examples, can be found
   within the MTW Operations Notice available through the following link:
   https://www.hud.gov/sites/dfiles/PIH/documents/FinalMTWExOpsNoticePart          VIWeb.pdf

15. Excluded Programs. The provisions implemented by this notice do not apply to renewal
    funding for the Moderate Rehabilitation Program or Single Room Occupancy (SRO) or the
    Emergency Housing Voucher (EHV) Program.

16. HCV Financial Management. HUD is focused on ensuring that PHAs appropriately
    manage their HCV Programs within the funding provided for the CY and existing restricted
    net position (RNP) and HUD-Held program reserves. PHAs are encouraged to use the Two-
    Year Forecasting Tool to assist them in their budgeting and leasing plans.

17. HAP Disbursements and Frontloading. PHAs receive monthly disbursements from their
    budgetary allocations in accordance with the cash management procedures in PIH Notice
    2017-06. PHAs may request a frontload when monthly disbursements and available RNP
    and HUD-held reserves will not cover expenses for the month. PHAs may request a
    frontload via the two-year tool or by submitting a request to the FMC FA. PHAs will be
    required to provide HAP expenses not yet reported in VMS and actual HAP expenses for the
    period requested. The frontload will be limited to the amount necessary to cover the actual
    HAP expenses. PHAs in need of a frontload during the year and have excess SPV funding
   available in their RNP, will be provided with a frontload that does not consider their
   available SPV funds as SPV funds may only be used for their intended purposes.      PHAs must
                                                                                                 36


   remember that frontloading early in the CY affects the amounts available in later months in
   the CY.

18. Use of HAP and HAP RNP/HUD-Held Program Reserves. PHAs are reminded that funds
    in the HAP RNP account and HUD-Held Program Reserves shall only be used for eligible
    HAP needs in the current CY. The CACC requires PHAs to use HAP funding to cover
    housing assistance payments. HAP and/or PHA reserves (HAP RNP and HUD-held
    reserves) shall not under any circumstances be used for any other purpose, such as to cover
   administrative expenses or be loaned, advanced, or transferred (referred to as operating
   transfers due to/due from) to other component units or other programs such as the Low-Rent
   (Public Housing) program. Use of HAP for any purpose other than eligible HAP needs is a
   violation of law, and such illegal uses or transfers may result in sanctions and possible
   declaration of breach of the ACC. Current year funding may not be used for prior year costs,
   including by MTW agencies.

   In instances where a PHA is found to have misappropriated HAP and/or HAP RNP/HUD-
   held reserve funds by using the funds for any purpose other than valid HAP expenses for
   units up to the baseline, HUD requires the immediate return of the funds to the HAP or HAP
   RNP/HUD-held reserves account. HUD may take action, including suspension and
   debarment, against a PHA or any party that has used HAP funds and/or the HAP RNP/HUD-
   held reserves account for non-HAP purposes.

19. Uses of Administrative Fees. For proper uses and reporting of administrative fees and UNP
    HUD issued additional guidance on the use of administrative fees for other expenses under
    PIH Notice 2022-18: Use of Housing Choice Voucher (HCV) and Mainstream Voucher
    Administrative Fees for Other Expenses to Assist Families to Lease Units, and continues to
    use PIH Notice 2015-17: Use and Reporting of Administrative Fee Reserves, respectively.

20. VMS/FASS Reporting and Data Integrity.        PHAs must continue to submit required
   financial documents including, but not limited to, monthly VMS    and annual FASS electronic
   submissions.   PHAs that do not submit the required data by the reporting deadline may be
   sanctioned as provided by 24 CFR 982.152(d), and in accordance with the procedures
   outlined in PIH Notice 2021-08 or any successor notice. PHAs that fail to meet the
   submission requirements may be subject to administrative actions, including but not limited
   to, an imposition of a penalty against the PHA’s monthly administrative fees until the PHA
   complies with these requirements. This penalty represents a permanent reduction for the
   current CY that shall not be reversed.

21. Prohibition on Over-leasing.   The 2023 Act prohibits the use of appropriated HAP funds by
   any PHA, except for PHAs in the MTW      demonstration, to lease units above their CACC
   baseline units during any CY, even if the PHA has sufficient budget authority (BA) and/or
   RNP to support the additional units. If a PHA engages in over-leasing, it must identify other
   eligible sources to pay for the over-leasing, and the PHA must take immediate steps to
   eliminate any current over-leasing. Renewal funding allocations will not include over-leased
   units. Renewal funding eligibility will be reduced based on the number of over-leased unit
                                                                                                 37


   months and the average PUC during the re-benchmark period. PHAs must still report all
   over-leasing in VMS and must also report $0 HAPs in the appropriate categories in VMS.

22 . Use of Outside Sources of Funds. HUD issued PIH Notice 2013-28, Guidance on the Use
     of Outside Sources of Funds in the HCV Program. HUD recommends that all PHAs
     carefully review the information contained in the notice.

23. Paperwork Reduction Act. The additional information collection requirements contained
    in this document are approved by the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) under the
   Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995 (44 U.S.C. 3501-3520). The OMB control number is
   2577-0169. In accordance with the Paperwork Reduction Act, HUD may not conduct or
   sponsor, and a person is not required to respond to, a collection of information unless the
   collection displays a currently valid OMB control number.

24. Further Information. Any questions concerning this Notice should be directed to Housing
    Voucher Financial Management Division, Office of Public Housing and Voucher Programs,
   at (202) 708-2934 (this is not a toll-free number).




   Persons with hearing or speech impairments may access these numbers via TTY by calling




                                       Pd mo
   the toll-free Federal Information Relay Service at (800) 877-8339.




                                      Richard J. Monocchio
                                      Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary
                                       for Public and Indian Housing
                                                                                                        38


Appendix A

                 Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2023 (Public Law 117-328)

Tenant-Based Rental Assistance — Overall Funding and Renewals:

For activities and assistance for the provision of tenant-based rental assistance authorized under the
United States Housing Act of 1937, as amended (42 U.S.C. 1437 et seq.) (in this title “‘the Act’’), not
otherwise provided for, $23,599,532,000, to remain available until expended, which shall be
available on October 1, 2022 (in addition to the $4,000,000,000 previously appropriated under this
heading that shall be available on October 1, 2022), and $4,000,000,000, to remain available until
expended, which 20 shall be available on October 1, 2023: Provided, That of the sums appropriated
under this heading—(1) $23,748,420,000 shall be available for renewals of expiring section 8 tenant-
based annual contributions contracts (including renewals of enhanced vouchers under any provision
of law authorizing such assistance under section 8(t) of the Act) and including renewal of other
special purpose incremental vouchers: Provided, That notwithstanding any other provision of law,
from amounts provided under this paragraph and any carryover, the Secretary for the calendar year
2023 funding cycle shall provide renewal funding for each public housing agency based on validated
voucher management system (VMS) leasing and cost data for the prior calendar year and by applying
an inflation factor as established by the Secretary, by notice published in the Federal Register, and by
making any necessary adjustments for the costs associated with the first time renewal of vouchers
under this paragraph including tenant protection and Choice Neighborhoods vouchers: Provided
further, That none of the funds provided under this paragraph may be used to fund a total number of
unit months under lease which exceeds a public housing agency’s authorized level of units under
contract, except for public housing agencies participating in the Moving to Work (MTW)
demonstration, which are instead governed in accordance with the requirements of the MTW
demonstration program or their MTW agreements, if any: Provided further, That the Secretary shall,
to the extent necessary to stay within the amount specified under this paragraph (except as otherwise
modified under this paragraph), prorate each public housing agency’s allocation otherwise
established pursuant to this paragraph: Provided further, That except as provided in the following
provisos, the entire amount specified under this paragraph (except as otherwise modified under this
paragraph) shall be obligated to the public housing agencies based on the allocation and pro rata
method described above, and the Secretary shall notify public housing agencies of their annual
budget by the latter of 60 days after enactment of this Act or March 1, 2023: Provided further, That
the Secretary may extend the notification period with the prior written approval of the House and
Senate Committees on Appropriations: Provided further, That public housing agencies participating
in the MTW demonstration shall be funded in accordance with the requirements of the MTW
demonstration program or their MTW agreements, if any, and shall be subject to the same pro rata
adjustments under the preceding provisos: Provided further, That the Secretary may offset public
housing agencies’ calendar year 2023 allocations based on the excess amounts of public housing
agencies’ net restricted assets accounts, including HUD-held programmatic reserves (in accordance
with VMS data in calendar year 2022 that is verifiable and complete), as determined by the
Secretary: Provided further, That public housing agencies participating in the MTW demonstration
shall also be subject to the offset, as determined by the Secretary, excluding amounts subject to the
single fund budget authority provisions of their MTW agreements, from the agencies’ calendar year
2023 MTW funding allocation: Provided further, That the Secretary shall use any offset referred to in
the preceding two provisos throughout the calendar year to prevent the termination of rental
assistance for families as the result of insufficient funding, as determined by the Secretary, and to
                                                                                                        39


avoid or reduce the proration of renewal funding allocations: Provided further, That up to
$200,000,000 shall be available only: (A) for adjustments in the allocations for public housing
agencies, after application for an adjustment by a public housing agency that experienced a
significant increase, as determined by the Secretary, in renewal costs of vouchers resulting from
unforeseen circumstances or from portability under section 8(r) of the Act; (B) for vouchers that were
not in use during the previous 12-month period in order to be available to meet a commitment
pursuant to section 8(0)(13) of the Act, or an adjustment for a funding obligation not yet expended in
the previous calendar year for a MTW-eligible activity to develop affordable housing for an agency
added to the MTW demonstration under the expansion authority provided in section 239 of the
Transportation, Housing and Urban Development, and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 2016
(division L of Public Law 114-113); (C) for adjustments for costs associated with HUD-Veterans
Affairs Supportive Housing (HUD—VASH) vouchers; (D) for public housing agencies that despite
taking reasonable cost savings measures, as determined by the Secretary, would otherwise be
required to terminate rental assistance for families as a result of insufficient funding; (E) for
adjustments in the allocations for public housing agencies that—(i) are leasing a lower-than-average
percentage of their authorized vouchers, (11) have low amounts of budget authority in their net
restricted assets accounts and HUD-held programmatic reserves, relative to other agencies, and (111)
are not participating in the Moving to Work demonstration, to enable such agencies to lease more
vouchers; (F) for withheld payments in accordance with section 8(0)(8)(A)(ii) of the Act for months
in the previous calendar year that were subsequently paid by the public housing agency after the
agency’s actual costs were validated; and (G) for public housing agencies that have experienced
increased costs or loss of units in an area for which the President declared a disaster under title IV of
the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act 19 (42 U.S.C. 5170 et seq.):
Provided further, That the Secretary shall allocate amounts under the preceding proviso based on
need, as determined by the Secretary;

Tenant Protection:
$337,000,000 shall be available for section 8 rental assistance for relocation and replacement of
housing units that are demolished or disposed of pursuant to section 18 of the Act, conversion of
section 23 projects to assistance under section 8, relocation of witnesses (including victims of violent
crimes) in connection with efforts to combat crime in public and assisted housing pursuant to a
request from a law enforcement or prosecution agency, enhanced vouchers under any provision of
law authorizing such assistance under section (t) of the Act, Choice Neighborhood vouchers,
mandatory and voluntary conversions, and tenant protection assistance including replacement and
relocation assistance or for project-based assistance to prevent the displacement of unassisted elderly
tenants currently residing in section 202 properties financed between 1959 and 1974 that are
refinanced pursuant to Public Law 106-569, as amended, or under the authority as provided under
this Act: Provided, That when a public housing development is submitted for demolition or
disposition under section 18 of the Act, the Secretary may provide section 8 rental assistance when
the units pose an imminent health and safety risk to residents: Provided further, That the Secretary
may provide section 8 rental assistance from amounts made available under this paragraph for units
assisted under a project-based subsidy contract funded under the “*Project-Based Rental Assistance’’
heading under this title where the owner has received a Notice of Default and the units pose an
imminent health and safety risk to residents: Provided further, That of the amounts made available
under this paragraph, no less than $5,000,000 may be available to provide tenant protection
assistance, not otherwise provided under this paragraph, to residents residing in low vacancy areas
and who may have to pay rents greater than 30 percent of household income, as the result of: (A) the
maturity of a HUD-insured, HUD-held or section 202 loan that requires the permission of the
Secretary prior to loan prepayment; (B) the expiration of a rental assistance contract for which the
                                                                                                         40


tenants are not eligible for enhanced voucher or tenant protection assistance under existing law; or
(C) the expiration of affordability restrictions accompanying a mortgage or preservation program
administered by the Secretary: Provided further, That such tenant protection assistance made
available under the preceding proviso may be provided under the authority of section 8(t) or section
8(0)(13) of the Act: Provided further, That any tenant protection voucher made available from
amounts under this paragraph shall not be reissued by any public housing agency, except the
replacement vouchers as defined by the Secretary by notice, when the initial family that received any
such voucher no longer receives such voucher, and the authority for any public housing agency to
issue any such voucher shall cease to exist: Provided further, That the Secretary may only provide
replacement vouchers for units that were occupied within the previous 24 months that cease to be
available as assisted housing, subject only to the availability of funds;

Administrative Fees:

$2,777,612,000 shall be available for administrative and other expenses of public housing agencies in
administering the section 8 tenant-based rental assistance program, of which up to $30,000,000 shall
be available to the Secretary to allocate to public housing agencies that need additional funds to
administer their section 8 programs, including fees associated with section 8 tenant protection rental
assistance, the administration of disaster related vouchers, HUD—-VASH vouchers, and other special
purpose incremental vouchers: Provided, That no less than $2,747,612,000 of the amount provided in
this paragraph shall be allocated to public housing agencies for the calendar year 2023 funding cycle
based on section 8(q) of the Act (and related Appropriation Act provisions) as in effect immediately
before the enactment of the Quality Housing and Work Responsibility Act of 1998 (Public Law 105-—
276): Provided further, That if the amounts made available under this paragraph are insufficient to
pay the amounts determined under the preceding proviso, the Secretary may decrease the amounts
allocated to agencies by a uniform percentage applicable to all agencies receiving funding under this
paragraph or may, to the extent necessary to provide full payment of amounts determined under the
preceding proviso, utilize unobligated balances, including recaptures and carryover, remaining from
funds appropriated to the Department of Housing and Urban Development under this heading from
prior fiscal years, excluding special purpose vouchers, notwithstanding the purposes for which such
amounts were appropriated: Provided further, That all public housing agencies participating in the
MTW demonstration shall be funded in accordance with the requirements of the MTW
demonstration program or their MTW agreements, if any, and shall be subject to the same uniform
percentage decrease as under the preceding proviso: Provided further, That amounts provided under
this paragraph shall be only for activities related to the provision of tenant-based rental assistance
authorized under section 8, including related development activities;

Mainstream Vouchers:

$606,500,000 shall be available for the renewal of tenant-based assistance contracts under section
811 of the Cranston-Gonzalez National Affordable Housing Act (42 U.S.C. 8013), including
necessary administrative expenses: Provided, That administrative and other expenses of public
housing agencies in administering the special purpose vouchers in this paragraph shall be funded
under the same terms and be subject to the same pro rata reduction as the percent decrease for
administrative and other expenses to public housing agencies under paragraph (3) of this heading:
Provided further, That up to $10,000,000 shall be available only— (A) for adjustments in the
allocation for public housing agencies, after applications for an adjustment by a public housing
agency that experienced a significant increase, as determined by the Secretary, in Mainstream
renewal costs resulting from unforeseen circumstances; and (B) for public housing agencies that
                                                                                                           41

despite taking reasonable cost savings measures, as determined by the Secretary, would otherwise be
required to terminate the rental assistance for Mainstream families as a result of insufficient funding:
Provided further, That the Secretary shall allocate amounts under the preceding proviso based on
need, as determined by the Secretary: Provided further, That upon turnover, section 811 special
purpose vouchers funded under this heading in this or prior Acts, or under any other heading in prior
Acts, shall be provided to non-elderly persons with disabilities;

Tribal HUD-VASH       Renewals:

Of the amounts provided under paragraph 15 (1), up to $7,500,000 shall be available for rental
assistance and associated administrative fees for Tribal HUD—VASH to serve Native American
veterans that are homeless or at-risk of homelessness living on or near a reservation or other Indian
areas: Provided, That such amount shall be made available for renewal grants to recipients that
received assistance under prior Acts under the Tribal HUD-VASH program: Provided further, That
the Secretary shall be authorized to specify criteria for renewal grants, including data on the
utilization of assistance re-ported by grant recipients: Provided further, That such assistance shall be
administered in accordance with program requirements under the Native American Housing
Assistance and Self-Determination Act of 1996 and modeled after the HUD—VASH program:
Provided further, That the Secretary shall be authorized to waive, or specify alternative requirements
for any provision of any statute or regulation that the Secretary administers in connection with the
use of funds made available under this paragraph (except for requirements related to fair housing,
nondiscrimination, labor standards, and the environment), upon a finding by the Secretary that any
such waivers or alternative requirements are necessary for the effective delivery and administration
of such assistance: Provided further, That grant recipients shall report to the Secretary on utilization
of such rental assistance and other program data, as prescribed by the Secretary: Provided further,
That the Secretary may reallocate, as determined by the Secretary, amounts returned or recaptured
from awards under the Tribal HUD-VASH program under prior Acts to existing recipients under the
Tribal HUD-VASH program;

HUD-VASH      Program:

$50,000,000 shall be available for incremental rental voucher assistance for use through a supported
housing program administered in conjunction with the Department of Veterans Affairs as authorized
under section 8(0)(19) of the United States Housing Act of 1937: Provided, That the Secretary of
Housing and Urban Development shall make such funding available, notwithstanding section 203
(competition provision) of this title, to public housing agencies that partner with eligible VA Medical
Centers or other entities as designated by the Secretary of the Department of Veterans Affairs, based
on geographical need for such assistance as identified by the Secretary of the Department of Veterans
Affairs, public housing agency administrative performance, and other factors as specified by the
Secretary of Housing and Urban Development in consultation with the Secretary of the Department
of Veterans Affairs: Provided further, That the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development may
waive, or specify alternative requirements for (in consultation with the Secretary of the Department
of Veterans Affairs), any provision of any statute or regulation that the Secretary of Housing and
Urban Development administers in connection with the use of funds made available under this
paragraph (except for requirements related to fair housing, nondiscrimination, labor standards, and
the environment), upon a finding by the Secretary that any 5 such waivers or alternative requirements
are necessary for the effective delivery and administration of such voucher assistance: Provided
further, That assistance made available under this paragraph shall continue to remain available for
homeless veterans upon turn-over: Provided further, That of the total amount made available under
                                                                                                            42

this paragraph, up to $10,000,000 may be for additional fees established by and allocated pursuant to
a method determined by the Secretary for administrative and other expenses (including those eligible
activities defined by notice to facilitate leasing, such as security deposit assistance and costs related
to the retention and support of participating owners) of public housing agencies in administering
HUD-VASH vouchers;

Family Unification Program:

$30,000,000 shall be available for the family unification program as authorized under section 8(x) of
the Act: Provided, That the amounts made available under this paragraph are provided as follows:
(A) $5,000,000 shall be available for new incremental voucher assistance: Provided, That the
assistance made available under this subparagraph shall continue to remain available for family
unification upon turnover; and (B) $25,000,000 shall be available for new incremental voucher
assistance to assist eligible youth as defined by such section 8(x)(2)(B) of the Act: Provided, That
assistance made available under this subparagraph shall continue to remain available for such eligible
youth upon turnover: Provided further, That of the total amount made available under this
subparagraph, up to $15,000,000 shall be available on a noncompetitive basis to public housing
agencies that partner with public child welfare agencies to identify such eligible youth, that request
such assistance to timely assist such eligible youth, and that meet any other criteria as specified by
the Secretary: Provided further, That the Secretary shall review utilization of the assistance made
available under the preceding proviso, at an interval to be determined by the Secretary, and unutilized
voucher assistance that is no longer needed shall be recaptured by the Secretary and reallocated
pursuant to the preceding proviso: Provided further, That for any public housing agency
administering voucher assistance appropriated in a prior Act under the family unification program, or
made available and competitively selected under this paragraph, that determines that it no longer has
an identified need for such assistance upon turnover, such agency shall notify the Secretary, and the
Secretary shall recapture such assistance from the agency and reallocate it to any other public
housing agency or agencies based on need for voucher assistance in connection with such specified
program or eligible youth, as applicable;

New HCV     Incremental Vouchers:

$50,000,000 shall be available for new incremental voucher assistance under section 8(0) of the Act
to be allocated pursuant to a method, as determined by the Secretary, which may include a formula
that may include such factors as severe cost burden, overcrowding, substandard housing for very
low-income renters, homelessness, and administrative capacity, where such allocation method shall
include both rural and urban areas: Provided, That the Secretary may specify additional terms and
conditions to ensure that public housing agencies provide vouchers for use by survivors of domestic
violence, or individuals and families who are homeless, as defined in section 103(a) of the
McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act (42 U.S.C. 11302(a)), or at risk of homelessness, as
defined in section 401(1) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 11360(1));

Tracking of Special Purpose Vouchers:

The Secretary shall separately track all special purpose vouchers funded under this heading.

Additional amounts for Tenant-based Rental Assistance:
                                                                                                     43


For an additional amount for ‘“Tenant-Based Rental Assistance’’, $2,653,580,000, to remain
available until expended, for activities specified in paragraph (1) (excluding any Set-Asides) of such
heading in title II of division L of this consolidated Act.
                                                                                                           44

        Appendix B


                                           CY 2023 Offset for Reallocation

          HA   Number:
          HA   Name:


          CY 2022 End of Year Reserves

          PROTECTED CATEGORIES
          Difference between the PHA's Eligibility and Prorated Eligibility
>




          CY 2023 Amounts needed to fully lease VASH units
                Unfunded VASH UMAs (Capped)
                VASH PUC
                  Total Unfunded VASH      UMAs   Protected
          Difference between higher of December 2022 UMLs x 12 or CY 2022 UMLs up to baseline on units
          under CACC
                 December UMLs (Capped)
                  Inflated PUC
                  Total December    UMLs   Protected
          Difference between December 2022, PUC and Inflated CY 2023 PUC at capped annualized
          December leasing
rommo




          CY 2022 New incremental       BA- 1/2 of Eligibility
          CY 2022 Set Aside Protection- 1/2 of Eligibility
          CARES    Act HAP protection — Unspent Remaining        Funds”
          Portion of CY 2023 Renewal Eligibility (Based on units under CACC):
                 4% - 500 and above units
                 6% - 250 to 499 units
                 12% - Less than 250 units
          PHAs with CY 2022 inflation factors that were higher than the CY 2022 national weighted average
          inflator
                  Difference of CY 2022 Inflated Renewal Funding compared to CY 2023 Inflated Renewal funding is
                  Protected
          Protect 1/2 of RAD     1 HAP for Projects in their 1st Full of Year of Funding during CY 2022
          Total Funds Available for Offset
          Offset Amount (Total Funds Available for Offset x 52%)


          Prorated Eligibility After Offset
          PHAs that received 2022 Shortfall funds are exempt from this offset.
          PHAs that received 2022 Lower-than-average Leasing funds are exempt from this offset.

          *CARES Act HAP Awards are not part of PHA reserves, and consequently are not subject to offset.
                                                                                                    45


Appendix C

                          CY 2023 Housing Choice Voucher Program
                                        Special Fees

Application for $30 Million Set-Aside for some Categories of Special Fees HUD-VASH;
FUP; Disaster; Secretary’s Discretion and/or SAFMR

Name   of PHA:
PHA    Number:
Executive Director:


CHECK ALL BOXES THAT APPLY

         HUD-VASH

         FUP

  ___ Disaster-Related

       _ Special Fees Under the Secretary’s Discretion

SAFMR:
           ____ a. SAFMR    adoption

           ____ b. SAFMR-based payment exception standard

Documentation requirements and deadlines for each of the above categories are included in
Paragraph 6 of this notice. Email completed applications to 2023SpecialFees @hud.gov.

This certification must be signed by the appropriate PHA official and returned.
Certification: I hereby certify that all the information stated herein, as well as any information
provided in the accompaniment herewith, is true and accurate. I also certify that should funding
be awarded under any of the selected special fee categories per this page, that I will keep clear
and organized records on how all awarded the funds were spent should HUD request to review
the outcomes of this fee funding.    Warning: Anyone who knowingly submits a false claim or
makes a false statement is subject to criminal and/or civil penalties, including confinement for up
to 5 years, fines, and civil and administrative penalties (18 U.S.C. §§ 287, 1001, 1010, 1012; 31
U.S.C. $3729, 3802).


Signature of Executive Director and Date




Contact Name     and Phone Number
                                                                                                                  46

  Special Fee Example Budget Justification                                                     Appendix D
                                                                                            TOTAL FY23 BUDGET
                                             Budget FYE         Proposed HUD-VASH           WITH PROPOSED
Description                                  6/30/23            Special Fees                EXTRA FEES
RECEIPTS
 ADMIN FEE EARNED                                 1,028,855                        52,749                     1,081,604
 INTEREST ON RESERVE                                    800                                                         800
 OTHER                                               10,000                                                      10,000
TOTAL OP RECPTS                                   1,039,655                        52,749                     1,092,404
EXPENSE
 ADMIN SALARIES                                     607,254                    -                                607,254
  EMP BENEFITS                                      268,410                    -                                268,410
 TEMP HUD-VASH
COORDINATOR                                                                        35,360                        35,360
  LEGAL                                                 2,000                                                     2,000
  TRAINING                                             10,000                       3,784                        13,784
  AUDIT & ACCOUNTING                                    5,000                                                     5,000
  PHONES/MOBILE PHONES                                 10,000                         600                        10,600
  POSTAGE                                               8,000                       1,147                         9,147
  OFFICE SUPPLIES & EQUIP.                             12,000                       1,033                        13,033
  PUB. & MEMBERSHIPS                                    3,500                  -                                  3,500
  FSS EXPENSES                                         10,200                  -                                 10,200
  PORTABILE ADMIN FEE                                  16,500                  -                                 16,500
 SUNDRY ADMIN                                          22,000                                                    22,000
 EXTRA HUD-VASH ACTIVITIES:                                                        10,825                        10,825
   HUD-VASH DAY                     3600
   LANDLORD RECRUIT                 2400
   TRANSPORTATION                   4825
 INSURANCE                                             10,359                  -                                 10,359
TOTAL ADMIN    EXP                                  985,223                        52,749                     1,037,972
 CONTRACTS                                             35,000                  -                         -
TOTAL ORDINARY MAINT                                 35,000                    -                         -
TOTAL OPERATING EXP                               1,020,223                        52,749                     1,072,972
RESIDUAL RCPT/DEF                                    19,432                    -                                 19,432

 HSG ASSIST PYMTS                                 9,453,345
 HSG FUNDS RECEIVED                               9,453,345
 RESTRICTED FUNDS                                   -
                                       Calculation of Admin Fees earned
                                                @95% Lease Rate
Total # of HCV (PUM)                 1,444              1,372                      16,462

                                    ColA
                                    Rate     Col B Rate         Proration Rate              Admin Fee
                     Unit Months     7,200             9,262
                         CY 2023:   $82.19            $76.72                         79%                     $1,028,855
Appendix E

             Calculation of HUD-Confirmed Shortfall and Shortfall Amount

The amount that a PHA will be eligible to receive from the $200,000,000 HCV Program
HAP Set-Aside and the $10,000,000 Mainstream Voucher HAP Set-Aside will be
calculated by HUD, using HUD’s Two-Year Forecasting Tool (see link) and the most
recent validated voucher leasing and expense data available in VMS at the time the PHA’s
application is reviewed, including any updated information supplied by the PHA. HUD’s
Two-Year Forecasting Tool can be found at the Office of Housing Choice Vouchers
website that includes a link to the two-year tool instruction page.

The two-year tool compares all resources available (including ARP Extraordinary
Circumstances renewal adjustments for PUC increases) to support the PHA’s HAP
payments in CY 2023 with actual HAP expenses for 2023 projected through the end of the
CY based upon the best information available.

Resources are calculated using the HUD-calculated RNP as of 12/31/2022, the HUD-held
reserve as of 12/31/2022, the PHA’s actual Renewal Annual Budget Authority (ABA) for
2023, and any new voucher incremental funding applicable to CY 2023 or HAP Set-Aside
amounts awarded or expected to be awarded in 2023.

HAP expenses are calculated based on current leasing and expense data, projected through
the end of CY 2023; the PHA’s suspension of general voucher issuance; and projected
attrition based on actual attrition for the 12 months prior to the PHA’s request for HAP Set-
Aside funds, adjusted for accuracy if the PHA has more recent information that will impact
the attrition rate in future months, as reported in PIC, and considering any updated
information supplied by the PHA.

The requirement to suspend general voucher issuance is subject to the following
exclusions:

    1.   Vouchers issued to current HCV participants to allow them to move.

    2.   Vouchers issued to avert a reduction in leasing due to program attrition. The PHA
         must manage the issuance of these vouchers so that the PHA does not exceed the
         number of units leased at the time of the SPT-confirmed shortfall and any
         additional units that are also authorized to be leased in accordance with these
         requirements. Under the supervision of SPT, PHAs with the available budget
         authority and units to increase leasing in 2024, may issue vouchers off the waitlist
         as early as November 2023 in accordance with time from issuance to HAP
         execution.
                                                                                      48

    In general, a PHA may reissue the turnover voucher to a family from the PHA
    waiting list, except for eligible VASH turnovers where a referral is provided by the
    Veterans Administration Medical Centers (VAMC), issue the voucher to a family
    moving from a Project-Based Voucher (PBV) unit in accordance with 24 CFR
    983.261, or use the voucher to absorb a family under portability.

    However, a PBV family that has the right to move in accordance with 24 CFR
    983.261 and wishes to do so has priority for the turnover voucher.

. Instances in which the PHA is leasing under the HUD-VASH program up to the
  baseline level of units under all HUD-VASH allocations (not just recent
  allocations), including turnover of HUD-VASH vouchers.

. Vouchers issued to program applicants under Tenant Protection vouchers (TPVs)
  or special-purpose voucher increments awarded in CY 2022 or CY 2023. These
    SPVs include Family Unification Program (FUP), Non-Elderly Disabled (NED),
    and Foster the Youth to Independence (FYI) vouchers.

.   Project-Based Vouchers (PBV) under the Rental Assistance Demonstration (RAD),
    in their first full year of funding through the HCV Program.

. PHAs may allow applicants to move into PBV units to allow the PHA to meet its
  contractual obligation to fill PBV AHAP units being placed under HAP for the first
  time, and PBV units currently under HAP that are vacated by program participants.

    Vouchers issued pursuant to the settlement of litigation (“Litigation Vouchers’)
    against a PHA. PHAs must request approval to continue leasing Litigation
    Vouchers and submit supporting documentation. HUD will review and decide on a
    case-by-case basis using the supporting documentation received as the basis for the
    decision.

. Vouchers issued using funds awarded under the Lower-than-average Leasing HAP
  Set-Aside category.

. The Secretary reserves the right to consider additional exceptions on a case-by-case
  basis.

    PHAs cannot issue vouchers and/or execute HAP contracts for families that do not
    meet any of the exceptions through the end of CY 2023, or until advised in writing
    by the SPT that they no longer have a shortfall. In addition, HUD reserves the right
    to suspend leasing for any of the above exception categories or altogether if
    necessary.
                                                                                          49

The application period for shortfall Set-Aside funding will remain open until SPT has
reconciled Shortfalls for all PHAs for CY 2023, subject to funding availability. PHAs that
receive Set-Aside funds based on their current HAP costs are encouraged to maintain
contact with the SPT to ensure all shortfall needs are met. Similarly, PHAs that do not
initially qualify for shortfall funding because they have suspended leasing and expect to
decrease leasing by attrition are also encouraged to maintain contact with the local Field
Office and the SPT if the attrition fails to resolve their shortfall.

All PHAs applying for the shortfall Set-Aside must be working with HUD’s SPT at the
time of their application. The SPT will review the PHA’s funding available for 2023 and
their leasing and expense data to date, to determine whether the PHA has a shortfall and the
amount needed to resolve the shortfall. The PHA will continue to work with the SPT
throughout the year to monitor the PHA’s financial position and to implement cost savings
measures outlined in PIH Notice 2011-28 or a superseding notice published by HUD to
decrease the possibility of an increased shortfall. PHAs must adhere to the eligibility
requirements detailed in Section 12 of this Notice or a superseding notice.

Factors considered by the SPT to determine the amount of a potential shortfall will be
determined as follows:

   a.   Cash Supported Total Reserves as of 12/31/2022: SPT will use the Cash
        Supported Total Reserves as of 12/31/2022, which consists of the HUD-Held
        Reserve, and the lower of HUD-Estimated RNP, PHA Reported RNP as of
        12/31/2022, or the actual amount of cash on hand to support the RNP. If there is a
        discrepancy with any of these amounts the PHA will be required to provide
        documentation as requested before this adjustment will be made.

   b.   HUD-held reserve as of 12/31/2022:     SPT will use the balance reported to SPT by
        HUD’s FMC.

   c.   2023 Renewal ABA:     Actual renewal ABA awards for CY 2023.


   d.   SPV and tenant protection funding and Set-Asides: FMC will provide amounts
        to be made available to the PHA in CY 2023 for special-purpose voucher and tenant
        protection funding increments applicable to any portion of CY 2023, and for any
        Set-Aside funding previously awarded in CY 2023. If necessary, the SPT will
        make adjustments to the shortfall Set-Aside award to ensure that new increment
        funding for Mainstream, SPVs, Lower-than-average Leasing Set-Aside, and/or
        TPVs remains available to lease the newly awarded number of SPVs and/or TPVs,
        rather than being used to cover the general shortfall.
                                                                                          50

    Unit months leased:    The unit months leased (UML) for CY 2023 will be projected
    by taking the number of units reported in VMS in the last month available and
    projecting that number through the end of the year. Reductions to projected leasing
    will be made to adjust for attrition, in accordance with the annual turnover rate used
    in the two-year tool. This rate is derived from the PHA’s PIC data on families end
    of participation (EOP). Increases to projected leasing will be made for vouchers
    issued prior to the date of the notification by the SPT of a potential shortfall and for
    additional leasing resulting from the admission of families described in each
    exception category above except that no adjustments will be made for mover
    families who receive vouchers in accordance with category 1.

    Total HAP expense:     Total HAP expense for CY 2023 will be based on a
    projection of the unit months leased for CY 2023 (described in e above) at the per-
    unit cost taken from the PHA’s most recent VMS report, and considering any
    updated information supplied by the PHA. If the PHA’s PUC increases in future
    months, and the PHA again determines that it is in danger of a shortfall, an
    additional shortfall award may be made without the need to reapply.

.   Vouchers issued or projected to be issued:      The number of vouchers issued as of
    the date of notification by the SPT of a potential shortfall, as shown in the PHA’s
    VMS report, will be used to determine future leasing, if any, from vouchers issued
    prior to the date of notification by the SPT of a potential shortfall. PHAs can only
    reissue turnover vouchers after receiving SPT notification of a potential
    shortfall. Planned issuances for vouchers exempt from the suspension will be
    shown in the months they will be issued. The projected HAP costs for these units
    will be affected by the voucher success rate provided by the PHA and average time
    from issuance of the voucher to the HAP effective date. HUD has the right to
    suspend leasing altogether if necessary.

    Other Planned Additions or Reductions to Leased Units: This field incorporates
    into the leasing schedule other planned additions to leasing with fixed start dates,
    such as the dates that PBV units currently under AHAP are scheduled to come
    under HAP. The calculated HAP cost for these units is not subject to the success
    rate calculation.

    2023 Year-End Total HAP Reserve Balance: Any PHA with a negative projected
    2023 year-end balance will be considered a shortfall PHA. PHAs with year-end
    balances of $0 or above will not be considered shortfall PHAs or eligible to receive
    shortfall Set-Aside funds.

    Available UNP and Other Non-Federal Cash: In cases where the needed
    shortfall amount is hard to determine due to factors like many potential voucher
    lease ups still to occur, rapidly changing PUCs, unclear attrition rates, etc., the SPT
                                                                                 51

will consider the availability UNP or other non-federal cash that the PHA could use
to temporarily cover HAP payments and may reduce the shortfall award amount
accordingly. If the shortfall award does not fully meet the need, the PHA then has
UNP or other non-federal funds to ensure all landlords get paid on time, and the
SPT can provide an additional shortfall award at the appropriate time to make the
HCV or Mainstream Vouchers whole, allowing the PHA to repay the UNP or other
non-federal account for the amount borrowed to pay landlords on time.” This
would reduce the number of shortfall awards that are estimated and end up more
than the PHA actually needed.
                                                                                                                            52




       Appendix L

             CY 2023 Quick Reference and Timeline Sheet for HAP Set-Aside Funds

Category            Deadline     PHA must submit - Failure to provide the items identified in each of the              Mainstrea
                    Date         below categories the PHA applies in DocuSign, WILL result in a                        m Voucher
                                 rejection of the PHA’s application(s)                                                 Set-Aside
                                                                                                                       Eligibility
1.   Shortfall      Will               e      Completed and signed 2023 Appendix F                                     Yes
     Funds          remain       *All applications must be submitted in DocuSign.
                    open
2a. Unforeseen      09/29/2023            Completed and signed 2023 Appendix G, and,                                   Yes
    Circumstances                         Written narrative describing the unforeseen circumstances their
                                          relationship to the significantly increased renewal costs in CY 2023.
                                          PHAs applying for unforeseen circumstances under both their HCV
                                          Program and Mainstream Vouchers, are required to provide a
                                          narrative for each.
                                 *All applications and additional requirements must be submitted in
                                 DocuSign.

2b. Portability     06/16/2023         e      Completed and signed 2023 Appendix H                                     No
                                 *All applications must be submitted in DocuSign.

3a. PBV             06/16/2023         e      Completed and signed 2023 Appendix H                                     No
                                       e      Completed and signed 2023 Appendix I for each project

                                 AHAP For each PBV project:
                                    e  The page which identifies the parties to the AHAP (both the Housing
                                       Authority and the owner);
                                    e  Identification of the project;
                                    e   Section 1.1A which identifies the effective date of the agreement;
                                    e   Section 1.1B which identifies the date of the commencement of the
                                             work;
                                       e      Section 1.1C which identifies the time for completion of the work;
                                       e     Exhibit C which identifies the units by size and applicable initial
                                             contract rents for the units to be project-based;
                                       e     If the project is to be completed in stages: Exhibit E which identifies
                                             the schedule of completion of stages (if applicable) (This exhibit
                                             shall identify the units in each stage); and
                                       e     Signature page which provides the signature of both the Housing
                                             Authority and the owner and the dates the AHAP was signed.

                                 HAP       Contract:   To be eligible for Set-Aside funding, the HAP contract must
                                 be executed within CY2023. If the HAP Contract has not been executed by
                                 the application submission date, the PHA must state when the HAP contract
                                 will be executed. If the HAP contract has been executed by the application
                                 submission date, the PHA must provide, from PART 1 of the HAP
                                 Contract for New Constructions or Rehabilitation, the following;
                                      e    The page which identifies the parties to the HAP Contract (both the
                                             Housing Authority and the owner);
                                                                                                                   53


Category        Deadline     PHA must submit - Failure to provide the items identified in each of the            Mainstrea
                Date         below categories the PHA applies in DocuSign, WILL result in a                      m Voucher
                             rejection of the PHA’s application(s                                                Set-Aside
                                                                                                                 Eligibility
                                       Exhibit A which identifies the total number of units in the project
                                       covered by the HAP Contract; the initial Contract Rent to owner, and
                                       the number and description of the contract units;
                                       If the project is to be completed in stages: in addition to item b.
                                       described in the above AHAP section that states the requirement for
                                       the “Identification of the project’, Exhibit A must also identify the
                                       units to be completed in each phase covered by the HAP Contract;
                                       Exhibit   B which identifies the services, maintenance and utilities to
                                      be provided by the owner;
                                      Exhibit C which identifies the utilities available in the contract unit,
                                      including a listing of utility services to be paid by the owner (without
                                      charges in addition to the rent to owner) and utilities to be paid by
                                      the tenant;
                                      Section 2a which identifies the initial term of the contract; and
                                      Signature page which provides the signature of both the Housing
                                      Authority and the owner and the dates the HAP was signed.
                             *All applications and additional requirements must be submitted in
                             DocuSign.

3b.   MTW New   06/16/2023   For PBV    Commitment:
      Cohorts                          Completed and signed 2023 Appendix H;
                                       Completed and signed 2023 Appendix I for each project;
                                       The full list of requirements shown under “1. AHAP” in the
                                       submission requirements section for the above Category 3a PBV, for
                                       each PBV commitment for which a request is being made under this
                                       category; and
                                       The full list of requirements shown under “2. HAP” as described in
                                       the submission requirements section for the above Category 3a.
                                       PBV, for each PBV commitment for which a request is being made
                                       under this category.

                             For MTW-eligible commitment/activity development (excluding PBV):
                                      Completed and signed 2023 Appendix H;
                                      Completed and signed 2023 Appendix J for each project;
                                      An approved Annual PHA Plan and MTW Supplement,
                                      identifying the PHA’s binding agreement indicating its planned use
                                      of HAP funding, for each MTW-eligible development commitment
                                      for which a request is being made under this category; and
                                      Documentation to demonstrate the PHA will require an outlay or
                                      expenditure of funds, immediately or in the future for the MTW-
                                      eligible development activity to include the submission of any
                                      completed HUD documentation to date as it relates to the
                                      development, for each MTW-eligible development commitment for
                                      which a request is being made under this category.
                             *All applications and additional requirements must be submitted in
                             DocuSign.

4.    HUD-      09/29/2023             Completed and signed Appendix H with a. and/or b. marked.
      VASH                                 a. Per Unit Cost Increase: For PHAs whose program-wide
                                               funded CY 2023 HAP PUC is less than their current HUD-
                                               VASH HAP PUC based on their latest HUD-VASH HAP
                                                                                                                     54


Category          Deadline     PHA must submit - Failure to provide the items identified in each of the            Mainstrea
                  Date         below categories the PHA applies in DocuSign, WILL result in a                      m Voucher
                               rejection of the PHA’s a     lication(s                                             Set-Aside
                                                                                                                   Eligibility
                                                  expenses in CY 2023, HUD will calculate eligibility under
                                                  this category. Therefore, no additional documentation will
                                                  be required or accepted other than Appendix H, which must
                                                  be completed, signed and submitted by the deadline date.
                                                  and/or
                                             b.  Leasing Increase: For PHAs whose HUD-VASH leasing
                                                 for CY 2023 will exceed the leasing level included in their
                                                 renewal funding, plus the leasing that will be supported by
                                                 the RNP and HUD-Held Program Reserves, HUD will
                                                 calculate eligibility under this category. Therefore, no
                                                 additional documentation will be required or accepted other
                                                 than Appendix H, which must be completed, signed and
                                                 submitted by the deadline date.
                               *All applications and additional requirements must be submitted in
                               DocuSign.

5.   Lower-       06/16/2023            Completed and signed 2023 Signed Appendix H;
     than-                     *All applications and additional requirements must be submitted in
     average                   DocuSign.
     Leasing
6.   Disaster     12/29/2023   Loss of Units Category of Disaster:
                                        Completed and signed 2023 Appendix K;
                                        Written narrative, detailing the impact of the disaster that has caused
                                        a loss of units, the PHA’s assessment of the availability of rental
                                        housing stock in the PHAs jurisdiction, a description of any plans in
                                        the jurisdiction to increase the availability of rental stock, which may
                                        include the PHA’s plan to project-base additional vouchers to
                                        increase the supply of units available to voucher families, and the
                                        number of families currently on the PHA’s HCV waiting list and if
                                        the waiting list is currently open or closed;
                                        Evidence to support the narrative; and
                                        The number of months impacted in CY 2023 by the loss of units.

                               Increased Costs Category of Disaster:
                                        Completed and signed Appendix K;
                                        Written narrative detailing the impact the disaster had in causing the
                                        increased costs, the PUC requested;
                                        Evidence to support the narrative (how the requested PUC was
                                        determined); and
                                        The number of months impacted in CY 2023 by the loss of units.
                               *All applications and additional requirements must be submitted in
                               DocuSign.

7.   NLT          6/16/2023             Completed and signed 2023 Appendix H;
     Inspection                         A spreadsheet identifying the amount of CY 2022 withheld HAP, by
     Withheld                           unit, by month, and the date of the retroactive payment was made to
     Housing                            the owner in CY 2023; and
     Assistance
                                        PHAs are required to enter their HAP expense amounts for NLT
     Payments
                                        Inspection Withheld HAP in VMS.
                                                                                                   55


Category   Deadline   PHA must submit - Failure to provide the items identified in each of the   Mainstrea
           Date       below categories the PHA applies in DocuSign, WILL result in a             m Voucher
                      rejection of the PHA’s application(s                                       Set-Aside
                                                                                                 Eligibility
                      *All applications and additional requirements must be submitted in
                      DocuSign.
