Developing the Processes and Potential to Engage Historically
Underrepresented Communities in Public Participation in STEM
   Research Through Authentic and Impactful Collaboration

                        Year 4 Final Report
                           DRL #1811234



             IMPACT STATEMENTS                                  ts
How has
this project wz
impacted
yous
     JOHN ANNONI,       Co-PI
     In my career, there are many experiences that could qualify
as life-changing. But, the most transformative experience was
being named a Co-Principal Investigator for the Noise Project. |
have taught for over 3 decades in a place not many want to be
and finally had a chance to work, hand in hand, alongside an
institution and foundation many desire to be with. My learnings
while supported by Cornell and The National Science Foundation
were driven by the people | worked directly with during this three-
and-a-half-year noise pollution education and research effort. The
other Co-Pi’s, Community Science Collaborators, the Cornell staff
and the people in Allentown, both City Government and everyday
people all played a part in me becoming a better listener, data
collector, speaker and citizen scientist.   Embracing a role that is
awarded based upon decades of hard work sets up a frame of
                                                                                 Illustration by Fay Williams
mind that can make a person cautious but also tremendously
caring. That theme of conscientiously caring is what | hope | gave
to the project and to the people it touched. The research we
focused on, noise and community, are commonly found in discussions but at times exclusive. | tried
to make them more inclusive. My work also focused on the opportunity for a community leader
being able to develop and deliver a piece of science work traditionally led by institutions. This fresh
attempt was a break from the norm and a new beginning for what science may be seen as. Our
efforts were helpful in bridging the gap between science and communities, especially underserved
communities.     Asa leader in the project, | lived by our four pillars: Commitment and Collaboration,
Power and Privilege, Realities and Reliance and Trust and Transparency.       | carried them into the
community as a source of light. The most obvious thing that | discovered was the advantage of
working as part of many subgroups. | learned that when Trust and Transparency is the foundation
of discussion it leads to innovative ideas and less fear of true open dialogue. It becomes obvious
that everyone has their own point of view, and many different ideas can be produced. | found our
foundation of group participation rules made me feel more energetic about contributing but ina
manner that was thoughtful of other perspectives. | could give to others my views while still being
accountable to my sense of person.      That one simple fact of sharing while caring is a BIG win and
definitely a deeply developed part of my leadership style. | learned that good teamwork is the key to
success in designing activities and strategic planning when time and resources are limited. However,
learning how to hold your words or reframe them can be just as productive when working with
limited time. Our non-negotiables that have been developed allowed me a framework to work within
comfortably, setting tables for personal engagements.       In fact, our developed list of non-negotiables
is   asample and recommendation      | would suggest for all collaborative efforts that require dialogue
from different perspectives. Reflecting back on the time | have spent with many good people trying
to build a bridge between community and institutions in and with science, makes me realize just
how much | have grown. | went from being a teacher, (and CEO of a community nonprofit) that was
not confident in his abilities to lead a project of this magnitude into someone who found his own
leadership science relatable style. | became effective, engaging and efficient for those | attempted
to help. While | look back at the project, it was a journey which went far beyond noise pollution.              |
became my own experiment, taking myself through a personal scientific method of guessing, trying,
failing, correcting and learning and for that process and opportunity, |’ll be forever grateful.
TANYA SCHUH, Co-PI
As | process what the last 3.5 years have held, it is quite the mixed bag. On one hand, it has been so
oowerful to be a part of a group that works so hard and soa intentionally to improve the experience
of diverse communities engaging in spaces where they have been historically underrepresented.
There have been trials and errors, and then many successes, in finding equitable ways to hold all
voices as equals as we collaborate, co-create, make decisions, and disseminate our findings. it has
been powerful to see the ways that this team has been able to support each other as we learn and
grow, but also have the opportunity to use our expertise in settings where it hasn't been historically
valued.   it has been amazing over the years to see such positive response from the various
audiences as we present our research, framework, and ways of working. | am hopeful that many
institutions, communities, and various settings are impacted, in big ways and small, by learning
from our work, research, and example.



| have been struck by the depth that has come through community coding, when research
isn’t done by a few and with only the institutional perspective. in the past project, | have seen
how watered down and broad the traditional, institutional-led research results were. Asa
representative from a community-based organization, the results represented my experiences,
however, they were presented in a way that did not fully explain the specific challenges that we
often face when working with science institutions. Seeing these results made me wonder how
true change can happen when the real issues are not being addressed in meaningful ways.        in
contrast, seeing the research and recommendations that were presented by us ICBOs made me
hopeful that real changes could come in these types of callaborations — which is one of the main
reasons why | decided to join this second project (in addition to the access and opportunities that
it would create for my students and graduates}. Again, ’m proud of the research that our ICBO
collaboration and the team has done ~ the research shines a light on many issues of inequities
between collaborations, the reasons they exist, and truly highlight what must be overcome in order
to advance science in ways that are truly equitable and invalve all communities.



it has not been an easy road. As our work and ways of working go against the status quo, there
have been many issues working witnin the confines of a traditional science institution. Besides
systemic issues regarding funding and processes, we have not been supported by many people or
systems within the institution. These issues have caused drama, significant delays in the work, and
uitimately, the unilateral decision to deny us the opportunity to apply for a supplement. Seeing
codes and research results play out in real time and in real life has made it even more evident why
our research and work is so important.


lam hopeful that while within the institution, we have encountered numerous obstacles, that the
NSF will use their power and privilege and take our research, our stories, and our recommendations
and create reali change within the field. | hope that the NSF sees the value in communities and
invests in community leadership, encouraging change within the field and leading by example.
There are plenty of reasons why it would be “too hard” or “too inconvenient” to lead and prioritize
these changes.   However, the risk and loss that would come by not is far greater.
 MORE TIME SPENT IN PARKS CAN
HELP AGAINST NEGATIVE FEELINGS
                                                        FEELINGS LIKE...




        FEELINGS
        THAT CAN BE
        Raia.




                            ustration by Fay Williams
BOBBY WILSON,         Co-PI
The fast twelve months have been filled with challenges, to say the least. The NOISE Project is
poised to take its place in pandemic history between the tale of two cities—the good and the
bad. We have seen success and we have seen failure. We have come a long way, and despite our
successes, we have experienced significant setbacks.
Personally, | have the feeling that the NOISE Team is facing the possibility of fracture. And yet,
from my lived experiences as an African American male let me know that everything will be alright.
There is no doubt in my mind that each one of us will go on to have bigger, brighter, and greater
impact by centering justice, equity, diversity, and inclusion within the communities thet we serve.
Why? Because of the NOISE Project, each of us has benefited from the exposure to and learning
of a language that has empowered        us to speak our truth, to name injustice, to work together in
solidarity and mutuality to improve the quality of life for those who we have been called upon to
serve.
March 7, 2022 was a day filled with uncertainty from the perspective that each of the NOISE Team
members who participated in the call with lan Owens. The Co-Pis and ICBOs poured out our hearts
and our souls in a very professional way——a way that | have never witnessed over the last eight
years that we have been working together.
lam proud to be a part of this great team and the great work that we have done.         | look forward to
crossing paths with my colleagues as often as opportunity will allow.

After three years of co-creation, we now have a NOISE App, a white paper, and an article published
in BloScience, a major science journal. We have reached a point in our research where the focus
has shifted to communication and dissemination.        The question | raise now is, how can we, as
individuals and as a collective body, continue to communicate, disseminate, assist, and assess our
efforts in changing the way that large institutions collaborate with community-based organizations?
This question centers on equity and continues to be at the heart of moving this great nation
forward.   For the record,    | make no apologies for the statements that | made in “The Soul of a Man”.
MAUF is committed to communicating and disseminating this work beyond the wails of our
collaboration. We are communicating with HBCUs and disseminating the research and the app
to the young minds within those institutions. We are sharing the research and the app with
elementary, middie, and high school students from marginalized and underserved communities,
with marginalized and disadvantaged farmers, other community-based organizations like MAUF, as
well as with families, friends, and acquaintances. This work has been and will continue to be at the
core of what we do at MAUF.
The candle that centers on equity has been lit. Yet, it appears that those with power and privilege
desire to cover it under a bushel basket. What began as the flicker of a candle is now a forest fire
and it is burning within the hearts and souls of the Co-Pis, the ICBOs, and of those of us who are
disseminating this great work. For those with power and privilege who desire us to go away, they
are in for a rude awakening.     The impact that we are having upon our communities and upon the
next generation is too significant for us to abandon now. The NOISE Project and its impact is here
to stay.
           Illustration by Fay Williams
                                          l
é<
     The candle that centers on
         equity has been lit...”
MAKEDA      CHEATOM,       Co-PI

I’ve been on this journey for 8 years ago with my colleagues,
the ICBOs from different parts of the nation working for
their communities to have a more livable community. As a
community organizer living in a town of conservative values
doing cultural work and not receiving help or recognition, we
were welcomed with open arms. We’ve all joined together
for the same cause of social change in our communities.
We have seen throughout the years that grassroots
community-based organizations run by BIPOC communities
have always had to prove their expertise. It has been no
different at the WorldBeat Center. Located in Balboa Park,
San Diego, a central location for nationally recognized
cultural institutions, WorldBeat Center has been excluded
from collaborations with institutions. It took a national                 Illustration by Fay Williams
collaboration like the Noise Project to be recognized and
respected as an institution and as a director.


Within a year, WorldBeat Center and | were invited to form various collaborations in the Park as
well as be members of various committees. These committees have historically lacked diversity and
have shown prejudice toward those who did not hold to their standards of degrees, experience, and
class. Balboa Park and its institutions have also protected their reputation and after the protests
that came from George Floyd and it became a national trend to commit to Equity, Diversity and
Inclusion, the institutions and committees invested in everything they could think of to show they
were also committed to EDI.


Some of the committees that come of Balboa Park’s Cultural Partnership Committee for EDI that
Makeda is now a part of include the Balboa Park Cultural District Advisory Board which aims at
helping guide the development of an Experience Plan by including a diverse set of community
voices from all sectors of San Diego with a variety of expertise. In addition, | am the leader of the
Inclusion, Diversity, Equity, and Accessibility Task Force for the Balboa Park Cultural Partnership
which is helping guide an IDEA framework for the Partnership.



Most recently, | have been invited as a project advisor for a new grant project proposed by the
Reuben H. Fleet Science Center. My experience as a CO-PI in the Noise Project and trust within the
BIPOC community have highlighted me as an asset for collaborations.



With the Noise Project, | was able to bring back the research to my community in San Diego and
show that science is for all. In the site research, | was able to combine art with STEM and do STEAM.
What gave me the greatest satisfaction was to see the community engaged in the Noise Project.
It was rewarding to share education on the health effects of noise pollution. This experience as
a community CO-PI is dedicated to my parents who weren’t able to finish elementary school, my
ancestors, all community leaders and the future generations.
  CATHERINE PHAM, ICBO            Advisor


Hi!   I’m Catherine Pham in Washington, D.C. My background is in clinical
social work and education. | first became involved with the Cornell Lab of
Ornithology through the Celebrate Urban Birds program nine years ago.
At the time, | was working in a large social services organization, Miriam’s
Kitchen, working with people experiencing chronic homelessness.       | lead a
weekly walking/birdwatching group, and we were thrilled to receive a mini-
grant from the Lab. In addition to our weekly outings and data collection
efforts, at the end of our grant year, we threw an amazing bird festival in
our dining room, attended by hundreds of people - think bird yoga groups,
bird-themed snacks, spontaneous bird poetry, a bird party playlist, a bird-
themed art exhibit, a bird call contest, and so much more. It was quite an
event! | left Miriam’s Kitchen in 2017 and soon after began to teach nature and outdoor education to the
pre-K grades at Sacred Heart/Sagrado Corazon, a bilingual (Spanish/English) Catholic School in DC. Being
in nature with 3 and 4 year olds was entirely different, with new joys and challenges. We were fortunate
to receive a Celebrate Urban Birds mini-grant at Sagrado Corazon, and our events engaged the school
community and neighborhood as well. (In fact, when we hung our homemade bird feeders around the
school we got some complaints from neighbors because of the increase in bird droppings!) One of our
favorite experiments was studying which type of bird seed our focal species preferred. As you can imagine,
the two projects | worked on were very different from one another.     On the surface | have explained some
of our activities. But here are the most important things: At Miriam’s Kitchen, our group of participants
who lived outside were contributing to science. The data we submitted to Cornell was part of a citizen
science project. One of our group members said to me that being a part of this project was important
to him because it gave him an identity other than being homeless. At Sacred Heart, we also contributed
to citizen science - even at ages 3 and 4. Those kids knew so much about the eight bird species we were
focusing on, and by the end of each school year, the kids considered themselves citizen scientists who
contributed to the Lab’s bird counts and helped keep the birds in DC’s Rock Creek Park safe.       Being part
of the CUBs program helped science become accessible to the students in a way that boosted confidence
and showed them a possible future in science. As one tiny citizen scientists told me “My work is important,
and the birds depend on me.” Being part of the CUBs program was a completely positive and enriching
experience for me and the participants in both of the settings | described.      | am forever grateful to Karen
Purcell and Marilu Fretts from the Lab, as they went out of their way countless times, including sending
pens and fun stuff to a Miriam’s Kitchen guest who moved into housing (!), and comforting a class of pre-K3
year olds who found a dead bird on one of their expeditions and were inconsolable. (In this instance, Karen
hopped onto a Zoom call with us and explained about wildlife’s “cycle of life.”) | have been a part of the
NOISE Project since the beginning.   | am grateful to have been a part of this project and to have met so
many people | would never have crossed paths with - scientists, IT specialists, app creators, and Cornell
Lab leadership. While | am proud of the work the NOISE Project has done, it has been difficult pretty much
every step of the way. On the one hand, the work of the ICBOs has been sought after and needed, but
only if it fits into the university’s academic mold, including how funding is organized, and how decisions
are made. | feel that what has happened with our project in many ways mirrors what has been happening
in our country and in communities that | am part of in Washington, DC.        Specifically, | mean that “systems”
are being nudged to change so that more voices can be at the table, and in particular voices of black and
brown people. | hope that the Lab’s future includes more emphasis on including diverse voices on staff, in
leadership, and in general. It matters. Thank you.
     YAO FOLI, ICBO Advisor
     The NOISE Project has geared me towards
     understanding community-led science projects. | joined
     the ICBOs in 2018. | was naive about equity, diversity,
     and inclusion before joining the ICBOs. The realities
     and challenges of our communities are inevitable.
     In addition, with the system’s hidden agenda and
     structure, it is adverse for the advancement of science
     and the benefit of science. How could a community
     thrive without knowing its worth?


     Working with community leaders and scientists all
     over the United States has given me the exposure to
     learn and better understand the barriers communities
     encounter in collaborations.



     This project has also helped me understand the
     importance of process and decision-making as a
                                                                            Illustration by Fay Williams
     community leader and a community educator. | had
     the understanding that inclusivity opens the door for
     diversity and leads to equity and justice standing for all
     but not for one.


     With all the knowledge, the skills, the tools, and the packages the noise pollution research
     provided, | am currently drafting a noise pollution project and food justice research for the Learning
     Farm and Enfield elementary school in Enfield, New York.

     The noise pollution research focuses on monitoring sound levels from the earphone and
     loudspeakers and identifying safe sound levels from the earphone and loudspeakers.
      | have been conducting noise pollution research focused on the corn mill machine in Hohoe, Volta
     Region, Ghana. The corn mill machine produces 100 decibels.


     With the help and support of Celebrate Urban Birds and the Cornell Lab of ornithology via the
     NOISE Project, in 2021, | started a birds education project called, Bring back the birds. Bring back
     the birds is to help explain the relationship between birds, humans, and the environment in our
     local dialect, Ewe. Bring Back the Bird is an initiative that will take place in Hohoe, Ndor, and Tonglo
     communities in Ghana. The goals of the project are to use equity-based processes, co-creation,
     non-negotiables, and agreements to work with the community to bring a great connection with
     birds.


     The noise pollution research did not only teach me many things, but it has also connected me to
     great minds!



10
     CECILIA ALVAREZ AND JUAN FLORES, ICBO Advisors
     For us, participating in this project has been an
     honor and we have been able to learn about the
     importance of collaborative work and co-creation.
     This not only generates a positive impact on each
     of us as people, but also helps us understand the
     impact that reference frameworks can have on
     projects. When the frameworks under which an
     investigation is conducted come from the point of
     view of the dominant culture, they may not have the
     necessary impact within the community; instead,
     when we conduct our research with a framework
     that is created from the perspective of the
     community, it is accompanied by equitable processes
     from the beginning, where the community is part
     of the entire process, from creating the protocols,
     establishing the research questions research, data
     collection, analysis and dissemination of results in
     creative ways and in a way that the community can
     understand and why not, that are an inspiration
     and example, either to continue the research or to
     answer other questions that have arisen from it.



     During the project we were able to learn about how                 Illustration by Victor Puga
     noise affects us and why it is important to know its
     repercussions on our health, how we can take care
     of ourselves, what laws protect us and how we can become aware of the noise that we ourselves
     generate, how we can have changes in our behavior to take care of our health and that of our
     neighbor, how we can create refuges of silence for our home, work and our community and why they
     are important for our well-being.


     After learning, the next thing was to share with our community, and find ways to do it. We understood
     that we have different audiences and different ways of learning in our community, so we had to find
     different ways of disseminating knowledge. One of them was art, another was through talks with
     students, we gave workshops for the general public, where people could express and share their
     experiences with drawings and talking about what was happening at home or work and how they
     were dealing with pollution. acoustics.


     Banners were also printed with the most important information to be able to make itinerant
     exhibitions where people can, through a QR code, learn more about the project and learn more about
     this important issue that affects us all.




12
We did a year-long investigation to find out about noise and birds, now decibels are related to the
number of species that can be observed in a certain place, and if there is a relationship between a
higher number of decibels and fewer species. For this investigation, 6 points were chosen (3 for noise
and 3 for silence with similar characteristics} in 3 Protected Natural Areas, one Federal, one State and
one Municipal. in addition, an important fact is that each of them is in areas of high, medium and
low economic level and also provides interesting data regarding it. Since noise is also directly related
to this issue, when you have an area with a higher purchasing power, you have less noise pollution.
Another important thing about this project is that when analyzing how the data would be obtained and
what equipment would be used, we thought that we wanted this project to be easily replicable by any
community that wanted to do it, without having to invest too much in it. The app was in the process of
being created, but today it is a reality and it can help in an incredible way, for when we did the project
we used a camera, a sound level meter, binoculars and a notebook to document the bird species, later
they were uploaded to the ebird platform. it is important to point out that during this project we had
the pandemic and the support of the authorities, both from the government and from the Natural
Protected Areas, was essential to carry out our work without interruption, since there was restricted
mobility in the city. We also suffered from tropical storms and two hurricanes during September and
October of that year. Another relevant thing is that a new species could be registered for the list of the
Nichupté Mangroves ANP, the Wedge-tailed Sabrewing. The results of this project have been shared
through talks via zoom due to the pandemic, through the ecology secretariat, public and private
universities, the Quintana Roo planetarium network, among others.



In collaboration with Celebra las Aves Urbanas, Green Jay Bird Conservancy and teacher and artist
Victor Puga, we made an e-book called “Equity in birdwatching, reflections and experiences” which
is a tool to invite you to reflect on issues such as equity, inclusion, discrimination, social justice and
community-led science. In the same way, we share examples that help to carry out actions to learn and
better understand the great responsibility that we have as a community and as individuals, so that all
people can know and participate in the different activities that are carried out in the Community, such
as Bird Watching. Addressing these issues and knowing them from different perspectives will help enrich
knowledge to apply it for the benefit of less privileged groups, who have been victims of discrimination
and also send a message that helps preserve the natural wealth of the planet. The events caused by
racist acts, the COVID-19 pandemic and the wars that take place every day around the world, commit
us to Know and work more on these issues. Birdwatching is an activity that is constantly growing in
different parts of the world, it is important that it is carried out under the principles of fairness, equality,
justice and without discrimination. We have the firm conviction that knowledge, science, education,
care for the environment and dialogue are the main strengths we have to achieve structural and
significant changes that help us to have fair, equitable and inclusive societies.




                                                                                                              43
     | want to mention that having the opportunity to work closely with the IT Team in the creation of the
     app was incredible, this co-creation was a complex process, but the result of this application and its
     impact is incredible. Many communities can use the data generated not only to learn more about
     noise pollution, but also to demonstrate to the authorities in which areas of the community there are
     more problems and with data they can even generate changes in public policies.


     The community-led research coding was a whole learning process, definitely throughout the days
     you can feel how you are changing, the learning is unquantifiable, not only do you learn about co-
     creation but you also learn in depth the importance of giving it the correct name to things and that by
     naming them you can visualize them better. Meaningful talks and discussions with a variety of voices,
     realities, opinions, and stories definitely teaches you, nurtures you, and makes you a better human
     being. Understanding inequities, how systems work, the characteristics of white supremacy, power
     and privilege, community perspectives and the value of different perspectives for science, just to give
     a few examples, gives us as   a community learning and a new perspective that is born from co-created
     work. We want people to know the process by which we have reached our working agreements, our
     research framework from a community and non-extractive perspective, and to learn how we organize
     our community review board and what our non-negotiables are when we work in co-creation. May
     this work be an inspiration for other community organizations that understand the power of the work
     of united communities to generate structural changes, changes in systems, changes to make science
     better, science with more perspectives with different forms of knowledge, better science , where the
     communities lead the investigation and are involved in the entire process.


     Being part of the research analysis team allowed me to work on something | had never done before
     and it was an opportunity to be integrated into the entire process. What a wonderful experience!
     An experience of life. Now begins the work of disseminating the results. It is exciting to think about
     all the ways in which we want to get the information to reach the largest number of sectors of the
     population. May this work be known and replicated by all communities in the United States, Mexico
     and the world.




                                           Illustration by Victor Puga


14
  LA EQUIDAD                              EN   LA
OBSERVACION                               DE   AVES

                                          Reflexiones y
                                           Experiencias




         TheCornellLab @ of Ornithology          reen
     Celebra Las Aves Urbanas                     7sayiitome,



          Illustration by Victor Puga


                                                                15
                                                          KAREN KITCHEN, ICBO Advisor
                                                          The Noise Project was created to raise
                                                          awareness of the significant negative effects of
                                                          noise pollution with an emphasis on ways that
                                                          noise pollution impacts marginalized and diverse
                                                          communities. Most of our group have been
                                                          working together for years. We call ourselves
                                                          the ICBOs (Independent Community Based
                                                          Organizations). With this project, we engaged
                                                          directly with our communities to raise the level
                                                          of awareness about noise pollution and offer
                                                          solutions and strategies that could directly
                                                          benefit our communities. For some of us that
                                                          involved promoting the many health benefits of
                                                          quietness and the opportunity to listen to hear
                                                          the softer sounds in nature. We highlighted
                                                          the importance of creating noise refuges for
                                                          everyone to be able to access. Other ICBOs
                                                          worked primarily with urban high school youth
                                                          and paired the noise pollution awareness with a
                  Illustration by Fay Williams           focus on accessing educational paths of college
                                                          and career in STEM and STEAM at universities,
                                                          including the Cornell Lab of Ornithology. We all
     shared resources on ways people can protect their hearing and lessen the short and long-term health
     risks caused by noise. We encouraged the use of hearing protection at loud events such as concerts
     and also when operating certain household appliances.


     The outreach included in-person gatherings, online webinars, conferences, workshops, and the co-
     created development of other educational resources such as the Noise website, a poster, pamphlets,
     Stem For ALL videos, our Community Perspectives Facebook page, PhotoVoice projects, an ICBO
     comic book, an app that transmits the sounds of plants (plant music) and an interactive app that the
     ICBOs co-created with software engineers at the Cornell Lab of Ornithology. Most of our resources are
     available in English and Spanish. In addition to the education and community engagement activities
     centered around noise pollution, we studied how to develop, as our title states, the Processes and
     Potential to Engage Historically Underrepresented Communities in Public Participation in STEM
     Research Through Authentic and Impactful Collaboration”.




16
Using the frame-work we developed in a previous research project, and using Grounded Theory and
Critical Race Theory, we examined ways that collaborations and partnerships between community-
based organizations and science institutions can be improved in areas of equity, diversity, and
inclusion. In order to achieve true co-creation and equity in collaborations, and to ensure
communities really benefit, we must examine, support, and frequently challenge the significant
factors of Power and Privilege, Trust and Transparency, Realities and Relevance, and Commitment
and Collaboration. These factors must be confronted and evaluated continually on the path to
changing systems and status quo, and establishing more equitable partnerships. Equity, diversity and
inclusion must always be centered.



Although Covid-19 disrupted our work somewhat, many of us made additional time to focus on the
coding of interviews and surveys, analysis, evaluation and dissemination of our findings. We were
excited to co-author an article about our research and thrilled that this article was published in
the March 2022 issue of the journal BioScience. We showcased our work at CITSCI Citizen Science
conferences, STEM   FOR ALL, the 2021 International Commission on Biological Effects of Noise
conference and several presentations to other departments at Cornell. We prioritized time to have
regular meetings, and to focus on strategies and solutions to problems and delays. One unexpected
delay was our Noise Project App, but that was finally completed and launched in February 2022, and
we are eager to share it with everyone.


Throughout this journey, we relied on our working agreements and non-negotiables to guide us.
Respect for one another, and acknowledgement of the gifts that each of us brought to the table
were essential to this work. Many of us became close, life-long friends. We feel deep gratitude for
what we’ve learned, what we’ve achieved, and what we’ve become through our participation in this
rich opportunity to make positive change. Although this particular project has come to an end, our
work, our commitment to engage communities around noise pollution and to help communities
develop more equitable partnerships will continue.




                                                                                                       17
     PHYLLIS TURNER, ICBO Advisor
     fam Citizen Science.     | have the title ICBO independent, community-based organization) and | am
     engaged in community-based participatory action research that focuses on noise pollution. Before
     becoming an iCBO with the NOISE Project, | was a “seasoned” Community Science Collaborator (CSC)
     and sponsor of an outstanding group of students fram Tri-Cities High School. They were members
     of the TCHS National Beta Club, and they were called Jr. CSCs. Youth from a marginalized schoo
     community were introduced to this informal, community-led research praject on noise pailution.


     Because this research was already being shared in my community by an enthusiastic Co-PL, Mr. Bobby
     L. Wilson, | was fortunate to be presented with the opportunity to engage with my students in this
     exciting participatory action research--the NOISE Project. Wow! In collaboration with the Cornell Lab
     of Ornithology (CLO}, CLO staff, the National Science Foundation, and otner independent community-
     based organizations from across the United States, and Mexico, the students and | were introduced
     to co-created principles which included a set of Working Agreements and Non-negotiabies called
     PROCESS. And through the process of attending regularly scheduled meetings and getting weekly
     NOISE updates, we became part of an amazing community of diverse, yet like-minded, individuals.                |
     formed what | hope will be lasting relationships with other CSCs, ICBOs, Co-Pis, CLO staff, and the
     Principal investigator with the project.    | have learned—a lot. The ‘how’ of communication matters as
     much as the ‘what’. |learned a new language which | later used to code NOISE interviews. | learned
     to analyze NOISE data. | have become more aware and empowered. | have shared many of my lived
     experiences both face to face and virtually because a global pandemic changed the way we have
     navigated, co-created, communicated, and disseminated through the project.


     Voices. My voice is now part of a beautiful chorus of diverse voices that collectively
     and individually speak our own truths. Our voices that highlight the challenges, changes, and
     achievements of our communities can be heard and researched as co-created academic publications
     in science journals! Thatis huge. Our voices matter. We may not arrive at the destination of justice,
     equity, diversity, and inclusion together, but we will arrive because we were together on a journey
     that matters. Through this PROCESS, | have gained a deeper understanding of the complexities of
     race, institutional racism, internalized white supremacy which | referred to as internalized oppression,
     and white supremacy culture.


     | was introduced to a FRAMEWORK that works.          | have a deeper understanding for the value of
     diverse perspectives in science, as well as other areas of social justice engagement.    It is impossible
     to separate science from social responsibility because social responsibility is the primary function
     of science. | have learned to use a language that helps me to name the harsh and brutal impact
     of discrimination and other social injustices. | have learned to work in community and to be more
     patient and to practice deep listening and loving speech even though i still get excited and can hardly
     wait to share my thoughts. Forgive and learn from mistakes. | have coded and analyzed into a
     wonderful new way of communicating and collaborating based on the principle of consensus.             | love
     this NOISE Project—what it nas given to me and what | hope has been my meaningful contributions to
     the Project.   | am Citizen Science.   | will use this experience to help move the needle towards a more
     just, equitable, diverse, and inclusive world that includes representation of African Americans and
     BIPOC communities in science.


18
  Challenges
As we move through the final days of the NOISE Project, the learning continues.               Being a part of this
illustrious group of people who call ourselves the NOISE Team has exposed me to different ways of
knowing and of processing information and experiences.               For as amazing as this journey has been and
realizing that the life of the project was time-stamped, still there is a sense of an impending feeling of
void that will soon fill the hours once scheduled for Co-PI, ICBO, Jr. CSC, or Full Project meetings.


The thought of the project coming to an end is not as bad as the thought of how it is coming to an
end. As the newest ICBO, | was anxious to understand the relationship between the NSF, the Cornell
Lab of Ornithology, and the community partners. Although the partners, or ICBOs, did not always
agree on the how, when, who, or where, the co-created Working Agreements always led them/us
back to the point of consensus.   And the Working Agreements?              Yes, it is part of the process to “let
people speak for themselves”



There are many aspects of the NOISE Project and countless artifacts that have emerged from the
project. Some are still emerging as the Project continues to live and enlighten us. | would have never
thought that a research project focused on the inequities and impact of noise pollution in historically
marginalized and underserved communities would have led to and disrobed a deeply rooted system
of white privilege and white supremacy in a large science institution. The NOISE Project has
effectively revealed a system neatly covered in such a thin layer of fragility that if you get as close as
a “funding supplement”, it would be easy to see right through to the core where white supremacy
culture lies.


It is not my intent to negate the invaluable learning that | have gained nor the lifelong relationships
that | have formed because of the NOISE Project. But neither will | ever forget perhaps one of the
greatest lessons of all—that when white supremacy is threatened, it will reveal itself with answers to
questions formed by stringing lots of fancy words together in broken sentences that need not make
any sense. But to a person of privilege, these broken sentences are used as a conveyor belt to move
him through the moment. “Obviously” (7 March 2022 meeting with CLO Lab Director lan Owens),
the purpose of these fancy words is not to move the needle towards justice, equity, diversity, and
inclusion.




                                      Illustration by Fay Williams


                                                                                                                     19
     The NOISE Project has resembled a major stage play
     production, of sorts, starting with Act |, the communities’
     partnership with the CLO. After moving through Acts 1-9
     (CLO, PI, Co-Pls, ICBOs, CSCs, Jr. CSCs, the App, Publications—
     BioScience, Informal Science, Coding & Analysis) and we
     approach the final act, the CLO reveals that it failed to read and
     understand its role. So now, because it did not like Acts 1 - 9, it
     decides not to go on stage for the final act. The audience—the
     community partners and their beneficiaries—are waiting with
     great anticipation for the last act, ready to offer a thunderous
     applause for all the hard work that went into planning— the
     funding (NSF), the location and budget (CLO), the script, edits,
     and final approvals (the communities and CLO), and even the
     possibility for an encore (the supplement).


     | am disappointed, to say the least, that the CLO director
     showed the nerve to speak of the NOISE Project in such glowing                Illustration by Fay Williams
     terms, describing the project as an “important topic, innovative,
     fascinating, successful, and impactful”. Although | agree with
     his assessment, in his own words, he knows very little, if anything, about the NOISE Project.



     As the new leader of the lab who, by default, became an ex-officio partner on this $2.6 million-dollar
     project of which the lab was awarded 69%, he did none of his own research to understand the nature
     of nor the need for this work. The NOISE Project was in its final year. The Lab had already accepted
     69% or more than two-thirds of the total grant. The fact that we were in Year 3 should have been an
     indication of the lab’s previous commitment to see the project through to completion. Despite the
     inequitable distribution of the award, the communities did the work in historical fashion “with less”.
     To add insult to injury, instead supporting our efforts and desires to fulfill the goals of the grant, the
     new “leader”, again by his how admission, relied on second-hand information on which to base his
     decision to deny our request to pursue supplemental funding. This raises a question about the timing
     and justification of this “strategic refresh”, as he called it. How could his “expertise” allow him to
     overlook the inextricable connection between science and social responsibility?


     To make a quantum leap from the bi-weekly meetings in the early days of the project to where we
     are now—local community events, coding, analysis, reflections, final reports, impact statements, and
     manuscript preparation, one would have to use vivid imaginations to visualize the impact of this very
     exciting multi-generational journey involving communities from across the United States, Mexico,
     and touching Ghana who historically have been excluded from the sciences. Some of us are feeling
     uncertainty about the future of our research, its impact, and the future of our team. Some of us are
     wondering whether this country will ever understand the value of science to communities or the value
     of diversity for the sciences. Perhaps, if there is access to community-based research. For the NOISE
     Project, the final act is dissemination. The Cornell Lab of Ornithology, you are Center Stage.




20
     MATEO CASTELLI, Student Research Team
     My involvement in the noise project allowed me to dip my toes into numerous roles, from being a
     part of the student research team to collaborating on our Noise App design to coding and analyzing
     our qualitative data. Across all these positions and roles, | have felt the impact of this work. It’s
     difficult for me to conceptualize the ‘impact’ of this project in a straightforward manner. Traditionally,
     | could point out the project’s level of engagement with partners, successful publications, and data-
     driven results to measure the impact. The Noise project covers all of these bases. Our workshops
     and presentations leave participants impressed and intrigued. Our Noise App, took kits, workbooks,
     and art have a broad reach in community and academic settings. Our public access publication for
     Bioscience will impact how researchers and partners think about collaboration by sharing years of
     inspiring work. However, it’s not accurate to speak about these things as the project’s central impact.
     In my view, the real impact of the project occurred (and will continue to occur) on the interpersonal
     level. Specifically, where the interpersonal level engages with the dominant culture. Institutions and
     systems of power are terrifying to challenge—individuals who do so need to be united by love, faith,
     hope, and wisdom. The Noise project is all of that, and its greater impact occurred because our group
     was constantly sharing and spreading these values. We did so through our documentation, meetings,
     conflicts, and celebrations. The moments our group faced inequity and responded with intention and
     purpose brought the project’s mission and values to life. These moments of honesty, transparency,
     and growth offer a vision of the future of collaborative research.


     | have felt this impact personally and cannot envision a future in academia, research, or collaborations
     in which these values don’t continue molding my choices and actions. Every person who has come
     into contact with our project shares this impact in one way or another. Even those who have not
     internalized our group’s drive towards equity have had to face their power and privilege head-on
     through their interaction with the Noise Project. Those who have internalized these values now walk
     into other collaborations fortified by the understanding that they hold knowledge, experience, and
     truths that can create better and more equitable research. In this way, the impact of the Noise Project
     is not quantifiable or observable because it will continue to blossom and spread in ways that we
     won't be able to track or measure. Not because it isn’t ‘real impact.’ Quite the opposite; because it is
     authentic, the impact of the Noise Project will go beyond even our visions and hopes.




22
Tlustrat ions by Fay Williams




                                23
     OWEN SULLIVAN, Student Research Team
     | joined the NOISE project almost exactly three years ago. | was then just a freshman student at
     Cornell, and I’m now preparing to graduate as a senior. | spent the summer of 2019 in Ithaca at the
     Lab of Ornithology, working alongside Brigid, Adam, Mateo, Karen, and Chacha in person, and the
     rest of the team virtually. From the start of my time on the project, | could tell that this work of which
     | had just become a part was simply different—different in its goals, its methods, its frameworks, and
     perhaps most importantly, in the way it treated its members. | can vividly recall Karen and Marilu
     requiring us, the student team, to take nature walk breaks. That’s right, a project in which your bosses
     required you not to continue working until the report was done, or to stay late until the filing was
     finished, but to enjoy the sounds of the birds chirping in the Ithaca summer. | was made to feel as
     though | was not merely a research assistant, but a member of a family, one that understood and
     upheld the worth of all of its members. Although it’s certainly difficult to distill the entirety of my
     experience on the NOISE project into one short impact statement, |’d like to take the pages that follow
     as an opportunity to describe just a few of the lessons I’ve been fortunate enough to learn from the
     project.
     As a Cornell student on the NOISE project, | feel as though I’ve learned by unlearning. In other
     words, the project has challenged preconceived notions with which | entered the project, and in
     their place, has provided me with new ways of understanding. And, as a Cornell student coming from
     a privileged background in terms of my positionality and lived experiences, | sure did (and still do)
     have a lot of unlearning to do. Perhaps the first notion | “unlearned” was the idea that one’s level
     of expertise, intellect, and broader worth varies in accordance with the level of prestige of their
     academic qualifications. A Cornell researcher with a graduate level degree is an all-knowing sage,
     while a researcher from a small, community-based organization is worthless, and included in scientific
     research only when the experts at Cornell are feeling charitable. If this language sounds harsh,
     well, this is very much the common narrative put forth at institutions like Cornell—dressed up in the
     language of social justice, though, to preserve the institution’s progressive nature and commitment
     to equity, diversity, and inclusion, of course. What I’ve learned, in place of this previous notion, is that
     expertise need not come in the form of a diploma. Every day on our community coding calls, | was
     fortunate enough to hear firsthand the expertise and wisdom that our community partners shared of
     their communities, of the ways in which institutional racism affects community-based research, of the
     subtle mechanisms of the institutional racism just described. Even if | was to study and earn a PHD,
     such a degree could not substitute for the expertise that our community partners possessed, garnered
     through their lived experiences and “other ways of knowing” beyond just a traditional, institutional
     path.


24
The second lesson I’ve “unlearned” is the idea that equity, diversity, and inclusion is merely an issue
of social justice, and has no benefit beyond this. Rather, I’ve seen through our work, especially
through our community coding process, the way in which a diverse team and an equitable process
leads to better work itself. it’s certainly the case that the issues of EDI are indeed issues of justice,
equality of opportunity, and redressing past wrongs, but their benefit should not solely be stated
in these terms. Had our team of community coders been compased exclusively of institutional
researchers of one identity group, there is not a doubt in my mind that an enormous amount of
the depth and nuance contained in the interview answers would have gone undetected. | can recall
many instances during coding in which | read an answer, thought nothing of significance of it, only
to hear members of our team with vastly different experiences from myself explain the way in which
the response connected directly to some broader structure or theme. Answers that |, as a white
man from Cornell, read to be completely innocuous, in actuality embodied the logic of institutional
racism, for instance. From an article | wrote for the project, discussing this lesson: “if an answer is
analyzed from one perspective—let’s say only | looked at and coded the answer—l may subconsciously
or even consciously interpret their answer in a particular way as a result of my perspective.
However, when a diverse group reads an answer, and ail see that answer through a different lens
and worldview, multiple people all volunteer their interpretation of the answer. Once these multiple
interpretations are brought forth, we are able to discuss each of them until we reach a collective
understanding of an interview answer-an understanding that was created by meshing various
different perspectives and interpretations.”
Thirdly, | unlearned the notion that promoting equity, diversity, and inclusion means treating
everyone although they are the same, and rather, learned that it entails consciously and directly
addressing the disparities in power and privilege that exist. It means more than just treating
everyone nicely, and instead means that we ought to disrupt the systems that generate inequity
in the first place. There has long been a relationship of extraction and inequity between dominant
culture institutions and underserved communities. lf there is ever to be equitable collaboration and
co-creation between the two groups, these same dynamics cannot continue but with a friendlier
demeanor and an anti-racist traning sprinkled in here and there. it must be the case that, at the level
of organization, the extractive structural dynamics that have historically been in place are upended,
and at the level of the individual, those of us who have benefited from such dynamics must recognize
this and work to undo past damage caused. This entails an unapologetically honest discussion of past
inequities that have existed, and also necessitates material actions that shift the balance of power to
communities. There can be no reali equity nor justice for communities until this end is accomplished—
milquetoast institutional methods of addressing EDI, while these same institutions perpetuate
systems and ways of researching that are fundamentally inequitable, will do little. The ways in which
this structural rearrangement of power ought to take place is certainly a complicated conversation,
but my point is that if we are to reach a place of equity, diversity, and inclusion within the sciences, it
is a conversation that we need to have.
These are just a few of the many lessons the NOISE project has taught me in my three years here.
it’s been an absolute joy working alongside the team, and my only hopes are that our work was
of benefit to the amazing independent community based organizations that form the core of our
oroject, and that we succeeded in moving the sciences forward even slightly towards a place of
greater equity.




                                                                                                              29
     ALYCIA BASQUIAT Student Research Team
     Part |

     i was born into the world as a black girl and had no choice but to run into the concept of diversity
     and equity. When   people think of diversity, ’rm one of the first images that come to mind, which is
     weird since it hasn't always been a thing in my mind. The meaning of diversity, equity and inclusion
     (DED has been ever changing throughout my life, as weil as its importance to me, from the time |
     first was introduced to it to now. This is the story of me and DEI.

     DEL and | first met in middie school. | sometimes wonder if that is too late or too early compared to
     other children, especially black children. | had just been admitted into a highly selective program
     that prepares students to apply to and attend independent private schools. This was when a whole
     new world was introduced to me. The program was for students of color, and the sub-component
     of the program that | was a part of was for Black and Latinx students who were being prepared
     to go to boarding school. Up until then, | had no reason to be introduced to the idea of diversity,
     equity, and inclusion because | attended predominantly black public schools in Queens, New York. |
     felt that | actually hacn’t experienced any effort towards DEI because my schools felt that it wasn’t
     needed considering the environment. But, once | began my academic program, that all changed.
     My academic program was rigorous, not only in the fact that | was doing college-level work as an
     eighth grader while still going to my regular school, but especially because of the steps they took
     to “prepare” us for our future in private schools. By “prepare” they meant introduce us to the
     hardships we might face as students of color in predominantly white institutions that were not
     made for us. | had a psychology class during the program dedicated to identity and understanding
     how to deal with situations in which my identity was being villainized, looked down upon, or
     minimized. | vividly rernember sitting in the classroom and listening to a then junior at a boarding
     school talk about her experiences on campus. She said she went to school with Donald Trump’s
     son, sometimes felt that she was a token black woman, and that her school only wanted her there
     to meet a “diversity quota.” She also mentioned the multiple microageressions she experienced
     and the hate crimes that occurred at her school. This wasn’t the only time | had heard this from
     current students. it made me begin to question the purpose of me going to a boarding school. Was
     {only going to be accepted only because they wanted       my face on their schoal brochure to promote
     diversity? Or was | going to be ostracized by people my own age because of my identity? Was a
     better education worth all the racism and discrimination | might face?
     All these questions were a lot to handle as a 13- year- old. The fact that the first time | was formally
     introduced to the idea of diversity and inclusion was through the lens of trauma from a PWI,
     made me belleve that the concept was a lie. How could somewhere promote diversity, equity,
     and inclusion so much, but execute the exact opposite? But despite all the questions, traumatic
     anecdotes, and warnings, | decided to remain on the path to boarding school. | ultimately believed
     that | could get farther in life with the opportunities there.




26
Part Il

Fast forward through the many months of academic rigor and applying to boarding schools, |
finally accepted an offer to attend Phillips Academy. | was very excited to step foot on campus as
a matriculated student, but not for the reasons you may think. Yes, of course, | would finally have
independence away from my family and the chance to study abroad (which | immediately took
advantage of by the way), but | would also finally get to see if everything | heard about the black
experience at boarding school was true. The very first day, move in day, was when | met a few
of the people who | still consider my friends to this day. They were also young black women and
happened to live in the room right next to mine. As we
all went through our first term at school, we talked about
how different being there was from home. Although, our
first term there was unlike any other. It was during this
time that the 2016 presidential election was happening
and consuming our lives. We were in constant worry
about what would happen. | remember peacefully going
to sleep after a long night of watching the news coverage
on the election because it seemed that Clinton would
win, only to wake up to what felt like the worst news |
have ever received.
                                                                        Illustrations by Fay Williams
The campus that day was desolate, except for the white
boy who ran around campus with a huge American flag
shouting his excitement. There was sadness in the air and that morning before heading to class
| comforted one of my friends who was genuinely scared for what was to come. All my teachers
that day paused their lessons to give us the opportunity to journal our feelings or to just be. It felt
like my life as a young black woman was about to worsen. Suddenly, there was a number of white
people that became emboldened in their racist beliefs, including one who wanted to shut down the
multicultural center at school that was a safe space for students of color.
Accompanying all these feelings of sadness, fear, and disappointment, was oddly enough what | saw
as a community coming together (well except for the people who were happy about the election).
That was one of the first times that | felt that | was being supported by some of my white peers and
even teachers. This was not an experience the older students told me about back in middle school.
As | continued through high school, | began noticing small things that made me hyper aware of my
blackness: stares when my friends and | would sit at the dinner table together and be authentic in
our blackness, my old white male teacher pausing his lecture to question the angry look on my face
when in reality | was just being attentive (which was a pattern my other female friends of color also
experienced), and having to constantly advocate for myself. Luckily, | had a space to bring these
concerns to - affinity clubs, teachers and staff of color, and my friends - and didn’t feel alone in my
experience. Within my bubble on campus of the BIPOC community, | was completely happy and
satisfied, but every time | stepped out of that bubble and was reminded of the school | went to,
some of that satisfaction faded away.




                                                                                                          27
      The year after the election, when | was a sophomore, my school decided to begin new programming
      on diversity, equity, and inclusion. | thought, “Great, another scheduled time when | have to educate
      my peers on my identity.” Although, my program leader mace it clear that that was not what this
      class was about. The class covered the definitions of race, equity, equality, and other topics that were
      integral to diversity and inclusion. Even though the class met maybe only twice a term and didn’t
      really get into how the knitty gritty of DEI on campus, | appreciated that the terms and topics behind
      DEL were clearly defined. This is something that should’ve happened and been in place much earlier,
      but it took a huge push for it to come to fruition.
      A book that was introduced to me this year, Why Are All the Black Kids Sitting Together in the
      Cafeteria? (you should check it out}, perfectly sums up my experience at boarding school. A large part
      of my identity is my blackness, but it was not like that until | started going to a PWi and it became the
      defining part of my identity to other people. Since then, many of my actions have been determined
      by my identity as a black person: the peooie [ interact with, the people | don’t interact with, where
      | hang out, and much more. But, as my black ness became more salient to me, DEI started to seem
      more and more like a buzz word and less like an actual practice. Although my school had this new DEI
      programming, it felt like it was still to only benefit my white peers and not me. As | applied ta college,
      | thought heavily about if a PWI was the place for me because of this, but | ultimately chose to attend
      one because of career and financial reasons. Now, | experience DE] in a different way.


      Part il

      When      | came to Cornell in 2020, | didn’t hear anything about diversity, equity and inclusion. Corneil is
      so much bigger than my high school that it is much easier to get stuck in a bubble and forget there is
      another world here beyond my own. | began Cornell hyper aware of how | was different from those
      around me because | was surrounded by non-back people my first three weeks. | was consistently
      reminded of how inequitable college and PWis are. Sure, there was diversity, but what did that mean
      if it wasn’t valued? Ht wasn’t until | began hanging out at the dorm intended mostly for black students
      and made new friends that | started to feel diversity was valued. It seems like that is contradictory:
      how could it seem more diverse in a place where everyone, for the most part, looked like me?
      After some reflection, | realized that the diversity in DEI isn’t necessarilyjust diversity in race and
      ethnicity, but also diversity in thinking. My first three weeks of school, many of the people | hung out
      with had very similar thinking and it made me feel like our conversations were meaningless. With my
      new friends and new environment, | felt that | actually learned more by talking to people because they
      had different perspectives and weren't afraid to share them. Sometimes we would talk about world
      issues, racism, and other concepts that were enriching and valuable. But still, there wasn’t a structure
      or setting in place that promoted and notably strived for diversity, equity, and inclusion.




268
It wasn’t until | joined the Noise Project team, that | heard the actual words “diversity, equity, and
inclusion” at Cornell and them mean what they’re supposed to. The Noise Project introduced me
to DEI in a way that was applicable and was on a larger scale beyond the organization. My schools
only promoted DEI at the school, but not in the outside community or world. That is what made the
Noise Project different. It is about achieving DEI in ways that matter, not just in terms of individual
interactions. When   | was first learning about community coding and collaboration, | honestly did
not understand the purpose. | thought that the same result would come about without it. But, | was
quickly proved wrong. After attending a number of coding sessions, | finally understood the true
importance of DEI: it allows everyone to show up as their complete authentic selves and be confident
in sharing their perspectives to further a conversation, initiative, anything. The level of engagement
and creation of new ideas was astonishing, unlike anything | had seen before.
Before Noise, | felt like the DEI exploited the experiences of marginalized groups to benefit the
education and livelihood of the dominant groups. It felt like my blackness and my lived experience
was used in the classroom to teach my peers a lesson on diversity, equity, and inclusion, rather
than us teaching each other and moving society forward. At Noise, | feel like everyone’s experience,
perspective, and voice is valued and because of collaboration, encouraged to be shared equitably. DEI
no longer feels like a buzzword, but a mission, and | have my close friends and the Noise Project to
thank for that.




                                         Illustration by Fay Williams



                                                                                                          29
