 _ HIGHER] » FUTURE READY OREGON
EDUCATION    WORKFORCE READY GRANTS ROUND THREE
 COMMISSION 4      Sector-focused Rounds (Healthcare, Manufacturing, and Technology)

                              Technical Assistance Providers

The Higher Education Coordinating Commission has contracted with six (6) providers to support
applicants and prospective applicants with free coaching and guidance through the Workforce
Ready Grants Round 3 Request for Applications (RFA) process. Applicants and prospective
applicants can expect to receive assistance and guidance in determining their eligibility and project
alignment with the RFA, and support developing their applications from the Technical Assistance (TA)
Providers. This service is being made available to all prospective applicants for all Round Three
RFAs at no cost. To access this service, please call or email one of the following providers (they are
listed alphabetically):



Boules Consulting
Marianne Boules is the founder and owner of Boules Consulting, a social impact consulting firm
specializing in the grants cycle. Since her company's founding in 2018, Boules Consulting has raised
$52 million in grants. Marianne is a returning Technical Assistance Provider, having served Round 2
Workforce Ready Grant applicants in 2023. She is experienced in writing about innovative economic
and workforce development projects that integrate racial equity. Marianne has experience with specific
populations including Black, Indigenous, and People of Color (BIPOC), rural, and low-income
populations. For example, as a grant writer, Marianne secured a $1.5 million workforce development
project to foster BIPOC-founded tech startups and stimulate the economy. She also served as the lead
grant writer and coordinator for a $160 million economic innovation project. As a Technical Assistance
Provider, Marianne is here to help you with your overall grant strategy, early draft development,
editing, aligning your proposal to evaluation criteria, and so much more!
Website: https://boulesconsulting.org/
Email: marianne@Boulesconsulting.org
Phone: 818-599-2692

Grassroots NW
Bill Weismann has devoted his professional career as a social change agent. Starting as a VISTA
Volunteer in rural New Hampshire organizing low-income tenants and designing self-help services, he
has worked for five decades with nonprofit organizations and public agencies. He served from 1983 to
1994 as Executive Director of three Oregon statewide social and economic justice organizations.       His
skillset includes grant writing, community collaboration, resource development, and program design.
Bill specializes in guiding smaller organizations to the next stage of development. Since 1995 Bill’s
consulting business, Grassroots NW, has served dozens of diverse clients. Bill is a skilled grantwriter,
having secured more than $30 million in grant awards. Clients include both BIPOC- and women-led
organizations, and grassroots groups and public partnerships. Funded workforce development
projects have focused on women, BIPOC and other marginalized communities.
Website: https://www.grassrootsnw.com/
Email: grassrootsnw@comcast.net
Phone: 503-422-2502

See next page for additional providers.

                                                                                        Page 1 of 3
 _ HIGHER] » FUTURE READY OREGON
EDUCATION    WORKFORCE READY GRANTS ROUND THREE
 COMMISSION 4       Sector-focused Rounds (Healthcare, Manufacturing, and Technology)



Greater Good Consultants LLC
Greater Good Consultants LLC specializes in transforming Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math
(STEM) education and workforce development visions into tangible successes. Founder Ashley Pereira,
an award-winning secondary STEM educator, consultant, and adjunct Professor of Secondary
Education, offers Technical Assistance with deep expertise in K-12 STEM and technology. Her 16-year
proven track record - reinforced by a MS degree in Secondary Education and Project Management
certification - has catalyzed transformative programs for nearly 4 million at-risk and underserved
youth nationwide. Since establishing GGC in 2012, Ashley has pioneered the use of immersive
technologies in grant-funded career readiness programs, setting a new standard for engaging and
impactful learning experiences. Her comprehensive experience in securing grants and implementing
transformative programs positions her well to support Future Ready Oregon grant applicants, offering
guidance and insights into the nuances of both pre- and post-award processes.
Website: https://greatergoodconsultantsct.com/
Contact: Ashley Pereira, MS Ed.
Email: ashley@greatergoodconsultantsct.com
Phone: 860-455-5778




Joanne Scharer
Joanne Scharer, Master of Public Administration (MPA), Master of Regional Planning (MRP) has
provided consulting and technical assistance services to a variety of governmental and educational
entities, non-profit organizations, and for-profit businesses for over 25 years. Her experience includes
proposal development for government and foundation funding, program implementation, and program
evaluation. In addition to Joanne’s expertise with the funding proposal and application process, she
also understands the reporting requirements involved after funding has been received, having
managed grant reporting for federal and state agencies and community colleges and non-profits. She
has supported work with specific priority populations, including low-income communities,
incarcerated or formerly incarcerated individuals, Veterans, and persons with disabilities. Joanne is
adjunct faculty at a community college and has keen workforce development insights from a higher
education perspective. With her multi-faceted experience, Joanne offers clear and actionable review
and feedback to assist with proposals and help expand an organization’s knowledge with an outlook to
future funding possibilities.
Email: joanne.scharer@gmail.com
Phone: 503-409-9910



See next page for additional providers




                                                                                       Page 2 of 3
 _ HIGHER] » FUTURE READY OREGON
EDUCATION    WORKFORCE READY GRANTS ROUND THREE
 COMMISSION 4          Sector-focused Rounds (Healthcare, Manufacturing, and Technology)



Next Level Nonprofit Consulting
Ann Craig and Lynn Egli, managing partners of Next Level Nonprofit Consulting, will be providing
direct, personal technical assistance to applicants. Coaching Experience: We have provided Technical
Assistance to over 70 Workforce Ready applicants during Workforce Ready Grants Round 1 (2022) and
Round 2 (2023) cycles. Expertise: We are hands-on, nonprofit practitioners with years of experience
in forming, growing, funding and operational management of nonprofits and educational institutions.
Our technical experience is especially strong in grant writing/management, financial /budget planning,
operations, and board governance. Our nonprofit sector experience is especially strong in youth,
disabilities, rural communities, and higher education. Oregon-based: Ann lives in Portland and has
been very successful over the past 15 years in writing large federal, state and foundation grants. Lynn
lives in Eugene has founded and grown several new nonprofits and serves on multiple nonprofit boar
Website: https: //nextlevelnonprofitconsulting.com/
Email (Ann): ann@nextlevelnonprofitconsulting.com
Email (Lynn): lynn@nextlevelnonprofitconsulting.com
Phone (Ann): 541-829-1850
Phone (Lynn): 541-760-5435




Wisdom Consulting
Wisdom Consulting provides consultation on research design, proposals, and activities to individuals,
nonprofits, universities, federal agencies, and industry. Lead Jennifer Wisdom, PhD MPH ABPP is a
psychologist, author, consultant, and speaker. She has worked with complex health care, government,
and educational environments for 25 years, including serving active duty in the U.S. military, working
with non-profit service delivery programs, and as faculty in higher education. She has a PhD in Clinical
Psychology and a Master of Public Health in Epidemiology and Biostatistics; she is also board certified
as a business and organizational consulting psychologist. Joining Wisdom Consulting is Cynthia Drake
Morrow, PhD MA, a consultant and medical writer with grant writing experience in research, clinical
care, and non-profit publishing and journalism. She holds a PhD in Health Services Research and a
Master of Arts in Bioethics. Based in Michigan, Dr. Morrow teaches graduate courses in public health
and research methods.
Website: www.leadwithwisdom.com.
Email (Jennifer): jennifer@leadwithwisdom.com
Email (Cynthia): Cynthia.Morrow06@gmail.com




End of provider list




                                                                                       Page 3 of 3
