Equity Lens
   Guide

  Updated: September 2021
Table of Contents

  Tali kele [U(o14
                (0) 9 ee                                                            cree 3

  What is an Equity Lens? 0.0...                     ccc cceeeeeeeeeseaaeeeeeeeeeen
                                                                                eens 4
  OYA's Commitment to the Equity Lens ..........                         eee             5
  Why an Equity Lens 2000.0... ceecccceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeneeseneeees 6
  Equity Lens: Guiding Principles ...............c.ccccccccsceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeees 7
  How to Use an Equity Lens ..0........ ec ceccceeceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaeees 8

  Infusing an Equity Lens: Basic Introductory Questions ........... 9
  Leadership Equity Lens ...............
                                    cc ccceccccceceeeeeeeeeeeeeeaeeeeeaeeeeeanes 10
  Policy Equity LEN .0........ cc cccccceeeneeeeeee ee eeeeeseeeeeeeaaeeeeeaaenees 12
  How to Use a Policy Equity Lens: Example ....................008 13
  Policy and the Racial Equity Scorecard ................cccceeecce          eens 15
  Youth, Family, and Staff Engagement ...............0.. cece 16
  Planning Services, Programs, Projects, and Events ............... 17
  Recruiting, Hiring, and Retention ..............         ce eeeeeeee ee eee seen es 18
  COMMUNICATIONS .......... cece cece cece ce eecccce ee eceeseeeecesaeeeseesaneeseeanes 19
  Training Staff and Volunteers «2.2...                  cceccccceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeean eens 20
  DY=)F- 1 O70) |(-\e
                   | (0) 4 re                                                            22
  Process IMProveMent .............cccceccececcceseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeesneseeaneeeaneees 23

  S10]
    0] £0)    ce                                                                        24




  About This Guide
  Authors
  Joe O’Leary
  Director, Oregon Youth Authority
  Nakeia Daniels
  Deputy Director, Oregon Youth Authority
  Dr. Andre Lockett
  Diversity, Equity and Inclusion Strategic Manager, Oregon Youth Authority


  This Equity Lens Guide was created by the Oregon Youth Authority. We hope that this
  resource furthers the work for Diversity, Equity and Inclusion beyond the Oregon Youth
  Authority and juvenile justice. Please credit the Oregon Youth Authority when using this
  work in your own pursuits.
Introduction

A truly sobering fact is that over a century post-American
slavery and over 50 years after the Civil Rights Act, racial
injustice and inequities persist in nearly every public policy
area and American system.


Youth of color are overrepresented in the U.S. juvenile
justice system, as are people of color in adult institutions.
These inequities are present at the Oregon Youth
Authority. Families of color disproportionately live in
poverty. To truly understand why requires the complex
unweaving of how many systems were designed and
have persisted throughout history. These are just a few of
the historical fundamental drivers of institutional racism:
    e   the legacy of slavery and Native American
        genocide;
    e   the systems designed to sustain the post-slavery
        economic well-being of former slaveowners;
    e   Jim Crow laws; and
    e   the stereotypical narratives that have followed
        African-Americans and other people of color.


Many organizations and agencies have made investments
in improving outcomes for underserved populations. In
fact, many organizations work diligently toward building a
more equitable society, allocating services and resources
equitably, and extending support to historically
underserved groups.


However, when decision-makers are made up of
homogeneous      groups, there can be unintentional
gaps in needed support for historically excluded
populations that can cause harm to the very people
they want to support. Failure to be inclusive or
intentional about monitoring the impact of policies and
practices on the experiences and outcomes of historically
excluded groups makes it easier to make false
assumptions or miss harmful and disparate impacts.
What is an Equity Lens?

 An equity lens is a process to analyze the impact of the design and
 implementation of policies, practices, and decision-making authority on
 historically excluded and marginalized individuals and groups. It is a tool
 used to identify and eliminate systemic barriers.
 This equity lens guide is both a tool and a process to orient OYA leaders and staff to the important
 concepts needed to infuse equity into all the work we do. This includes all decision-making points,
 policies, practices, and resource allocation. It also includes the development of strategic action plans
 focused on eliminating systemic and individual barriers and improving the outcomes for all youth,
 especially those from historically underserved populations.

 This document is designed to provide decision-makers with questions to:
    ¢       evaluate their own      backgrounds,   beliefs, and biases to be more culturally responsive and
            monitor lack of inclusion in decision-making      processes;   and
    ¢       assess the level of commitment to equity and inclusion at many different decision points.

 Incorporating the questions in this document will allow decision-makers to:
    ¢       craft more culturally responsive solutions and decisions;
    *       gain valuable perspectives from people who have previously been silent, ignored, or
            misunderstood;    and
    ¢       more fully understand the reach, effectiveness, and impact of investments in inclusion on
            equal outcomes.

 This equity lens may represent a significant departure from traditional processes. Implementing it will
 take more time and work, but it is necessary to truly be equity-centered and to achieve OYA’s goals.



   Definition: Equity
        e    A bold and fearless long-term commitment to understanding the depth of racism and all
             other forms of discrimination within America's systems, especially the criminal and
             juvenile justice systems, and taking action to eliminate barriers to equity and inclusion
             within our system.
        e    Intentional engagement with marginalized communities in decision-making and explicitly
             recognizing their lived experiences to shift perception, ensure equitable resource
             allocation, and improve youth outcomes.
        e    Normalize cross-racial communication, specifically about every demographic's
             experiences working for OYA, to ensure we are establishing an agency culture where
             everyone can thrive.
OYA’s Commitment to the Equity Lens

OYA has long recognized that youth of color and
those who identify as LGBTQ+ (lesbian, gay,
bisexual, transgender, queer, questioning, or intersex)

are over-represented in the state’s juvenile justice
system and in its own care and custody. We also
recognize that the young women      in our care, while not
over-represented, require treatment and programming
specific to their needs.

We are committed to dismantling systemic injustice
and we respect, honor, and embrace the
diversity among youth, staff, families and partners.
OYA leaders and staff are committed to
fearlessly challenging our implicit biases and
operationalizing our values and Positive Human
Development (PHD) with an equity-based lens.

Incorporating an equity lens into how we review policy
and practices, and how we make decisions,
will require thoughtful and intentional inclusion of
youth and staff from historically marginalized
communities. For OYA, this includes youth and staff
from the following communities:
   e   Black, African, African American
   e   Native American, members of Oregon’s nine
       federally recognized tribes, American Indians,
       Alaska Native
   e   Hispanic, Latino/a/x
   e   Asian
   e   Pacific Islander
   e   Linguistically diverse
   e   People with disabilities
   e   LGBTQ+
   e   Female
Why an Equity Lens?




 An equity lens allows us to analyze and               An equity lens is designed to:
 assess what we do from many different
                                                         Increase perception, awareness,        and the
 perspectives. It encourages us to ask                   aptitude to incorporate differences.
 specific questions to check our blind spots             Assist in the development of
 as decisions     are made.
                                                         committees and teams that are specifically

 Diversity, equity, and inclusion strengthen our         relevant and representative of the youth we

 ability to fulfill our mission of protecting the        serve and staff we employ.

 public and reducing crime by holding youth              Focus on identifying and dismantling
 accountable and providing opportunities for all         systematic racism, injustices and barriers

 youth in safe environments.                             to equity.
                                                         Provide tools to leaders and decision-
 Who is this equity lens guide for?                      makers to be more inclusive of youth and
 This guide is designed for EVERYONE          at OYA     staff from historically marginalized
 and all those we partner with to serve youth.           communities.
 This includes:                                          Identify root causes and changes to policy
     e   Agency   leaders, staff, and volunteers         or practice that must take place to ensure
     e   Contracted community partners and               equitable and inclusive outcomes.
         consultants                                     Identify the appropriate performance
     e   Other stakeholders                              measures and related data needed to
                                                         effectively monitor equity and disparate
 Daily Thought Pattern
                                                         impact in our practices, policy, and
 An equity lens should be used in every business
                                                         decision-making.
 decision, every day. Using an equity lens daily
                                                         Create action plans with specific goals
 will make our agency more equitable and
                                                         related to diversity, equity, and inclusion.
 inclusive in all that we do.
Equity Lens: Guiding Principles
When you use the equity lens process in your work, keep these guiding principles in mind. Focus on who
is at the table, their position of power, and the influence that each person has to achieve equity and
inclusion. And remember: systemic change is not instantaneous. It takes commitment, time, and effort.




e   Focus on diversity when you're deciding who should be at the                f        Be aware of common
    table for any decision or process.   Prioritize race, ethnicity,                     rationalizations that might

    gender, and job role diversity.                                                      lead to exclusion:
    It is everyone’s responsibility to develop an environment where            “They don’t have the right knowledge,
    each person understands the goals and feels heard. When we _               skill, or understanding to provide
    truly value diverse perspectives and realize we cannot                     input.”
    accomplish our goals without them, noticing and overcoming                 “It's not their ‘job’ to make decisions
    rationalizations and our own biases becomes a priority.                    or develop resources.”



e   Acknowledge your biases. The equity lens process will help                  f)       Be aware of a false sense that
    you understand the underlying causes and impacts of our work                         “it doesn’t happen here.”
    on different populations.                                                Discrimination is everywhere. Mini-
e   Discuss each marginalized group that might be impacted by                mizing racism, sexism, microaggres-
    the decision at hand. Consider positional power dynamics,                sions, and other discrimination creates
    subjectivity in the process and follow-through, or bias.                 an unsafe environment, undermines
e   Determine the impacts on people of color and other                       those who share their personal
    marginalized groups and center their needs.                              experience, and blocks progress.




e   Train and educate on cultural differences.                     ()   Be patient! What feels difficult now
    Equity requires us to shift focus away from                         will become       second   nature with
    everyone being treated and served equally to                        practice.
    acknowledging differences and everyone being                 Using an equity lens is a step-by-step,
    treated and served to their appropriate needs.              question-by-question process that requires
e   Be aware of your sphere of influence. If you are            commitment. Not every question is needed
    dismissive or indifferent, this can harmfully               for every situation, but being meticulous
    impact others’ ability to share their expertise             establishes the habit that sustains a culture
    and engage in the process.                                  centered on the needs of marginalized
                                                                communities.                                             7
    How to Use an Equity Lens
    OYA expects every level of our agency to fully include, center, and equitably engage people of
    color from all groups in decision-making, from start to finish.

    The equity lens is aimed at closing divides based on race by ensuring representation of diverse perspectives.
    This helps reduce assumptions about what the impacts are or are not for each community of color.


    OYA uses this equity lens process to ensure equitable outcomes for youth of all races and to create respectful,
    diverse, equitable, and inclusive environments for youth, their families, and staff that are free from harassment,
    discrimination, and bias.

    What does it mean to “center” the needs of youth and employees of color?
    e    Placing the needs and barriers faced by youth or staff of color at the forefront of thinking, discussions, and
        decisions, rather than as an afterthought.
    e    Being conscious of the environments we create, to ensure people of color feel safe to soeak about the barriers
        they see or face.
    e    Ensuring that this engagement informs all decisions and that solutions target overcoming the barriers.




    e    Review the different methodologies listed in the              e   Walk through each question. It is okay to skip a
        next few pages. Determine which one best suits the                 question if diverse groups sitting at the table agree it
        needs of the decision, project, etc. at hand.                      does not apply to the situation.
    e    If you’re not sure which one is best, use the
        introductory lens.




e       Put the needs of communities of color at the center        e       Take responsibility for centering youth and staff of
        of the analysis of each question. This will help you               color in all your work by asking who is represented at
        understand the potential impact of your decision,                  the tables you sit at, too.
        project, or situation.
e       Assess if you have adequate representation from
        marginalized groups. Ensure you are including the
        people doing the work and the people who are
        impacted.




e       Keep defensiveness and bias in check, whether             e        Equitable engagement starts from the beginning and
        yours or others’. Acknowledge and respect the                      empowers diverse representation to help drive the
        experiences and input of diverse voices.                           conversation.
e       Ensure engagement is equitable and that people
        from marginalized communities hold real power in
        making decisions.
                                                                                                                                  00
Infusing an Equity Lens: Basic Introductory Questions

           Making                        What is the demographical makeup of
         Decisions                       those impacted by this decision, policy,          Oo     6
                                         program, or practice? Can this assessment         O      OC



     i
  ©, t AX,
                                         be validated?



                                         Is there enough diversity and inclusion at             T
                                         the decision-making table to move forward?        Ni




               on
                                         Who is being heard? Who is not?



                                         Are there factors being used to rationalize
                                         lack of inclusion? Are we over-valuing
How These Questions Help:                similarity of job roles in ways that reinforce
  Leading: Ensuring that leaders are     structural biases? How we mitigate this?
  transparent and demonstrate their
  commitment to equity and inclusion.
                                         How are we considering accessibility for
  Do staff and youth recognize this
                                         those who     need to be included and those
  commitment? If not, why?
                                         who are impacted? (think language, written         (®)
  Assessing:    Ensuring that we have
                                         materials, videos, meeting spaces, etc.)?
  the capacity to infuse equity into
  processes and decisions, that we
                                         How     might inequities, barriers, or negative
  consider those who are impacted,
                                         outcomes arise from the decision, policy, or           Ho
  and that we do not make rationaliza-
                                         program being discussed? Who is burdened
  tions that prevent inclusion.
                                         most and who benefits most? Consider class
  Reflecting: Identifying biases and
                                         and demographics.
  assumptions. Have | been burned
  when trying to be inclusive before?
  How am | trusting staff to have        What have we learned from not centering
  rational discourse?                    inclusion and focusing on equitable impact?
  Detecting: Identifying patterns of
  lack of equity or inclusion at this
                                         Based    on the responses, what solutions or
  decision point.
                                         interventions could eliminate inequitable              | Q
  Strategizing: Eliminating barriers
  that prevent equity and inclusion.
                                         impact? How can the impact be monitored            oth
                                         and measured?
Leadership Equity Lens
When we become champions for equity and inclusion in the way we lead, we take action to model
a work environment that uses everyone’s diverse talents and skills. These questions are designed to
accomplish this leadership approach. These are also good performance evaluation questions.




     These questions will help frame discussions and reflections on the type of environments
     leaders create and support. It is important to monitor and think critically about innate
     self-defensive mechanisms when you ask these questions.

     e   What steps do | take to create a respectful and inclusive environment, specifically for
         youth and staff from marginalized communities? Have | asked youth and staff about these
         steps to see if they think they are effective? Have | asked them what | can do to be more
         respectful, equitable, and inclusive?
          e   Dol clearly communicate to staff and volunteers, etc. that inappropriate behavior
              such as offensive jokes, racially-biased language, and negative comments are not
              acceptable? Do | unintentionally promote or accept this type of behavior?
          e   When thinking about the decisions | make that impact youth or staff, how do |
              actively gather input and ideas from staff, volunteers, etc. from diverse backgrounds,
              especially those from marginalized communities? Is it feasible? If | think it isn’t
              feasible, am | sure my reasoning is sound and not merely a justification?
          e   How can | encourage staff to contribute positively in creating an inclusive
              workplace?
          e   Dolset an example as a leader that diversity, equity, and inclusion are important?
              How am | intentionally doing this?
          e   What is my threshold of comfort in advancing DEI with my team? How much am |
              willing to venture beyond that threshold to meet DEI expectations?

     e   How am!    ensuring the psychological and emotional safety of staff and youth from
         historically marginalized communities in the space where | lead?

     e   Have | made intentional efforts to ensure employees suffering harassment, disrespectful
         treatment, or any form of discrimination can access existing agency support systems?

     e   Are there policies, procedures and/or practices and attitudes that unintentionally prevent
         some people from fully engaging in our work?


         (Continued on page 11)
Leadership Self-Reflection Questions (continued)

                          Listen           Learn              Support               Act
                              ,             -                       -             eSe
                             ,               -                  SS                -    “i

  e   Am | aware of OYA’s commitments to developing a more equitable and inclusive system?
      Do | continually ensure that staff are equally informed? Have | engaged OIIR and the DEI
      Strategic Manager to get updates on what the agency is doing to move our efforts forward?
  e   Who can be allies in my pursuit of equity and how can | engage them?
  e   What opportunities could | create to enable people from under-represented groups to bring
      new perspectives to our team, acquire experience, and move into higher-level positions?
      (Some ideas: job rotations, job shadowing, DEl-focused management mentoring)
  e   Are equity and inclusion incorporated into our staff check-in process? Do | ask staff for their
      perspective?
  e   Do staff have an opportunity to weigh in on their supervisor’s performance evaluation? If
      not, why not?
  e   Have | sought to identify negative attitudes, beliefs, and biases within myself, or practices in
      my department or work area, that may unintentionally exclude youth or staff from
      marginalized communities?
  e   How proactive have | been in developing my team in a way that represents the population
      of the youth we serve? Does the diversity of my team mirror the demographics of the youth?
      Are my staff trained in cultural sensitivity?
  e   How have | created opportunities for underrepresented staff to acquire experience to
      progress their careers?
  e   Am         intentionally seeking to understand the experiences of staff and youth from
      marginalized communities?
  e   When | interact with colleagues,           my subordinates,   or youth, do | check assumptions?
            e     Dolhold assumptions about people that get in the way of how | work with them?
            e     Dol   avoid stereotypes so | can see the individual for who they really are?
            e     Am | able to respect our differences and yet recognize what we have in common?
            e     Dol   recognize their contributions?
  e   Am        genuinely paying attention to those who are not expressing their ideas? How do |
      encourage feedback and full participation from everyone present? Am | raising issues in a
      way that encourages dialogue?
  e   Dol       consider potential barriers in each situation, and work to minimize them (e.g.,
      language, prejudice, lack of safety in the space)?
  e   lf lam not sure what barriers may exist, do | ask my colleagues or the people | supervise?         44
Policy Equity Lens




   When we are intentional about making policies equitable and accessible, we ensure
   that expectations for equity are clear across the agency.

     What is the purpose of the policy? How do we know the impact of this policy? Can the
      impact be measured in any way?
     Are we recognizing how bias can influence the language and implementation of this policy?
     What are we doing to mitigate this bias?
     Are all racial/ethnic groups affected by the policy represented at the table in this review or
      policy development?
     What are the equity and inclusion concerns related to this policy? (race/ethnicity,
      accessibility, safety, culture, gender identity, etc.)
     What mechanisms are in place to ensure accountability for equity?
     What human and financial resources are required to address equity and inclusion needs
      for this policy?
     Are the groups most affected by the policy consulted for its development or reviews?
     Why or why not? (bias, lack of attention, “WWe have always done it this way”) How can we
      ensure their perspectives are included, especially youth and employees from underserved
      populations?
     What background information can aid in addressing equity and inclusion with this policy?
      Is it possible to develop innovative policy solutions that draw upon the contributions and
      assets of youth affected?
      If new resources are required in the policy implementation, how can we build that in from
      the beginning? (examples: contract with community partners, collaborate across
      departments, funding allocation)

      How can we communicate the policy to reach everyone who is affected?
     As currently written, how could this policy negatively impact youth and or staff from
      underserved populations?
                                                                                                      12
How to Use a Policy Equity Lens: Example



    What is the purpose of the policy? By design, what purpose does it serve?

    The policy will provide structure for ERGs.    ERGs will provide a safe and supportive network
    organized around social identities shared by employees. We anticipate ERGs will support us
    recruiting and retaining diverse employees and help us improve how we support employees from
    marginalized communities. ERGs will remain consistent with OYA’s mission and values. We
    anticipate ERGs offering professional development opportunities, networking outside of
    department areas, mentoring,    community engagement,      input on DEI, and activities that promote
    cultural awareness and cultural sensitivity.

    What are the equity and inclusion concerns related to this policy? (race/ethnicity,
    accessibility, safety, culture, gender identity, etc.)

    This policy and the structure of ERGs will be designed to amplify staff voice, especially for staff
    from marginalized communities. Accessibility for facility staff doing shift work is of great concern.
    We must be thoughtful in constructing this policy so every staff member has access to the ERGs.

    What mechanisms are in place to ensure accountability for equity?

    Each ERG will have an Executive Team sponsor who will support the ERG chair to ensure
    resources and support are equitable. Additionally, DEI Steering Committee leads will routinely
    check in with ERG chairs.

    What human and financial resources are required to address equity and              inclusion needs
    for this policy?

    For shift-working facility staff to participate in ERGs and have it be counted as paid time, we will
    have to either offer overtime or have coverage available during the time of ERG meetings. This
    human and financial resource scenario should be explicitly outlined in this policy.

    Are the groups most affected by the policy consulted for its development or reviews? Why
    or why not? (bias, lack of attention, “We have always done it this way”)

    ERGs have been discussed at many of the listening forums with staff. They are supportive of the
    concept, although some facility staff worry about how much they will be able to participate.
    Additionally, the DEI Steering Committee weighed in on the development of the policy proposal.
How to Use a Policy Equity Lens: Example (continued)
    How can we ensure their perspectives are included, especially youth and employees from
    underserved populations?

    Involving the DEI Steering Committee in developing this policy ensures we are appropriately
    representing and being sensitive to the many different staff and department areas within OYA.


    What background information can aid in addressing equity and inclusion with this policy?

    We need to be equitable and inclusive in deciding the different social identities we extend an ERG
    to (race and ethnic groups, veterans, women, etc.). The number of hours per month or quarter
    staff can engage in paid ERG time will also be important to specify. Doing a diversity assessment
    of our current staff will be helpful so we can monitor how many of our staff are engaged in ERGs
    by demographic.


    Is it possible to develop innovative policy solutions that draw upon the contributions and
    assets of youth and staff most affected?

    We will lean on diverse groups of staff to support the development of this policy to ensure
    everyone has an opportunity to participate in employee resource groups if they choose.


    If new resources are required in the policy implementation, how can we build that in from
    the beginning?

    Collaboration across departments,   combined with the reduction of program-area silos, will be
    important to implementing this policy effectively. We will ensure staff know about this goal.


    How can we communicate the policy to reach the full diversity of people affected?

    We will collaborate with our Communications Office and use the communication equity lens
    established in this guide.


    How will we measure the extent to which the policy contributes to removing barriers or
    creating opportunities for people who have historically been underserved?

    Growth in number of members year over year; number of meetings held annually; number of
    events driven by ERGs; staff /employee engagement surveys


    As currently written, how could this policy negatively impact youth and or staff from
    underserved populations?

    We do not anticipate any negative impact. However, we do recognize the need for structure and a
    commitment from agency leaders to support these groups to sustain their growth.                      14
Policy and the Racial Equity Scorecard
The Racial Equity Scorecard is a way to assess how much the OYA Policy Committee has
applied the equity lens to policy reviews and development. Policies can be scored on a scale of
0 (harmful as-is, capable of making disparate impacts worse) to 5 (deemed racially equitable
with asset-based language).

Larger policies could be made more racially equitable by applying this scorecard to each section and rec-
ommending the OYA Research Office conduct an analysis of the impact of the policy on the lived experi-
ences of youth and staff from marginalized communities.
Note: The word “inequity” is used in the scorecard instead of “disparate impact” as a way to focus both on inequitable out-
comes and the structures that helped create them.



                                  Overtly or covertly targets     May have coded                   Lacks information on the
    O      Hannatnl               youth or employees of           language that                    mechanisms to monitor
                                  color.                          exacerbates inequities.          inequities.




                                  May appear race-neutral         May have language that           Lacks asset-based
    1      Potentially            on the surface.                 negatively impacts sub-          language and ways to
           Harmful                                                groups of communities of       | monitor inequities.
                                                                  color at higher rates.


                                  Has standard                    References equity without        Lacks information on the
           Equity-                equity statement.               outlining concrete actions     © mechanisms to monitor
    2      Based                                                  for how to do so within          inequities.
           Language                                               the context of the policy
                                                                  subject matter.


           Inclusive              Has standard equity             Explicitly outlines actions      Lacks asset-based
    3      and Wider-             statement.                      to ensure equity in its          language.
           Reaching                                               adherence with evaluation
                                                                  of impact mechanisms.


           Far-                   Has equity statement that       Explicitly outlines actions      Includes asset-based
           Reaching               acknowledges historical         to ensure equity in its          language.
    4      and                    trauma experienced by           adherence with evaluation
           Targeted               people of color from            of inequity.
                                  biased policy.


            Racial                Entire policy explicitly puts   Asset-based language             Includes language that
    5       Equity                the needs of youth or staff     acknowledges historical          outlines evaluation of
            Prioritized           of color at the center.         trauma to ensure equity in       inequity.
                                                                  its adherence.

                                                                                                                              15
Youth, Family, and Staff Engagement

 When   we welcome the diverse perspectives of staff, youth, and families, we take action to
 ensure everyone is included. To infuse equity into our work, we must consider the questions
 below in our decision-making processes.




     (fua                      &M                                            )                OL
 e   What approaches and outreach will help ensure that those impacted are able to fully participate?
     How can we create opportunities for people least likely to be heard to ensure they share their
     specific concerns?
 e   Have we evaluated how this process or decision could produce unintended consequences for
     historically underserved populations? How have we mitigated these unintended consequences?
 e   Are the voices in the room diverse enough to make this decision? What steps can we take to
     include the diversity of perspectives impacted, especially when they do not align with our own?
 e   Are there employees from other departments, community partners, or volunteers with experience
     with communities of color who can ensure we are diverse and inclusive?
 e   What steps must we take to remove barriers to people’s full participation (examples: family support
     with transportation, flexible schedules,   language,   accessible location, advanced   scheduling,
     multiple formats, avoid religious and cultural holidays, culturally appropriate)?
 e   ls the environment welcoming to participants who may be reluctant to share their views? Have we
     asked them how we can make the space more inviting for everyone to be comfortable to share?
 e   Does the pace, format, and language of the engagement accommodate everyone, including
     participants who are least likely to speak up and for whom the information may be new? Are the
     insights from groups who face systemic barriers and inequities reflected in the report and the final
     decision?
 e   Can we create an anonymous means of collecting feedback for those from marginalized
     communities who don’t yet feel safe to communicate?
 e   ls the final decision expected to increase or decrease existing disparities, or areas of disparities,
     and if so, for which demographic subgroup(s)?




                                                                                                             16
Planning Services, Programs, Projects, and Events

When we consider the range of equity issues that may exist, we can then take action to
eliminate barriers so that everyone, especially those from historically underserved
populations, can benefit.

All of the equity questions below might not apply to every planning item. Use the ones that make
 sense within the context of the service, program or project being developed.


e   How will this service, program,   project, or event ensure equity and

    inclusion?
e   Do the expected outcomes of the service, program, project or event
    reflect equity and inclusion explicitly in its goals? How?
e   What budgetary trade-offs do we need to consider that are dispropor-
    tionately impacting youth from underserved populations? Does our
    allocation of resources negatively impact youth from underserved pop-
    ulations? What would be the trade-off if we reallocated resources to
    address this?
e   How will the service, program,    project, or event build upon the strengths

    of the people it seeks to serve equitably? Are the people developing this service, program, project
    or event considering racial and cultural differences? What source of information are you using to
    determine this?
e   Are the people most impacted included in the development of this service, program, project, or
    event, especially those from marginalized groups?
e   lf this is a service or project that is using evidence-based research, are the study samples
    diverse? How do we anticipate youth responding to this service or project who are outside of the
    demographics of the sample used in the research? Is the material inherently biased against
    certain demographics?
e   How is this service, project, or event designed to ensure that a full diversity of people can
    participate and benefit with dignity? (consider family schedules; staff schedules, including facility
    shift work; family transportation needs;   language   barriers, etc.)
e   Have we considered and noted equity and inclusion in our business and project management
    plans? Do we have clear goals, timetables for implementation,           and procedures for evaluation and
    ensuring accountability? How will we measure impact and effectiveness? (You should be able
    to disaggregate this information demographically. See data collection and process improvement
    questions, p. 22-23.)
e   What human and financial resources are required to address equity and inclusion in the
    development and implementation of this service, program, project, or event?
Recruiting, Hiring, and Retention

 When we integrate equity and inclusion in our hiring practices and policies, we increase
 diverse skills and perspectives in the workplace. The result is that we better serve all youth.




 e   Do staff and volunteers in our work area reflect the diversity of the youth we serve? Who is
     under-represented?
 e   What actions are we taking to improve the diversity in our work area? (Think about this now and
     have a plan solidified as positions becomes available.)
 e   What is the demographic breakdown of all applicants who met minimum qualifications and did not
     get selected for interviews? What is the demographic breakdown of those who did? What
     strategies are we using to monitor diversity levels as we fill positions?
 e   Do our current policies/practices hinder us from considering applicants with certain criminal
     histories? How could this impact applicant diversity? Is a policy revision feasible?
 e   Do job requirements and selection criteria unnecessarily limit who would qualify? Could we
     incorporate personal lived experience into ways to meet     job requirements?
 e   How do we conduct reference checks? How do we ensure equity and fairness within this process?
     What resources are needed?
 e   Does our job announcement language unintentionally reduce the likelihood that people from
     underserved populations will apply? How are we vetting this?
 e   How could we engage our existing staff from underserved communities to improve the language of
     our job announcements and to diversify our applicant pools? Are we getting their feedback on how
     to best retain their demographic group?
 e   Have we considered where best to post this employment opportunity to ensure that the widest
     diversity of people are able to access it? Do we encourage agency and community partners to
     monitor our job   listings so that we can broaden the applicant pool from diverse groups?
 e   How are we monitoring information about who voluntarily and involuntarily leaves their jobs with
     us? Can we break these numbers down demographically?
 e   ls it mandatory that interview panels be composed of individuals who bring diverse backgrounds
     and experiences relevant to the position? Why not?
Communications

 When we apply equity to all communications, we are being intentional about ensuring
 marginalized communities are informed. We are seeking to use languages of the youth we
 serve and staff we employ across all the media we use. To achieve this, consider the
 following questions for any form of communication.




 e   Have we considered all possible target audiences? Are there any historically marginalized
     communities not being considered (people of color, LGBTQ+,        people with disabilities, etc.)?
 e   ls our language trauma-informed? Are we considering the trauma that people from marginalized
     groups experience and avoiding language that makes these experiences worse? Have we
     included members of these communities in the development of this communication to better inform
     the language we use?
 e   What specific strategies do we need to reach every historically marginalized community that we
     serve or employ (examples: working with community leaders, bulletin boards, community newspa-
     pers, social media)? Have we sought feedback from people from marginalized communities?
 e   Are our communications watered-down or diluted to make them palatable to the White majority?
 e   Do the tone and words we use to describe youth, staff, and families align with our movement
     toward a more equitable and inclusive system?
 e   Is our communication bold and does it unapologetically align with         a humane, restorative, and
     developmental approach? Are we using our Positive Human         Development principles?
 e   How do our communication methods reach the target audiences we seek? How do we know this?
 e   Have we created a system for internal and external stakeholders to make formal complaints about
     our communication methods and language if deemed         necessary?
 e   Have we considered what populations will be missed by only using certain methods (example:
     online or social media only)? Are our approaches effective? How do we know?
 e   Do images represent the full diversity of employees and youth?
       e   Do they capture diversity within specific communities of people?
       e   Will the people portrayed in the images relate to and feel included in the way they are
           represented?
       e   ls everyone portrayed in positive images that promote equity and break stereotypes?
       e   Consider who   is active and passive, who   is at the center, who    is serving and being served.
                                                                                                               19
Training Staff and Volunteers

 Training and development enhance employees’ and volunteers’ growth and professional
 development. To support all employees and volunteers, we must create and provide training
 that represents and includes everyone.



                                               au

 e   Have we considered diversity and inclusion when staffing for internal trainer rotations and hiring
     external consultants? Do trainers embody the diversity of the youth we serve?
 e   What is the current diversity profile of trainers? How does it compare to the diversity profile of the
     youth we serve? (Reflect on your staffing demographics and hire accordingly.)
 e   How can we recruit trainers from diverse backgrounds, so they reflect the population we serve?
     Can we be more intentional about seeking diversity for rotational opportunities?




 e   Are training materials created and designed with inclusive language, scenarios, and photos? Do
     role plays, examples, etc. express the diversity of cultures in the youth we serve?
 e   Does the training material outline the need to recognize and acknowledge the different
     experiences people have based upon their identities without pressure for these people to speak
     for or represent an entire community?
 e   How are we currently training staff related to the competency and skills they need to work
     sensitively and effectively with individuals from diverse backgrounds, especially from historically
     underserved populations? What component of the training material will teach cultural sensitivity?
     Does the training material account for or address the need for trauma-informed care?
 e   How can we better train and educate our staff on the history of the U.S. juvenile justice system,
     Oregon's juvenile justice system, and the impact they have had on youth from marginalized
     communities? (This is trauma-informed because it acknowledges the experiences youth and
     families have with the criminal system   prior to commitment to OYA,   and how those experiences

     may impact their engagement and behavior or attitude towards OYA.)
 e   Do employees know how the knowledge attained from this training will be tied to their job
     performance and the measures we will use to determine this? If not, why not?
     (Continued on page 21)
Training Staff and Volunteers (continued)

 e   How will the learning objectives be designed to influence staff awareness and consideration of
     individuals and communities from diverse backgrounds? (The learning objectives should explicitly
     state this goal.)
 e   How do training materials account for different language fluency, learning styles and abilities,
     physical/sensory, and cognitive abilities? (Consider auditory, verbal, visual, and kinesthetic
     learning styles; include closed-captions and audio descriptions when possible; use clear and
     legible font large enough to be read from all parts of a room, etc.)
 e   Do visual materials (photos, videos, and graphics) reflect diversity?
 e   How are we monitoring the attitudes and conversations of the dominant culture during the trainings
     to recognize oppressive and harmful dialogue?
 e   How do we take into consideration the lived experience of staff from marginalized communities
     when developing training content? Are we getting feedback from staff from these communities?
 e   Are staff mandated to fully participate in the training? Are barriers addressed (safety, language,
     accessible location, time, avoiding religious and cultural holidays, culturally appropriate,
     accommodation       needs)? How will we ensure make-up sessions for staff who miss training?
 e   Have we welcomed the diverse perspectives of people who have specific equity concerns or
     needs, even if they may not be obvious? (LGBTQ+        identities; dietary, auditory, language needs or
     preferences, etc.)
 e   Inthe evaluation of the training, do we ask whether there were any barriers to participation or
     whether the facilitator was inclusive of the diversity of participants?




                                                                                                               21
Data Collection

 Considering equity when conducting our environmental scans, needs assessments, and data
 collection allows us to find disparate impacts and eliminate inequities that may exist.




 e
                                      al
     What current statistics or demographic data would help us understand the people or communities
     who face systemic barriers and inequities in relation to the issue in question? Will data gathered
     capture the diversity of the population? Is it broken down to make differences visible (also known
     as “disaggregated”)?
 e   How are we collecting, reviewing, and analyzing demographic data (race, ethnicity, gender,
     language, disability, etc.) to inform our decision? How is this data woven into decision-making?
 e   What do we want to accomplish by reviewing and analyzing this data? How will the metrics we
     analyze accomplish this for everyone, including people from historically marginalized
     communities?
 e   How can this data work toward improving achievement, opportunities, and other components
     within our system for youth or staff? How could it be used to increase the sense of worthiness and
     outcomes for underserved populations of staff or youth?
 e   Are we making assumptions that we need to verify? (Example: when we measure how safe youth
     feel in our custody, the data includes youth from historically marginalized communities explicitly
     disaggregated. Any data not broken down demographically fundamentally assumes the results
     includes those from underserved populations, which may not be the case.)
 e   How might we consult with the people most affected by any disparate impact we uncover to
     ensure the reliability of our data, approach, and findings? (Ask staff, leaders, and youth from
     marginalized communities about the culturally appropriateness of the data or approach, or present
     the information to OYA’s DEI Steering Committee for recommendations. )
 e   Does the final report include any findings on the specific equity and inclusion concerns identified?




                                                                                                            22
Process Improvement

 When we consider equity and inclusion in how we measure results, we take action to ensure
 that all benefit from the process and outcomes.




 e   Are there components of youth and staffs lived experience that cannot be captured in the form of
     data collection we use?
 e   What measures are we currently tracking and monitoring?
        e   How can we determine the level of equity based on the findings of each measure?
        e   Can the measure be broken down demographically to assess any disparate impact?
        e   What value does the measure hold if potential disparities cannot be assessed?
 e   What other approaches can we take? (focus groups, semi-structured interviews, etc.)
 e   What measures do we need to effectively monitor equity in decision points for our department?
 e   Have we spoken to youth or staff from marginalized communities to get their feedback on the
     measures and forms of data collection we have decided on?
 e   When analyzing our data, did we maintain a diversity of perspectives in the findings?
 e   What specific disparities were uncovered in the data analysis?
 e   How have we sought feedback from the population of staff or youth where disparities were found
     in data? (Validating our findings this way minimizes any bias influences.)
 e   Have we conducted a root cause analysis of disparities we find in the data? Have we created an
     action plan with SMART    (Specific, Measurable, Attainable,   Relevant, and Time-sensitive) goals to

     reduce the disparities we found in the data?
 e   How will we know this action plan is supporting our strategy to eliminate disparities impacting
     underserved populations? What are the measurable goals within our action plan?
Sources


 “Equity & Inclusion Lens Handbook’, City of Ottawa, Canada, and the City for All Women   Initiative
 (CAWI). www.caw/-ivif.org/publications/equity-and-inclusion-lens-handbook-2018


 Enterprise IT Governance Group (EITG): 21/23 IT Investment Budget Prioritization DEI Assessment


 Bread For the World Methodology:
 http://files.bread.org/institute/report/racial-equity/report-methodology.pdf


 Race Forward Equity Impact Assessment:
 www.raceforward.org/sites/default/files/RacialJusticelmpactAssessment_v5.pdf


 State of Oregon Equity Framework in COVID-19 Response and Recovery:
 www.oregon.gov/gov/policy/Documents/EquityFrameworkCovid19_2020.pdf




                                                                                                       24
