  Oregon Water Resources
  Department Environmental             OREGON
  Justice Report

  725 North Summer Street, Suite A
                                       WATER   RESOURCES
  Salem,OR 97301                       DEPARTMENT
  503-986-0900

  www.oregon.gov/owrd/




Annual Report for the Environmental Justice Council: 2023
                                   Table of Contents
Annual Report for the Environmental Justice Council: 2023

Introduction




                                                                           W
Environmental Justice Highlights




                                                                           DMD
Agency Environmental Justice Considerations (ORS 182.550 Section 1)




                                                                           oOo
Public Participation and Meaningful Involvement (ORS 182.535 Section 2)   10

Environmental justice impacts (ORS 182.550 Section 3)                     14

Agency Environmental Justice Progress (ORS 182.550 Section 4)             15

Environmental Justice Mapping Tool Involvement (ORS 182.550 Section 5)    17

Environmental Justice Council Engagement:    2024                         18

Agency Environmental Justice Council Legislative Citations                19

Agency Meaningful Engagement Legislative Citations                        20

Definitions                                                               22
                                          Introduction
Oregon Water Resources Department Mission Statement
The vision of the Oregon Water Resources Department (OWRD) is to assure sufficient and sustainable
water supplies are available to meet current and future needs.

OWRD’s mission is to serve the public by practicing and promoting responsible water management
through two key goals:
   e    To directly address Oregon's water supply needs.
   e    Torestore and protect streamflows and watersheds in order to ensure the long-term
        sustainability of Oregon's ecosystems, economy, and quality of life.

OWRD    is one of the natural resource agencies listed in HB 4077 and committed to supporting its
efforts toward environmental justice.

OWRD Leadership
Acting Director: Douglas Woodcock
Deputy Director, Strategy and Administration: Racquel Rancier
Acting Deputy Director, Water Management:      Ivan Gall
Oregon Water Resources Commission is OWRD’s advisory board (Water Resources Department :
Water   Resources Commission   : Water Resources Commission      : State of Oregon).


Environmental Justice Personnel
To advance racial and environmental justice, as well as foster diversity, equity, and inclusion, the
agency needs staff dedicated to this work to build relationships with BIPOC and rural communities
and other underrepresented or under-resourced groups; to identify data collection that can inform
equity work; to evaluate communications, programs, policies, and services through an equity lens;
and to ultimately provide guidance, expertise, and advice to the agency. This work requires a long-
term effort to build trust and collaboration and cannot be accomplished in one biennium.

As a result, the 2023 Governor’s Recommended      Budget for OWRD     included a policy option package
proposing two positions responsible for leading the agency's efforts in advancing environmental and
racial justice and diversity, equity and inclusion. These positions would have increased the agency's
capacity to reach underrepresented and underserved groups, including BIPOC and rural communities,
as well as to create a workplace culture that is welcoming and inclusive to all. The package also
contained $500,000 in base budget funding for services and supplies, which would be used for:
training, translating materials, conducting an organizational assessment, conducting engagement and
outreach with BIPOC and environmental justice communities, and for providing incentives and
accommodations to participate in Department rules advisory committees, workgroups, and other
engagement efforts.

This package was not funded by the 2023 Oregon Legislature. As a result, the Department does not
have dedicated environmental justice staff. Despite the lack of staffing, OWRD     staff leveraged
available resources in 2023 to move equity priorities forward by: 1) Hiring temporary staff to
shepherd immediate equity priorities, and 2) utilizing training opportunities to greound OWRD staff in
equity principles and practices. Note that the Department may not have the same opportunities in the
future, as the funding sources for some of these activities no longer exist or were based on project
specific funding. A description of these investments follows:

1.   Equity, Environmental Justice and Racial Justice Specialist (March - June 2023) — This temporary
     staff person was hired to work on the Planning, Collaboration and Investments team with the
     agencies involved in HB3293 (2021), researching environmental justice frameworks and best
     practices for equity-centered community engagement. This resulted in a draft project plan, an
     organized working group of the state agencies identified in the bill and a rough draft of Best
     Practices of Community Engagement for the working group to continue to refine.         ACommunity
     Engagement Coordinator hired in late spring has continued this work as described later in this
     report.

     DEI Plan Project Coordinator (March - June 2023):     A temporary project coordinator was hired to
     support the development of the approach for developing and incorporating a DEI plan into
     OWRD’s strategic plan.

     Integrated Water Resources Strategy (IWRS) Equity and Environmental Justice Policy Analyst
     (March - June 2023): This temporary position developed a report and presented the findings on
     DEI principles and evaluating the IWRS process and outcomes.      Recommendations were made for
     more inclusive approaches for the development of the next plan and considered both racial and
     environmental justice. The approaches she articulated translates to other bodies of work and can
     inform next strategic plan being developed in 2024.

     Inclusive Leadership Series (May - June 2023): OWRD      managers participated in this four-part
     training series led by Daryl Dixon from Cascade Employers Association. The training provided the
     history of how policy and workflows impact people of color and how past injustices show up in
     today’s workplace. There was a big focus on how to identify historical bias and exclusion, and how
     to be more inclusive leaders.

     Equity Trainings for staff:   OWRD’s DEI team worked closely with contracted equity facilitators to
     offer equity trainings in 2023 for interested staff and managers. The Center for Diversity and the
     Environment provided two 4-hour trainings, the first DEI trainings customized specifically for
     OWRD, to continue to build understanding of equity principles and practices in natural resource
     organizations. “No Magic Shortcut” and “Catalyzing Change Within OWRD” were offered to all
     staff in May-June of 2023, and over 50 staff participated. OWRD    contracted with the Avarna
     Group to provide two trainings to over 80 staff (“The What & Why of DEIJ and “The House of
     DEIJ).    Recordings of those webinar trainings and a DEIJ vocabulary sheet were emailed to all
     agency staff. The DEI Team participated in two additional webinars with the Avarna Group.
Agency Budget and Revenue Sources
e      Identify key environmental justice personnel within the agency.

There is no designated budget or resources specifically for environmental justice in the 2023-2025
biennial budget. Staff members spend a portion of their time working on environmental justice issues
and the agency is seeking to integrate DEI-EJ considerations and best practices into agency programs.
Without dedicated staff to help, however, this means that the agency is slowly making progress and
some programs are further along than others.

For example, several staff serve on an agency DEI team, which has helped the agency work on
projects to improve some of its recruitment practices and provide training. These staff members
volunteer to be a part of the team and work is performed as paid time during regular work hours, in
addition to their regular position responsibilities. Another example are the three full-time Community
Engagement Coordinators who incorporate environmental justice values into their community
engagement work (see more on these new positions below). Staff working on rulemakings and other
policy and budget development have also sought to be make our processes more inclusive and
transparent, as well as to engage water justice advocates. Communications staff have worked to
increase accessibility of our communications and where possible develop alternative language
formats for materials within the limited agency budget and capacity. Integrated Water Resources
Strategy staff worked with Oregon’s Kitchen Table to try to reach populations that the agency has not
engaged with in the past. As a result, while the agency doesn’t have dedicated resources, we are still
making progress where we can with existing staff.
                         Environmental Justice Highlights

1.   Integration of Environmental Justice into revised Integrated Water Resources Strategy (IWRS) is
     a statewide document that provides an outline for how we can both better understand our water
     resources, and better meet our state’s water needs. The first IWRS was published in 2012, the
     second in 2017, and work is underway on the next update. Public outreach and engagement
     efforts were conducted in May and June of 2023, designed specifically to broaden our reach to
     communities that have not historically participated in the IWRS process. Later in 2023, OWRD       led
     the draft IWRS development, with assistance from many other agencies. During this process,
     OWRD   hired a temporary employee with extensive background in EJ issues to help review the
     2017 IWRS and make recommendations. The IWRS project team is working to integrate these
     recommendations by adding environmental justice focused example actions for each IWRS action.
     The first draft of the IWRS will be released for public review and comment   in March 2024.

     House Bill 3293 provides six state agencies the ability to provide funding to help water project
     developers conduct outreach to communities and community members so their voices are heard
     and integrated into decisions regarding water projects. To this end, the bill instructed the named
     agencies to coordinate and develop Best Practices for Community Engagement and to recognize
     them in each agency’s Oregon Administrative Rules to help guide community engagement for
     work funded as authorized in the bill. These Best Practices are under development and informed
     by conversations with agency partners, local organizations, local governments, and others
     working in the field of community engagement. The Best Practices will then be followed by water
     project developers that receive funding to undertake the work authorized under this bill.

     Community Engagement Coordinators were hired in the last eighteen months with funding
     authorized by the 2021 legislature. These three new positions bring much-needed capacity to
     surface community concerns/barriers and collaborate around solutions related to access to water
     and water management. This team is providing technical assistance or resources where
     appropriate, and developing relationships and connections intended to propagate a more
     collaborative relationship between communities and OWRD. In 2024, CECs will be implementing
     the Community Engagement Foundations (discussed below); coordinating cross-agency
     agreements re:   HB3293 Best Practices; providing engagement activities for water budget-related
     data (HB2018) and other technical   initiatives; and providing focused community engagement
     services to various communities around the state.

     Community Engagement Foundations is a framework and set of tools being developed to guide
     community engagement by staff across the agency. This framework will include fundamental
     equity principles, such as identifying and engaging stakeholders potentially impacted by a project
     or program early and often, expanding the stakeholders with which OWRD generally engages, and
     integrating questions into project planning that generate shared decision-making or more robust
     and/or culturally responsive communication when appropriate. In 2024, the draft framework will
     be completed and piloted (and then refined) with interested teams within OWRD.
The Business Case for Investing in Water in Oregon quantified at a high-level, the economic and
non-economic value of water in Oregon. OWRD contracted with an economics firm to produce an
overview of the risks Oregon faces, including water management, current beneficial water use,
and the demographics of the state. The risks identified included environmental justice and the
disproportionate impacts on frontline communities as the competition for scarce resources
increases. The report also included: an economic analysis including economic value and benefits
to the state from key water related industries and activities; select tribal perspectives; illustrative
case studies from around the state; and a final discussion on the cost effectiveness of investment
over non-investment in water around Oregon. The economic analysis is intended to show how
water is a significant driver of Oregon’s total economy.

The DEI Team is an agency team organized to promote equity, diversity, inclusion, and
environmental justice in the Department. After partnering with the Employee Services Section to
deliver a series of DEI trainings to staff in 2023 (see investment description above), the DEl Team
plans to host learning opportunities and discussion groups for staff in 2024.




               Babyfoot Lake in the Kalmiopsis Wilderness post-Biscuit Fire; Selma, OR
 Environmental Justice Considerations (ORS 182.550 Section
                                                     1)
Environmental Justice Consideration Process
OWRD    does not yet have in place a formal system for tracking environmental justice issues that have
been identified. It would be beneficial to have systems that could better capture the best
observations and thinking that come from identifying racial justice issues within the department.

OWRD staff are actively working to create structure and formalize processes that progress equity
practices in a more consistent manner. For instance, OWRD         is actively addressing a backlog in
rulemakings. This has given staff an opportunity to improve on what has been done before. Below are
some of the improvements recently implemented or in the process of being implemented:
    e   Broadening representation on Rulemaking Advisory Committees and holding more meetings
        to increase input.
    e   Utilizing GovDelivery to communicate about the process — this allows the public to choose
        what information they want to receive and receive it automatically.
    e   Broadening knowledge of process and water policy by holding trainings that enable people
        who do not specialize in water issues, or come from a community further from decision-
        making processes, to meaningfully participate.
    e   Updating rulemaking information on our website - all prospective rules are now together with
        summary, contact information, engagement opportunities and timelines, and all information
        related to each bill.
    e   Imbedding equity-centered questions that identify environmental and fiscal impacts, and
        people impacted by a rulemaking, earlier in the rulemaking process.

As these practices are being put in place, templates are being developed that can be used for
facilitating similar processes in other sections of the agency.

The community engagement team is in the middle of a similar progression, identifying changes that
can be made that result in broader and more equitable community engagement, and setting up
processes and supports that enable those changes to take root in the department (more about this
below in Meaningful Public Participation).

Another environmental justice consideration beginning to be addressed is the gap between the
complex science that is foundational to OWRD’s water management activities - from rules
development to supporting place-based planning — and the public’s understanding of water systems.
With legislative support (HB2018, OR Water Data Portal, HB2010), OWRD           is increasing its capacity to
do community engagement, public outreach, and develop information portals for the public to better
access and utilize the latest scientific information related to water.
OWRD’s work is highly dependent on Western Water Law, which dictates that some people will have
priority over others based on when water was first used. In some cases, this may be before Oregon's
statehood. This results in unequal access to water. Our role as an agency is to regulate to existing law.


Environmental Justice Community Considerations
e   How does your agency define environmental justice communities?

e   What tools does your agency use to identify and prioritize environmental justice communities ?

OWRD   uses the definition of “environmental justice community” found in ORS 182.535(4), which
states that an “‘environmental justice community’ includes communities of color, communities
experiencing lower incomes, communities experiencing health inequities, tribal communities, rural
communities, remote communities, coastal communities, communities with limited infrastructure
and other communities traditionally underrepresented in public processes and adversely harmed by
environmental and health hazards, including seniors, youth and persons with disabilities.” To help
ensure that these communities are considered/engaged, OWRD aims to use the questions found in
the 2021 Governor's DEI Action Plan, Racial Equity Toolkit (pp. 35-40). As noted above, OWRD is
working to develop a more formalized process for environmental justice considerations.
                                                                                                         10


      Public Participation and Meaningful Involvement (ORS
                                      182.535 Section 2)
Increase Public participation of Individuals and Communities Affected by
Agency Decisions
This is an area of opportunity at OWRD. With three new community engagement staff now onboard,
there are engagement activities happening in specific regions, and at the same time staff are
developing guidance to have a more consistent approach as an agency and generally improve our
engagement processes.

To work on geographic equity, OWRD      has focused on hiring engagement staff around the state.
Where these staff focus their regional work is still determined by the urgency of regional water issues
as each of the three CECs have huge areas in which they are providing support. These engagement
staff are a key step in shifting to more responsive approaches instead of continually reacting to crises.
These important shifts are happening because OWRD has clearly identified that water-related issues
in the state continue to be more complex and that community partnerships and place-based
solutions are key strategies to better prepare for a sustainable water future.


Public Engagement Policy Processes
e   Does your agency have a public engagement process for promoting community participation in
    agency decision-making processes?

Public engagement approaches currently vary across the agency. In 2024, community engagement
staff will be piloting the Community Engagement Foundations to create more consistent and defined
processes. Engagement also varies based on how a decision-making process is statutorily defined.
Statewide rulemakings or regulatory actions have a more defined process for engagement and OWRD
continues to refine its approaches to maximize opportunities for public input and consultation.
Engagement opportunities such as sharing scientific findings about Oregon’s water, or supporting
communities to address water challenges at the local level, are areas where OWRD       is investing in
additional staff to better support local decision-making and cooperative water management.

e   Describe the current level and quality of public participation.

The type and quality of public participation depends on the project and desired outcome.       A recent
survey of OWRD   staff regarding public engagement indicated a focus on sharing information (water
law, policy and science can be complex) with a wide range of technical assistance offered as well.
Many staff noted the importance of relationship and listening as well as going out into communities
to meet with people to work through complex issues together. Staff also reported a desire to have
better participation when they are seeking public input, and as described in Community Engagement
Considerations above, have been taking steps to grow in this area.

Community engagement staff have been using the |AP2 Spectrum to describe public involvement in
agency decisions and activities. In 2024, OWRD staff will be introduced to this spectrum along with
Se                                                                                                     11


 other engagement planning tools, so staff can integrate community engagement activities where
 appropriate as projects and decisions are being planned.


 Selected Audiences
 e   Has the agency performed an analysis to determine the stakeholder groups impacted by agency
     decisions?

 An agency-wide analysis has not been conducted in recent years. Stakeholder analysis is typically
 done at the project level. As the agency continues to grow and evaluate engagement processes,
 developing a consistent system for cataloguing this information would help with staff capacity
 limitations and help staff identify who should be invited to the table when it comes to an agency
 decision or project.

 e   With which stakeholders does your agency engage?

 In December 2023, OWRD       staff from sections that engage with the public were asked a series of
 questions to better understand how OWRD currently engage with the public. Sixty-eight staff
 responded via interview or survey.

 The questions were phrased broadly, beyond a strict definition of community engagement, to
 capture how, with whom and for what purpose staff from varying sections of the agency engage with
 the public. These results are being used to guide the evolution and support for public engagement for
 the department. The analysis of responses is underway and full results will be available in the spring
 of 2024.

 In an initial data review, landowners and other individual members of the public, other agencies, local
 governments (and their representatives), conservation groups, municipal water suppliers and
 irrigation districts were the most common    responses provided by OWRD     staff when asked with which
 external partners they regularly engage.    Other partners identified were tribal nations,
 universities/researchers, other community organizations, K-12 schools, realtors, Certified Water
 Rights Examiners, well drillers, policy makers, funders, cannabis growers, neighbors (often a
 complainant), and water haulers. Staff working in a region were much more likely to mention
 community-based partners. Statewide staff mentioned working with coalitions of community-based
 partners, such as place-based planning groups.

 The Oregon Water Resources Department (OWRD) also works closely with Oregon's nine federally
 recognized Indian Tribes on issues related to water supply, watershed management, and water
 distribution, including water rights held or claimed by the Tribes and/or tribal members. In 1997,
 OWRD       adopted a Government-to-Government policy statement that focused on two main points: we
 must honor and protect existing tribal rights to use water, and we must continue to forge
 partnerships to share responsibility for water management. Those partnerships are improved
 through regular communication and participation in the Natural Resources Working Group and the
 Cultural Resources Cluster Group. Annually, OWRD submits       a Government-to-Government Report to
Oregon's Legislative Commission on Indian Services, summarizing OWRD           work with Oregon's nine
Tribal Governments.



 Public Engagement Policy
 e      Describe policy if applicable. If not applicable, describe progress towards development.

 At this time the Department does not have an agency-wide public engagement policy. Community
 Engagement Coordinators will be working on community engagement foundations and tools for the
 agency in 2024. Once OWRD       leadership has had a chance to review then next steps on whether further
 guidance is needed.


 Meaningful Engagement
 e      What is the extent of meaningful engagement?

 This information was also gathered by Community Engagement staff in December 2023 and the results
 are currently being analyzed. The results will be shared back to agency staff with tools and supports to
 continue to grow and deepen our public engagement as an agency.

 OWRD has significantly grown in engagement staff in 2023 as the agency is committed to increase and
 improve its engagement activities. As noted in this report, there is a lot of planning activity regarding
 meaningful engagement, and the areas for improvement shift based on activity.

 Sometimes OWRD        is statutorily directed to consider only certain criteria, for example, in water rights
 transactions. In these circumstances, department staff provides the public due process as directed by
 the legislation and can work to improve the breadth of engagement as described above in
 Environmental Justice Considerations.

 OWRD   staff are also actively cultivating opportunities to engage with a broader set of the public that is
 interested in water issues. For example, OWRD       contracted with Oregon’s Kitchen Table      at the National
 Policy Consensus Center in 2023 to increase community engagement in the IWRS revisions to
 communities typically underrepresented in the process and experienced some broader participation.
 While OWRD increased engagement, it also heard that some ongoing stakeholders wanted to have
 more engagement in the process. How OWRD           staff engage with stakeholders with a long history in
 water while ensuring anyone ultimately affected is aware of and has the opportunity to provide input
 in a project or decision, is an area of growth for the agency. Having an equity coordinator would
 provide the capacity to make progress on this important growth point for the agency.
Follow-up
e      Does your agency follow-up with participants after decisions are made?

There are varying degrees of follow up based on the
issue and staff capacity. OWRD   staff consistently follow
up with funding applicants, Rules Advisory Committees,
and those asking for specific technical assistance or
customer service. OWRD’s follow up for broad public
participation processes has generally been to respond
to comments and share with its Commission, which
welcomes public comment.

                                                                Integrated Water Resources Strategy
                                                              Community Outreach Meeting in Seaside




                   “The IWRS Update engagement included a survey available in nine
                 different languages and coordination with many community organizers
                 to ensure input from a wide range of voices” - Crystal Grinnell, OWRD
                              Integrated Water Resource Strategy Specialist
                                                                                                     14


     Environmental Justice Impacts (ORS 182.550 Section 3)
Determine the effect of agency decisions on environmental justice communities.
e      Does your agency measure the impacts of agency decisions on environmental justice in
Oregon communities? Why or why not?

As stated previously in this report, OWRD staff are actively working to engage a broader set of
constituents and develop processes that better evaluate our impact on these communities.
Historically, we have lacked resources and understanding, which has made it challenging to identify
who is impacted and successful strategies for meaningfully engaging with those that are impacted.
OWRD   has broadened its understanding but has more work to do in this area.

The Community Engagement Foundations mentioned above will include recommendations for
identifying who could be potentially impacted both directly and indirectly and developing outreach
strategies accordingly. However, the challenge for the agency is that water touches every single
person in the state. There are certain entities that regularly engage and are directly affected, but the
implications ultimately affect everyone. OWRD    does not have a budget to support engagement or
communications work that has a broad statewide impact, so it will need to be strategic and prioritize
work as it moves forward.
                                                                                                           15


      Environmental Justice Progress (ORS 182.550 Section 4)
ORS 182.550 Section 4: Improve plans to further improve environmental justice
in Oregon;
 e       How is EJ built into agency strategic plans?

 e       What does your agency need to further develop and implement environmental justice policies
 at the agency?

OWRD    will be updating its strategic plan in alignment with the Governor’s January 2023 expectations.
As OWRD     is currently in the middle of a Director transition, OWRD,    Department of Administrative
Services and the Governor’s Office have agreed to delay plan submittal deadlines, so the new
Director can have an active hand in developing the agency’s upcoming goals and priorities. OWRD’s
next strategic plan will include actions to advance diversity, equity and inclusion, and the agency will
be participating in the agency DEI cohorts organized by the Department of Administrative Services.
The Department is currently scoping out a workplan and anticipates that the next strategic plan will
be adopted in 2024 or 2025.

Many of the strategies and activities mentioned above will be foundational to OWRD’s next strategic
plan, with continued equity work a key focus. For example, the IWRS provides a snapshot of the work
happening across agencies, and recommended strategies for moving equity forward. The community
engagement and place-based planning staff continue to bring forward the impacts of water
management on communities and their needs as we prepare for the plan. Much of the work
highlighted in this report will inform OWRD’s new strategic plan.

OWRD is still in the planning stages for the 2025-2027 Budget and Legislative Concepts. We will
update these developments in next year’s report. OWRD does not have any legislative asks in the
2024 (short) session.

The following would greatly support OWRD        in developing and implementing environmental justice
policies across the agency:

1.   Environmental Justice Coordinator: As stated previously, OWRD          has already identified the need
     for dedicated environmental justice staff. This is critical to setting and articulating a vision for EJ;
     developing more consistent policies and procedures; and supporting consistent practices across
     the various teams and sections.

2.   Facilitation training: This would enable our staff to be better listeners and ensure we are making
     space for all voices when engaging with community.

3.   Communication classes: These were offered in 2023 and some of our teams participated as part
     of their professional development. This is hugely helpful as staff engage with the public around
     often contentious water issues.

4.   Resources for training, communication and outreach to EJ communities: The addition of one
     communications coordinator and three community engagement coordinators in 2023 will enable
OWRD to develop and begin to standardize communications and engagement policies and
supports in 2024. Having additional resources to work with contractors to intentionally set new
goals and practices for engaging EJ communities would be beneficial. The agency also has a
limited budget for producing communications and outreach materials, and for conducting DEI-EJ
training within the agency.
                                                                                                     17


        Environmental Justice Mapping Tool Involvement (ORS
                                     182.550 Section 5)

e        How is your agency participating in the development of the environmental justice mapping
tool?



One of OWRD’s Community Engagement Coordinators will be participating on the Environmental
Justice Mapping Tool Working Group and will make recommendations to OWRD            leadership regarding
opportunities for OWRD    staff to provide input or engage with the tool as it develops.
         Environmental Justice Council Engagement:                                     2024

e      How would your agency like to engage with the EJC in 2024?



OWRD is eager to engage with the EJC. As mentioned above, it has invested staff resources to more
actively engage with the EJC and its many participants. In the meantime, OWRD      has already reached
out for consultation with the EJC regarding the scoping of Best Practices for water projects, as
outlined in HB3293, and is looking forward to engaging with the group in early 2024. OWRD      hopes to
identify areas of mutual interest that the EJC can provide advice and expertise to OWRD    as we
continue to mature in our environmental justice work.
                                                                                               19




         Environmental Justice Council Legislative Citations

e       Please share agency impacted legislation from the last legislative session where
Environmental Justice Council or Environmental Justice Task Force engagement is cited in the
legislation.



There was no OWRD-related legislation in 2023 that directly mentioned engagement with the
Environmental Justice Task Force or Environmental Justice Council.
                Meaningful Engagement Legislative Citations
e       Please share agency impacted legislation that includes language regarding meaningful
engagement.

e       How do agencies collaborate when multiple agencies are listed?



House Bill 3293      instructed the named agencies (Oregon Water Resources Department, Oregon
Department of Fish and Wildlife, Department of Environmental Quality, Oregon Department of
Health, Oregon Water Enhancement Board, and Business Oregon) to coordinate and develop Best
Practices for community engagement for the development and implementation of water projects the
agency funds. Agencies are required to recognize best practices in Oregon Administrative Rules to
help guide in community engagement by water project developers . HB3293 also encourages, but
does not require, the six agencies to make financial support available to local organizations and local
governments to create community engagement plans related to water projects. The six named
agencies started coordinating on the development of the Best Practices in spring 2023 and intend to
engage others externally before finalizing the Best Practices in 2024.

HB 2010 created the Place-Based Water Planning Fund and provides OWRD           permanent authority to
support place-based integrated water resources planning (place-based water planning). OWRD
piloted this approach with four places across the state since 2016. Place-based planning is a
collaborative and inclusive process that is designed to: (A) Gather information to develop a shared
understanding of water resources and identify critical issues and knowledge gaps; (B) Examine the
existing and future in-stream and out-of-stream water needs for people, the economy and the
environment; (C) Identify and prioritize strategic, integrated solutions to understand and meet
instream and out-of-stream water needs; and (D) Develop, implement and update a place-based
integrated water resources plan.

The bill notes that place-based integrated water resources plans are to be "developed using an open,
equitable and transparent process that fosters public participation and meaningful engagement with
environmental justice communities, consistent with the requirements of ORS 182.545.” The
established fund allows OWRD to provide grants to groups to do the pre-work to prepare for
planning, to develop place-based plans, and to coordinate implementation of state-recognized plans.
In addition to those three general categories of grants the bill specifically notes that OWRD    may
provide financial assistance to facilitate “associated public participation, including participation by
members of environmental justice communities, through education, outreach, financial support and
other activities."   A one-time deposit of S2M was put into the fund. OWRD is undertaking rulemaking
and program development in the 2023-2025 biennium.

HB 2010 specifically calls out that the Water Resources Commission may establish requirements for
promoting public participation and engaging environmental justice communities in its rules. In terms
of inter-agency coordination, prior to funding award OWRD      is required to consult with the
Department of Environmental Quality, Department of Land Conservation and Development, Oregon
Health Authority, Oregon Watershed     Enhancement Board, State Department of Agriculture and State
Department of Fish and Wildlife to understand agency capacity, provide assistance and engage in
planning.

HB 2010 also made change to the provisions related to the Integrated Water Resources Strategy,
including extending the requirement to review and update the IWRS from five years to at least eight
years. The bill also requires biennial workplan development for water-related activities and requires
the IWRS to included provisions to promote meaningful engagement with environmental justice
communities and to promote partnerships with tribes, state and federal bodies to implement
recommended actions. There are several other agencies who implement the IWRS, as well as the
update. The legislature established a permanent IWRS Specialist
position to implement the IWRS, develop updates, and coordinate
among state, federal, and local agencies, and educational and non-
governmental organizations.

HB2018 was enacted in 2021 to work internally and with external
partners through 2032 to develop and publish ground water budgets
for all major hydrologic basins in Oregon. This includes multiple layers
of data related to ground water levels, recharge and consumptive
use. The legislation also directs OWRD to engage communities.                  A new Agri-Met station in Pine
Community engagement staff hired in 2023 are now working with               Grove, OR provides partners and the
                                                                                interested public with robust
multiple sections across OWRD to develop meaningful community
                                                                             ongoing weather data to aid water
outreach that will be coordinated with other OWRD     outreach and                               ..
                                                                                     planning decisions.
engagement activities that can benefit from water budget
information, such as place-based planning, the Surface Water Availability Reporting
System Update, and the Oregon Water Data portal. This is an opportunity to develop meaningful
public engagement strategies that broaden public awareness and participation regarding the latest
water science and planning for a sustainable water future.

HB 5506 provided $100k one-time general funds to Portland State University’s Oregon Consensus to
continue facilitation of the Tribal/State Water Task Force to discuss issues related to water supply,
watershed management, water distribution, and tribal water rights. The Task Force started meeting
in September 2021 and released its Summary Report in February 2023. As the Task Force has focused
on education and ensuring that all parties have a greater understanding of the importance of water
and the future needs of water, it became clear that there are a number of shared values about water
that are agreed upon between both the Tribes and the state. This included recognizing the
importance of Tribal engagement in water planning in Oregon at all levels. The Summary Report also
identified key themes and recommendations which promote meaningful engagement.
                                           Definitions
Environmental Justice: (ORS 182.535 Section 3)
“Environmental justice” means the equal protection from environmental and health risks, fair
treatment and meaningful involvement in decision making of all people regardless of race, color,
national origin, immigration status, income or other identities with respect to the development,
implementation and enforcement of environmental laws, regulations and policies that affect the
environment in which people live, work, learn and practice spirituality and culture.


Environmental Justice Community: (ORS 182.535 Section 4)
“Environmental justice community” includes communities of color, communities experiencing lower
incomes, communities experiencing health inequities, tribal communities, rural communities, remote
communities, coastal communities, communities with limited infrastructure and other communities
traditionally underrepresented in public processes and adversely harmed by environmental and
health hazards, including seniors, youth and persons with disabilities.


Meaningful Involvement: (ORS 182.535 Section 7)
“Meaningful involvement” means:

(a) Members of vulnerable populations have appropriate opportunities to participate in decisions
   about a proposed activity that will affect their environment or health;

(b) Public involvement can influence a decision maker’s decision;

(c) The concerns of all participants involved are considered in the decision-making process; and

(d) Decision makers seek out and facilitate the involvement of members of vulnerable populations

Environmental Burdens: (ORS 182.535 Section 2)
Environmental burden” means the environmental and health risks to communities caused by the
combined historic, current and projected future effects of:

(a) Exposure to conventional pollution and toxic hazards in the air or in or on water or land;

(b) Adverse environmental conditions caused or made worse by other contamination or pollution;
   and

(c) Changes in the environment resulting from climate change, such as water insecurity, drought,
   flooding, wildfire, smoke and other air pollution, extreme heat, loss of traditional cultural
   resources or foods, ocean acidification, sea-level rise and increases in infectious disease.


Community Engagement Plan (ORS 541.551(a))
For the purposes of implementing ORS 541.551, means a plan to meaningfully engage and provide
suitable access to decision-making processes for disproportionately impacted communities,
underrepresented communities, tribal communities and all persons regardless of race, color, national
origin or income in planning for water projects using identified best practices.


Disproportionately Impacted Communities (ORS 541.551(b))
For the purposes of implementing ORS 541.551, “Disproportionately impacted communities” may
include:

                (A) Rural communities;

                (B) Coastal communities;

                (C) Areas with above-average concentrations of historically disadvantaged households or
           residents with low levels of educational attainment, areas with high unemployment, high
           linguistic isolation, low levels of homeownership or high rent burden or sensitive populations;
           or

                (D) Other communities that face barriers to meaningful participation in public processes.
