       CCOs and Coordinated Care
         House Behavioral Health and Health Care Committee
                          Oregon State Legislature
                             January 30, 2025

                                  Presenters:
Ann Ford, Chief Executive Officer of GOBHI and President of Eastern Oregon CCO
Josh Balloch, Vice President of Health Policy and Communications, AllCare Health




                                                                          Oregon
  CCO Oregon
CCO Oregon is a statewide, nonprofit 501(c)(3) member
association that convenes payers, providers, and other care
delivery partners to identify and advance evidence-based,
stakeholder-driven strategies that support coordinated care and
health transformation.


Our vision is a future with lower costs, increased access to
quality care and health-related social needs, improved            CCO Oregon celebrated the 10th anniversary
outcomes, and a sustainable workforce across the delivery         of Oregon’s coordinated care model in 2022.
                                                                  Watch the celebration video.
system through the widespread implementation of the
coordinated care model.


CCO Oregon engages our membership through our annual
conference and monthly workgroups focused on Behavioral
Health, Oral Health, Pharmacy, Government Relations, CCO                                              CCO       CS
Contracting & Operations, and Social Determinants of Health.                                      Oregon
CCO Oregon Membership
Advantage Dental                   InterCommunity Health Network
Advanced Health CCO                Jackson Care Connect
AllCare Health                     Kaiser Permanente
All Smiles Community Oral Health   Moda Health
Capitol Dental                     ODS Community Dental
CareOregon                         Oregon Dental Association
Cascade Health Alliance CCO        Oregon Primary Care Association
Cascadia Health                    PacificSource Community Solutions
Central City Concern               Permanente Dental Associates
Central Oregon Health Council      Planned Parenthood of the
Columbia Pacific CCO                  Columbia Willamette
Curandi                            Providence Medical Group
Eastern Oregon CCO                 Trillium Community Health Plans
GOBHI                              Umpqua   Health Alliance CCO        sesgssies |Steseitateaiiiaies
Health Share of Oregon             Willamette Dental
Hospital Association of Oregon     Willamette Health Council
                                   Yamhill Community Care CCO
OHP enrollment and CCOs
             ®    Coordinated care organizations (CCOs) contract with OHA to
                  deliver Medicaid, aka Oregon Health Plan (OHP) benefits.

             @®   1,438,080 Oregonians (33% of the state’s population) are on OHP.
                   O   92.4% (1,328,786) are enrolled in an CCO
                   O   7.4% (106,418 OHP) members are on Open Card, aka Fee for Service
                   O   More data is available at the OHA dashboard, updated 12/31/24

             @    cCcCO enrollment increased over the past five years, with the
                  implementation of the Healthier Oregon and OHP Bridge
                  programs, as well as the COVID-19 pandemic.

             @    97% of Oregonians have insurance coverage.

             @    There are currently 16 CCOs across Oregon.

                                                                             Oregon
Coordinated Care Organization 2.0 Service Areas
CCO 101
e   ACCO establishes and maintains a network of local providers to deliver the care that
    Oregonians on OHP need. The CCO and its network is sometimes referred to as the “hub and
    spokes” model.

@   In2012, the Oregon Legislature passed SB 1580, authorizing CCOs to achieve the Triple Aim:
     O   Better health and outcomes
     O   Higher quality patience experience
     O   Lower sustained costs

@   Prior to CCOs, OHP members may have had three separate plans for physical, mental health,
    and dental care. The different providers types were also not coordinated. This structure made
    care more difficult for patients and providers and more expensive for the state.




                                                                                           Oregon
CCO 101 (cont’d)
                                                    Every CCO is a local organization with a per-
                                                    member budget that grows at a fixed annual
         Best Practices       Paying for
         to manage and        outcomes              rate of no more than 3.4% for all health care
         coordinate care      and health            services.

                                                    Each CCO is accountable for health outcomes
                  BETTER HEALTH              :
 Transparency      “Siysai-8H\:):     Sustainable   in its community population.
  in price and                           rate of
     quality       LOWER COSTS           growth
                                                    CCOs have more flexibility than other care
                                                    delivery models to support innovative
              Shared         Measuring              approaches to care, community-specific
          responsibility    Performance
            for health                              efficiencies, and more rapid adaptations to
                                                    changing community needs.

                                                                                            Oregon :
CCO provider networks and community partners
CCOs are subject to network adequacy standards and contract with:
       Hospitals
       Counties                                                             Care Coordination   Services Team

       Peer support
       Housing and social service providers
       Community based organizations                                              Your Care Coordinators


       Wraparound services
       Schools and school-based health centers
                                                                AS,          [i    cl                oe
       Mental health and substance use disorder (SUD)
                                                                Primary       Mental
                                                                  Care        Health                         :
                                                                                                    Ph armacies     Social
       providers                                                                                                   Services
                                                                Providers    Providers
       Community mental health programs (CMHPs)
       Certified community behavioral health clinics (CCBHCs)
       Federally qualified health centers (FQHCs)
       Dental care organizations (DCOs)
                                                                                                                               a
       Non-emergent medical transportation (NEMT)                                                                 CCO         ws

                                                                                                           Oregon
CCOs are driven by and accountable to community
 CCOs’ per-member/per-month global budget payments provide some flexibility for CCOs to coordinate
 care for improved health population outcomes and make investments in their local communities.
 CCOs are governed by local Medicaid stakeholders that include health care providers, community
 members, and health system partners.
 CCO Governing Board meetings are open to the public and include time for public comment; minutes
 are posted on the CCO website.
 Community Advisory Councils (CACs) are groups of volunteers including OHP members that help the
 CCO to develop and sustain programs, improve services, and engage the greater community for input,
 feedback and prioritization
 CCOs convene community providers and partners to develop Community Health Improvement Plans
 (CHPs). Community Health Assessments (CHAs), and Comprehensive Behavioral Health Plans.
 CCO Quality Incentive Metrics assess CCO impact on various population health factors, along with other
 federally and state required measures.
 The CCO model emphasizes comprehensive, integrated care that is coordinated and member-centered


                                                                                           Oregon
cco contracting with the OHA
    Current statute requires that CCO Contracts have aterm of at least 5 years, but have been repeatedly
    extended:
     O    First contract: Began in 2012. OHA postponed the renewal until 2020
     O    Second contract (CCO 2.0): Began on Jan. 1, 2020. Was also expected to last 5 years, but in 2023 was postponed
          by the Legislature to 2027

@   The benefits of the model were clear by 2019: The overall cost of the CCO program grew at a rate of 3.4%
    per member per year. Prior to CCOs, the growth rate was at 5.4%,            which means about $2.2 billion in
    costs were avoided over the first five years.

@   Priority areas for CCO 2.0 were identified by Gov Brown:
     O    Focus on social determinants and equity
     O    Increase value and pay for performance
     O    Improve the behavioral health system
     O    Maintain a sustainable cost growth

e   The third multi-year contract is slated to begin on Jan. 1, 2027 and is expected to sustain the overall the
                                                                                                                           a)
    success of the model.                                                                                      CCO         *¢

                                                                                                            Oregon
And between multi-year contracts...
e   CCOs and their provider networks are responsible for hundreds
    of planning documents, reports, and audits each year.

e   Between the multi-year procurement contracts, OHA issues
    contract amendments each year with new requirements. For the
                                                                     CONTINUOUS
    2025 amendment,       23 changes were made.                      IMPROVEMENT

e   Along with the amendment, OHA publishes new rate schedules
    and per-member/per-month capitation rates each year.

@   CCOs and their provider network have implemented new §1115
    Medicaid Demonstration Waiver programs, such as Early and
    Periodic Screening, Diagnostic, and Treatment (EPSDT) coverage
    and Health Related Social Need (HRSN) climate, housing, and
    nutrition benefits.

                                                                               Oregon
Current challenges across CCOs
@   Provider reimbursement and fully funding Oregon’s Medicaid model:
     O    Providers rates are often higher under commercial plans; while acuity and administrative burden
          are often higher in Medicaid
     O    Program expectations frequently exceed reimbursement (i.e., HRSN, IIBHT, dental, and more)
          Lack of transparency into rate development; difficulty accepting trends and partner input
     O




     O    Medicaid and the Oregon Health Plan are not structured in a way that allows CCOs to just “pay
          more”
     O    Difficulty with provider recruitment and retainment, especially in rural and geo-isolated
          communities
    Complicated regulatory system and at times delayed guidance from OHA or federal government
    Care continuity barriers and department silos across multiples agencies (i.e. corrections)
    Balancing access, accountability, program expectations, provider reporting burden, and quality
    Specific provider gaps (i.e. interpreters) and a lack of diversity in the workforce
    System capacity shortages such as acute care and the State Hospital for behavioral health
    Lack of and high cost of housing exacerbates core system problems for patients and providers             =
    Social and environmental factors outside of CCO or provider control, i.e. wildfire, public         CCO   ws
    transportation, schools, pandemics, broadband access, fentanyl, etc.                              Oregon
(Some) 2025 CCO-related legislation
    Prioritized List task force: Task force bill to advise and oversee moving OHP's "prioritized list" from the
    Medicaid Waiver to the State Plan Amendment (HB 2212)
    CCO contract length: Extend the multiyear CCO contract period to 10 years (HB 2205)
    Rate review: Establish a more formal and transparent process to set CCO capitation rates (HB 2215)
    Minimum     Medical Loss Ratio (MMLR): Set MMLR in statute consistent with the federal standard (HB 2213)
    Annual CCO contract changes: Establish a clear process and criteria for proposing and adopting changes to
    the CCO contract that occur between the multi-year procurement process (HB 2209)
    Streamline regional planning: Align the community planning processes across CCOs, CMHPs, hospitals, and
    counties to better use payer and provider capacity (HB 2208)
    Adult Mental Health residential task force: Direct OHA to study and develop recommendations for CCOs to
    potentially administer the benefit for Adult Mental Health Residential Care (HB 2206)
    SHARE Initiative: Clarify and simplify CCO reserve requirements for community-led investments (HB 2214)
    Funding:   Fully fund the OHP and coordinated care model, including the provider assessment (HB 2010)

*These bills will be individually endorsed by CCO Oregon members

                                                                                                        Oregon
Questions?




   Samantha Shepherd
    Executive Director
       CCO Oregon
      (928)699-1343
samantha@ccoore gon.org
