                                                       OREGON
                                     ie                Department        of
                                     (~~~              Land     Conservation
                                        \     4        & Development



                 Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion Committee Charter
                                            Final Version - January 30, 2020

A.   Purpose

     This charter establishes the Department of Land Conservation and Development’s Diversity, Equity,
     and Inclusion Committee (DEI Committee/Committee), and sets forth its vision, objectives,
     responsibilities, and operation.

B.   Vision

     The DLCD workforce will represent the diversity of the communities we serve and foster a more
     diverse, equitable, and inclusive culture for employees, the public, and the local governments we
     serve. This diversity should exist across the breadth (functions) and depth (hierarchy) of
     government.
C.   Mission

     The DEI Committee works to integrate best practices for diversity, equity, and inclusion into agency
     policies and programs. The Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion Committee serves as an advisory body to
     the DLCD Management and Policy Teams. The DEI Committee will provide research,
     recommendations, event support, and policy guidance to the DLCD leadership as requested and as
     outlined in the DE] Committee annual work plan.
D.   Committee Membership
         1.    The DEI Committee will have no fewer than five and no more than eight members. One seat
               on the Committee shall be reserved for a current member of the American Federation of
               State, County and Municipal Employees (AFSCME) Local 3772’s board of directors. If more
               than eight staff request to participate, the Committee will prioritize cross-agency, multi-
               divisional representation when selecting members.

         2.    Members will be solicited from each of the following divisions Community Services Division,
               Director’s Office, Administrative Services Division, Planning Services Division, and Ocean and
               Coastal Services Division.

         3.    After the initial establishment period, membership will be open annually to regular DLCD
               employees who are committed to diversity, equity, and inclusion and who will actively
               participate in the mission, vision, and objectives of the Committee. Employees who are
               interested in participating will seek and obtain their manager’s approval, complete an
               application, and submit the application to the co-chairs and Management Sponsor. The
               Committee will review and recommend applicants to the Management Team for final
               approval.

         4.    Members will serve a 12 month term on the Committee. Members who have already served
               a term may request to serve for up to two additional terms. Such requests will be



' Local and Regional Government Alliance on Race & Equity, Public    Sector Jobs: Opportunities
                                                                                              for Advancing Racial
Equity, The Racial Equity Alliance, 2019. https://www.racialequityalliance.org/resources/public-sector-jobs-
opportunity-for-advancing-racial-equity/
               considered in the light of the members’ expertise and commitment, and with consideration
               to the benefit of providing the opportunity to serve on this committee to other employees.

          5.   Members    may spend up to eight hours per month of paid time on DEI Committee work.


          6.   Inaddition to the aforementioned committee membership, a Management Sponsor will be
               assigned by the Management Team to provide guidance to the DEI Committee and to
               coordinate communications with the Management Team.
E.   Committee      Roles and Responsibilities

     1.   Committee members are expected to contribute:

               a.   Regular meeting attendance (quarterly or as determined by the Co-Chairs);

               b.   Timely response to requests for information or assistance;

               c.   Subject matter expertise in support of the DEl Committee efforts;

               d.   Research or written guidance regarding staff trainings, policy, and program updates;

               e.   Support for committee activities (events or other subcommittee activities);
               f.   Communication to their respective teams and divisions about the objectives and
                    upcoming activities of the DEI Committee.
     2.   Meeting discussions shall be inclusive and collegial; recommendations shall be based ona
          majority of opinion.

     3.   Co-Chairs will facilitate the DEI Committee:
               a.   Committee Co-Chairs will be elected by members of the committee.

               b.   Co-Chairs will serve a 24 month term.

               c.   Co-Chairs will schedule meetings (quarterly or on a schedule determined by the Co-
                    Chairs), prepare the meeting agenda, facilitate meetings, and serve as Committee
                    spokespersons to the DLCD Management and Policy Teams.

               d.   Co-Chairs have the discretion to operate as Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson, and Co-
                    Chairs are encouraged to foster future leadership by retaining the positions of ‘past co-
                    chair’ and/or ‘incoming co-chair’ on the committee.

               e.   Co-Chairs will ensure consistent and timely meeting documentation and meeting note
                    distribution. Meeting notes will be made available to all DLCD staff.

F.   Objectives of the DEI Committee:
     The Committee will develop an annual work plan that addresses the below objectives; discussed and
     reviewed in draft by Management Team.
          1.   Develop recommendations for training, policies, and practices that foster a more diverse,
               equitable, and inclusive culture for employees, the public, and the local governments we
               serve.
          2.   Regularly review our agency tools, policies, and practices to pro-actively make
               recommendations for changes that implement nondiscrimination toward all prospective,


DLCD DEI Committee Charter                                                                               Page 2
                                                   OREGON
                                       ie          Department        of
                                                   Land    Conservation
                                       yy,         & Development

              current, and future employees, particularly for practices related to the recruitment,
              retention, and promotion of employees protected by the Equal Employment Opportunity
              Commission regulations and Oregon statutes.
        3.    Develop a scope of work that identifies priorities for defining and removing bias from and
              expanding access to land use planning in Oregon that: 1) includes a set of equity priorities
              for Oregon’s land use planning system; 2) identifies opportunities to highlight
              discrimination, bias, and inequities in the history of and current application of Oregon’s land
              use system; 3) engages local communities; and 4) supports the promotion of diversity,
              equity, and inclusion across Oregon.

G.   Charter Review

         1.   The charter will be reviewed by the Committee members at the beginning of each biennium
              and revised if needed.
        2.    Charter revisions will be reviewed and approved by DLCD Management Team.
