Services We Provide at Quantum Residential To Maximize Your Profits Home About Services Property Search Careers Residents Contact Us Home About Services Property Search Careers Residents Contact Us Services Quantum Residential Services We Provide We aim to not just manage, but to bolster the success and profitability of your investment. We do not believe in a “one-size fits all” method to management. Instead, we believe in an individualized 360-degree approach for each of your communities. Our 360-degree approach includes assessing and addressing the current demands of the community, forecasting for anticipated needs and implementing the necessary steps to stay ahead of the market. Quantum has been maximizing profit for clients in the Pacific Northwest for over 50 years, specializing in large conventional and affordable housing. – Better than Market Occupancy Rates – Accurate and Timely Accounting – Project Management – Resident Screening – Resident Utility Billback – Better than Market Collections – Market Analytics – Group Insurance – Bulk Discount Vendor Savings – Fair Housing Compliance – Preventative Maintenance – Tailored Marketing Strategies – Industry Leading Training – Resident Retention Programs – Affordable Housing Compliance We Manage 6,000+ Units 70+ Properties 25+ Cities Services More than a prominent industry name within the region, Quantum Residential’s 50 years of experience offers a legacy of success in the field of property management. Quantum has been an Accredited Management Organization (AMO) with the Institute of Real Estate Management (IREM) since 1984, making us one of only 554 firms in the United States with this accreditation. Maximization of Return on Investment We consistently exceed net income expectations for our clients. Our approach in maximizing the ROI of your assets is to create a personalized strategy for your asset based on your immediate goals and long term vision. Through proper preventative maintenance and established vendor relationships, we are able to obtain discounts for the properties and reduce overall expenses. By incorporating comprehensive industry reporting and personalized local market analytics, we are able to provide insights into how best to keep your asset profitable regardless of market changes. Our ability to offer our clients these services as part of our internal network increases the success of the community while remaining fiscally conservative, ultimately ensuring the maximization of your ROI. Asset Preservation Through regular inspections, preventative maintenance tracking and thorough training, we take pride in maintaining the asset with a big picture lens – never believing in the “duct tape” approach. Our clients appreciate the ability to have our team manage the daily operations of their assets, knowing that we value transparency and strong lines of communication. Industry Leading Accounting We take great pride in our outstanding accounting team, who consistently provide accurate and timely reporting. Each of our communities is assigned a dedicated Accounting Specialist and Payables Specialist to provide support. Our dedication to procedures and thorough multi-prong auditing process insures consistency and accuracy. Make the Move! Find Your New Home. (360) 696-9000 601 E 16th St, Vancouver, WA 98663 info@Qresinc.com Team Member Portal 2024 © Quantum Residential | All Rights Reserved | Privacy Policy | Accessibility Brand Name Brand Name