Public Defense Services Commission
                                                           2019-21                     2019-21                  2021-2
                                 2017-19                    0 i.                        0 i.                     0     3 .              2021-23
                                                        Legislatively               Legislatively           Current Service
                                 Actual                                                                                            Governor's Budget
                                                          Adopted                   Approved *                   Level
General Fund                         309,088,199               342,319,238                342,078,348              396,803,692            379,627,352
Other Funds                            4,700,093                 4,039,068                 13,586,941                4,449,667             13,449,667
Total Funds                          313,788,292               346,358,306                355,665,289              401,253,359            393,077,019
 Positions                                     76                          81                          90                     79                     112
 FTE                                        75.80                       80.80                       86.47                 78.80                   106.05
* Includes Emergency Board and administrative actions through January 2021


Program Description
The Public Defense Services Commission (PDSC) was established as an independent state agency in 2001. By statute, the Commission is to
“establish and maintain a public defense system that ensures the provision of public defense services in the most cost-efficient manner
consistent with the Oregon Constitution, the United States Constitution, and Oregon and national standards of justice.”

The agency is organized into three divisions: (1) Appellate Division consists of public defense attorneys who represent eligible persons at the
appellate court level and is responsible for providing appellate representation on criminal matters, juvenile dependency and termination of
parental rights cases, and parole cases. The Appellate Division has two sections; the Criminal Appellate Section (CAS) and the Juvenile
Appellate Section (JAS). This is accomplished primarily using staff attorneys. (2) Professional Services Account (PSA) consists of the funding for
contract defense services, including attorneys, investigators, and expert witnesses, contracted attorney support staff, and case managers as
well as non-routine expenses including psychological evaluations, discovery, etc. The PSA may include funding for the Parent and Child
Representation Program (PCRP) and can be further delineated into death penalty and non-death penalty cases. PSA costs are primarily at the
trial court level. (3) Contract and Business Services Division is responsible for administering the public defense contracts that provide legal
representation for eligible persons, processing requests and payments for non-contract fees and expenses, and the budget and other
financial activities of the Commission.

Applicants for state-appointed counsel pay a $20 application fee unless the fee is waived for financial hardship reasons. In addition, the court
may find that individuals are able to pay a contribution towards their defense costs. PDSC transfers ACP revenues back to the Judicial
Department to support program Verification Specialist positions in the courts and uses the remaining revenue to support the Contract and
Business Services Division. ACP cash balances above reserve requirements have also been used to augment Professional Services Account
expenditures.




LFO 2021-23 Budget Review (John Borden)                                         1                                                                          05/03/2021
The number of cases is affected by numerous factors, including crime rates and demographic factors, such as population size and age
distribution. When, for example, law enforcement is reduced or expanded as a result of economic conditions, the number of arrests and
prosecutions can change. The state of the economy also affects the number of people who are financially eligible for public defense services
and it may affect funding levels for public safety and judicial services.

CSL Summary and Issues
The 2021-23 current service level budget for the agency totals $401.3 million total funds, including $396.8 million General Fund and $4.5
million Other Funds. The budget includes 79 positions and 78.8 FTE. The CSL is $46.1 million, or 13%, more than the 2019-21 legislatively
approved budget of $355.2 million and has 11 fewer position (7.67 FTE) than the approved budget. The decline of nine of the positions is
attributable to an interim Emergency Board action (April 2020), discussed in more detail under the Emergency Board/Special Legislative
Actions section, and whose roll-up costs have yet to be incorporated in the 2021-23 budget.

PDSC’s decision to move to a new contracting model (discussed in more detail below), and other changes, were done outside of the routine
biennial budget development process and timelines and therefore were not incorporated into the 2021-23 current service level. The current
service level, which was calculated based on a financial rather than a case-based forecast, is significantly underfunded. Savings in reduced
death penalty cases has been “absorbed” by the agency due to higher trial-level contract costs under the new model and higher PSCP costs.

The Commission directed that the agency (i.e., the Office of Public Defense Services) implement the new contracting model in a budget
neutral manner; however, that has not been the case. PDSC is having difficulty quantifying the financial impact the agency’s procurement
activities related to the new contract model, including accounting for adjustments made for the overpayment of case credits under the prior
contract model.   In addition, some new contracts have already been amended.

The 2019-21 PDSC budget used one-time Title IV-E Foster Care funding to expand the Parent and Child Representation Program to four
counites; however, there currently is insufficient current service level funding for this expansion, the cost of which is estimated at $5 million.
An adjustment (i.e., fund shift of General to Other Funds) is also needed to reflect the continuation of Title IV-E Foster Care funding.

Like the Legislative Branch, Judicial Branch agencies, are allowed to keep any unspent General Fund balances at the end of a biennium.        PDSC
is currently forecasting no General Fund carryforward even given what should have been saving resulting from the pandemic.

Policy Issues
There are a number of policy and legal issues facing PDSC, including the following:

Sixth Amendment Center Report - In late 2018, the Sixth Amendment Center released the findings of its review of Oregon’s indigent public
defense system. Among other things, the independent review found the state’s method of contracting for public defense services — the fixed

LFO 2021-23 Budget Review (John Borden)                                  2                                                               05/03/2021
fee per case model — did not meet constitutional standards. In September 2020, the Commission approved a “new” contracting model that
is being implemented for contracts that take effect January 1, 2021. The contracts are based on the number of attorneys and support staff
required to handle the projected caseload. The agency will pay a single statewide rate for each full-time equivalent attorney and each
support staff (or fraction thereof), and a regionally-adjusted rate for administrative costs. There are caps on the number of cases an attorney
can handle. The Sixth Amendment Center report led to the introduction of reform legislation (HB 3145) in the 2019 Legislative Session. The
legislation failed to gain passage; however, some actions were taken in the 2019-21 budget to begin to address issues raised in the report. In
regard to the public defense contracts, a budget note was adopted directing the PDSC to develop a new contract model.
PDSC, however, has developed no implementation plan associated with the Sixth Amendment Center report findings, including which
findings the agency has chosen to accept, nor has the agency undertaken a financial analysis related to the cost of adopting the
recommendations.

HB 4004 (2020) - HB 4004 from the Legislative Session in 2020 remained at the second chamber desk upon adjournment. This measure
would have expanded the membership of the Public Defense Services Commission from seven to nine members and require the adoption of
specific policies by the Commission for contracting with public defense providers. A similar measure, HB 2003, was introduced during the
Legislative Session in 2021. The Sixth Amendment Center Report found that the composition of PDSC does not adhere to national standards,
in that all commissioners are appointed by the judiciary, while the legislative and executive branches of government have no equal voice in
the commission’s affairs.

United States Supreme Court’s decision in Ramos v. Louisiana, 140 S Ct 1390 (Apr 20, 2020) - The U.S. Supreme Court ruled in Ramos v.
Louisiana that the Sixth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution (rights related to criminal prosecutions) requires that guilty verdicts for criminal
jury trials be unanimous. The decision affects not only those persons currently in custody, but persons who have served their sentence and
post-prison supervision but have a felony conviction from some time in the past. All those persons would currently be able to bring a post-
conviction relief case challenging their conviction. The key issue for these cases is whether the Ramos rule should be made retroactive, which
will ultimately be decided by the U.S. Supreme Court and the Oregon Supreme Court. The Oregon Supreme Court has just recently began
issuing decisions related to Ramos cases. Hundreds of criminal convictions have been pending appeal before Oregon’s appellate courts
awaiting the Ramos decision and it is anticipating that thousands of cases could be filed over the next biennium seeking relief from non-
Unanimous criminal convictions.

Other Policy Issues - The Legislature in 2021 will likely continue discussions around public safety system and policing reforms as well as the
implementation of Ballot Measure 110 (2020) and the decriminalization of certain drug offenses.

Pandemic
State and federal courts are providing essential services; however, courts are operating at reduced capacity. There is presumed to be a
growing backlog of existing criminal cases due to the pandemic and new cases arising from the pandemic, which will impact future

LFO 2021-23 Budget Review (John Borden)                                 3                                                              05/03/2021
prosecutorial and investigative activities. While the Professional Services Account should have been experiencing some level of reduced
expenditure related to the pandemic, that has yet-to-occur.

The pandemic has resulted in an increase in the filing of state habeas petitions.   Habeas corpus is a legal remedy, under state and federal
constitutions, available to adults in custody to challenge the conditions of their confinement due to either the failure of a jail or prison to
provide adequate care for a serious medical condition or sentencing errors that keep persons incarcerated past a sentence date. Each case is
unique to the medical condition of the petitioner and must be coordinated with the Department of Corrections (DOC). A class action lawsuit
(Maney et al v. Brown et al) was filed by prisoners held by DOC and that matter is expected to last into the 2025-27 biennium.

Other Significant Issues and Background
PDSC is facing a convergence of governance, procurement, human resource management, financial management, performance management,
information technology, and funding challenges, which have been brought to the forefront due in part to the agency’s recent change to a
new contracting model for public defense services as well as the expansion of the PCRP program.

Current Biennium Deficit
PDSC forecasted a General Fund deficit for the current 2019-21 biennium due to the following: (1) contract model change; (2) Parent Child
Representation; (3) Ramos decision; (4) pandemic/Habeas Corpus petitions. The contract model changes may not be budget neutral as has
been originally reported. This deficit may also be attributable to non-routine expenditures. The deficit of $7.6 million General Fund was
funded by the Legislature [HB 5042 (2021)]. In addition, PDSC is now projecting a new General Fund budget deficit for the remainder 2019-
21 biennium, which is currently estimated at $3 million.

Emergency Board/Special Legislative Actions
PDSC has had budgetary adjustments resulting from Emergency Board meetings in April, August, and December of 2020 and January of 2021.
Adjustments were also made during the Second Special Legislative Session in August of 2020. Several of the more noteworthy actions
included:

   e   Emergency Board Action (April 2020) approved $3.9 million for nine positions (9.00 FTE) and information technology services to
       improve oversight of indigent defense contracts as well as to provide a rate increase for related investigator and interpreter services
       (Policy Package #081 April 2020 Emergency Board totals $2.9 million and nine positions (9.00 FTE) in roll-up costs). Of note, is that
       almost immediately after receiving authorization of new positions, the agency reclassified a number of the position administratively.
   e   Second Special Legislative Session Action (August 2020) - eliminated the $16.1 million special purpose appropriation, which was the
       remaining balance of a $20.0 million appropriation that was available for allocation to the Public Defense Services Commission for
       caseload activities, including activities designed to improve public defense caseloads.



LFO 2021-23 Budget Review (John Borden)                                   4                                                               05/03/2021
   e   Second Special Legislative Session Action (August 2020) - the Financial Management System Replacement Project (SB 5532 2019
       budget note) was initially funded with a $2 million special purpose appropriation. Based on the current project timeline, the funds
       were not needed in the current biennium and were disappropriated.
   e   Second Special Legislative Session Action (August 2020) - provided $9 million Federal as Other Funds for Title IV-E Foster Care to fund
       legal representation of certain children and/or parents and training for contract providers and reduced General Fund by $4.5 million.
       Federal policy was revised to allow states to claim Title IV-E administrative costs (at a 50% match rate) for independent legal
       representation of children and their parents when (1) the children are candidates for Title IV-E foster care, or (2) the children are in
       foster care and the legal representation assists the subject children and parents to prepare for and participate in foster care legal
       proceedings, such as court hearings related to a child’s removal from the home.
   e   Emergency Board Action (January 2020) - provided $514,091 Other Funds from the Department of Administrative Services and the
       Coronavirus Relief Funding for costs associated with the legal filing of Habeas Corpus petitions for eligible adults in custody.

Budget Notes
The Legislature in 2019 approved a series of budget note for PDSC and that primary centered around the Sixth Amendment Center report
findings.

       Budget Note: (SB 5532 2019) - The Commission is directed to work collaboratively with the Oregon Judicial Department and other
       stakeholders to identify and begin implementing system changes to improve quality assurance and oversight of the Commission’s
       public defense services contracts, specifically on indigent defense. The Commission is directed to report to the Joint Committee on
       Ways and Means during the 2020 legislative session on changes identified and/or implemented to address quality assurance issues
       raised in the 2019 report by the Sixth Amendment Center.

       Budget Note (HB 5050 2019) - The Oregon Public Defense Services Commission is directed to work with stakeholders to identify data
       public defense contractors should be required to submit to the Office of Public Defense Services as part of its contractual agreement.
       It is the Legislature’s intent that OPDS, in establishing reporting requirements, obtain data that to the greatest extent possible will
       allow the agency to determine (1) the level and quality of services provided to each defendant, and (2) improvements in case
       outcomes for defendants.

       Budget Note (HB 5050 2019) - The Oregon Public Defense Services Commission shall evaluate options for delivering indigent public
       defense services and adopt an approach that delivers quality public defense services. In its evaluation of public defense contract
       options, the Commission is directed to consider the findings of the January 2019 report by the Sixth Amendment Center entitled “The
       Right to Counsel.” As part of its new contract model, the Commission shall require contract attorneys to provide information the
       Commission determines is needed to demonstrate the level and quality of services provided, and the case outcomes.


LFO 2021-23 Budget Review (John Borden)                                  5                                                               05/03/2021
        Budget Note: (SB 5532 2019) -The Public Defense Services Commission is directed to work closely with the LFO and regularly report
        on the status of the Financial Management System Replacement Project throughout the lifecycle of the project and follow the Stage
        Gate review process as administered by the LFO. The Commission is further directed to (1) retain the services of qualified project
        manager(s) with experience in planning and managing projects of this type, scope and magnitude; (2) retain the services of business
        systems analyst(s) with demonstrated experience working on modernization programs of this type, scope and magnitude; (3) develop
        and update the business case and foundational project management documents as required; (4) work with LFO to acquire
        independent quality management services as necessary to conduct an initial risk assessment, perform quality control (QC) reviews on
        the business case, procurement documents and foundational project management documents as appropriate, and perform ongoing,
        independent quality management services as directed by the LFO; (5) submit the updated business case, project management
        documents, initial risk assessment, and QC reviews to LFO for Stage Gate Review; and, (6) report back to the Legislature on project
        status during the 2020 Legislative Session and/or interim legislative committees.

Agency Request Budget
PDSC submitted a number of budget requests for consideration by the Legislature some of which include the following:

Trial Representation ($14.1 million General Fund) - Requests funding to increase the statewide provider pool by 30 representational units.
This package allows OPDS to address disparities between high workloads and attorney compensation for public defenders. Adding 30
representational unit will allow historically overloaded areas in the state to add capacity, enabling attorneys to lessen their caseloads and
represent their clients to the best of their ability.

Contract and Business Services Infrastructure ($2 million General Fund; 10 position/7.75 FTE) - Request administrative positions to perform
the business functions necessary to support the public defense system.

Parent and Child Representation Program ($4.9 million General Fund; 5 position/3.75 FTE) - Request to expansion of the Parent Child
Representation Program (PCRP) into three additional counties, including Clackamas County, Douglas County and Clatsop County, plus added
internal infrastructure to direct and oversee the expansion. Expansion to Multnomah County became effective July 1, 2020. The program is
currently offered in Columbia, Coos, Lincoln, Linn, Yamhill and now Multnomah counties.

Appellate Mandated Caseload ($2.2 million General Fund; 9 positions/6.75 FTE) - Requests additional attorneys and staffing to meet the
Appellate Division - Criminal Section’s key performance measure of attaining a median number of days to file the opening brief equal to 180
days past record settlement and add an Juvenile Appellate Section attorney position to address an increase in case intakes.

Information Technology Project - Case and Financial Management System - There was no policy package request submitted for the agency’s
information technology project.

LFO 2021-23 Budget Review (John Borden)                                 6                                                             05/03/2021
Governor’s Budget
The 2021-23 current service level budget for the agency totals $401.3 million total funds, including $396.8 million General Fund and $4.5
million Other Funds. The budget includes 79 positions and 78.8 FTE. The current service level budget is $46.1 million, or 13%, more than the
2019-21 legislatively approved budget of $355.2 million and has 11 fewer position (7.67 FTE) that the approved budget. The budget
eliminates all General Fund policy packages plus includes a two percent (unspecified) General Fund reduction which when combined totals a
$34.1 million reduction from the Agency request budget (policy package position/FTE counts remain, but unfunded). The two percent
reduction to the current service level alone totals $7.9 General Fund. This reduction is meant to be a proportionate reduction taken by both
the Executive and Legislative Branches of Government. After reducing the agency’s current service level budget, the Governor’s budget then
added an Emergency Board special purpose appropriation for $20 million General Fund “...to address pay parity,” which is assumed to be
more than just funding to address pay differences between state Appellate Attorneys in PDSC and Department of Justice attorneys.

Reduction Options
Reduction options may be limited given the constitutional and legal requirements surrounding public defense; however, past recessionary
periods have necessitated reductions to public defense. The state has a constitutional obligation to provide counsel for eligible persons and
to provide for timely adjudication. If insufficient funding for public defense results in violation of these constitutional provisions, the court
must dismiss the case and release the person. The Commission has no legal authority to control the number of public defense cases it
receives, nor any authority to prioritize case-types. In the absence of any prioritization and adequate public defense funding, the courts
would need to dismiss cases.

Key Performance Measures
A copy of PDSC’s Annual Performance Progress Report can be found on the LFO website:
https://www.oregonlegislature.gov/Ifo/APPR/APPR        PDSC   2021-01-21.pdf




LFO 2021-23 Budget Review (John Borden)                                  7                                                               05/03/2021
