2024 Annual Report | Race Forward Skip to main content Main navigation Learn About Us Our Story Our Mission, Vision, and Values Our Strategic Plan Annual Reports 2024 2022-23 Projects, Programs, & Initiatives Butterfly Lab Colorlines Government Alliance on Race and Equity H.E.A.L. (Honest Education Action and Leadership) Together Housing and Land Justice Narrative Place-Based Strategies (Co-governance) Policy Innovation Lab Services for Organizations Our Board Our Team Get Tools and Resources Understanding Racial Equity Events Cultural Week of Action Facing Race Conference Just Narratives Training Racial Equity Series H.E.A.L. Together Training Government Webinars (#RaceAnd) Podcasts Toolkits Reports Ways to Give Open Search Donate Now Submit Close Search Breadcrumb 2024 Annual Report 2024 Annual Report 2024 Annual Report Race Forward’s commitment to advancing racial equity and a just, multiracial democracy is stronger than ever. Even in these uncertain times, we continue to work toward a vision of a multiracial democratic society where all people, regardless of race, gender, gender identity, economic status, and abilities can thrive. Our 2024 Annual Report recaps how our programs build collective power, transform institutions, develop and uplift enduring narratives of the world we want, engage strategic partners, and more. For instance: More than 1,100 people attended one of our racial equity training sessions to build their skills in talking about and using racial equity in their practices. More than 5,000 parents, students, and educators engaged with our HEAL (Honest Education Action and Leadership) Together initiative Public Schools Strong to fight for equitable, fully-funded public education. More than 4,000 civil servants across all government levels (federal, regional, state, and local) engaged with our Government Alliance on Race and Equity network and our Federal Initiative to Govern for Racial Equity to work toward transforming our public institutions to protect and provide public goods for all Americans. Approximately 14,500 people downloaded and listened to our Momentum podcast for analysis and to make meaning of current issues from leaders across sectors. See the Full Report Footer Careers Contact Us Press Privacy Policy ©1999–2025 Race Forward. All rights reserved. Donate Now Sign Up For Our Newsletter Charity Navigator Candid Youtube Instagram LinkedIn Bluesky Facebook Threads