                 €Nr,
               gee    7
           @
      sx
       >
                                3                U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT
     7*
     %%,                    |       :                           WASHINGTON, DC 20410-5000
           &
               Dp               :
                    4%   ove”



     OFFICE OF PUBLIC AND INDIAN HOUSING




     Special Attention of:                                                Notice PIH 2020-32
     Directors of HUD Regional and Field
     Offices of Public Housing; Public Housing
     Agencies                                                             Issued: November 20, 2020

                                                                          Expires: This notice remains in effect
                                                                          until amended, superseded, or rescinded

                                                                          Cross References: 24 CFR 882.514, 24
                                                                          CFR 960.208, 24 CFR 966.54; 24 CFR
                                                                          966.56; 24 CFR 982.554; 24 CFR
                                                                          982.555; 24 CFR 982.301(a); 24 CFR
                                                                          983.252(a); Notice PIH 2013-27; Notice
                                                                          PIH-2015-06; Notice PIH-2019-05




     Subject: Guidance for PHAs on the Allowability of Remote Hearings and Remote
     Briefings


1.   Purpose. The Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) and social distancing requirements
     present significant challenges for public housing agencies (PHAs) to conduct in-person hearings
     and briefings.                     As remote environments become more common, this guidance presents best
     practices for determining if barriers exist to conducting a remote hearing or remote briefing. If
     the remote hearing or remote briefing is scheduled, this guidance also outlines PHA
     requirements to ensure equal opportunity and nondiscrimination for individuals with disabilities
     and limited English proficient (LEP) persons under Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of
      1973 (Section 504), the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA), Title VI of the Civil
     Rights Act of 1964, and the Fair Housing Act. This notice will remain in effect post-COVID-19.
     This notice provides a summary and hyperlinks to guidance that discuss approaches to remote
     hearings. Readers are advised that this document is not exhaustive.

     The contents of this notice, except when based on statutory or regulatory authority or law, do
     not have the force and effect of law and are not meant to bind the public in any way. This
     document is intended only to provide clarity to the public regarding existing requirements under
     the law or agency policies.

2.   Background. The activities in HUD-assisted programs listed below require an individual or
     group meeting to convey or meet regulatory requirements. Advances in technology provide



                                                        www.hud.gov     espanol.hud.gov
options for PHAs and families to participate remotely. Hearings and briefings may be
conducted telephonically, via video-teleconferencing, or through other virtual platforms absent
a request by a party for an in-person hearing or briefing. Below are the regulatory program
requirements for a hearing or oral briefing.

  Public Housing program:


      a.   Applicant: The PHA must provide an applicant an opportunity for an informal
           hearing following the PHA’s determination of applicant ineligibility and denial of
           admission to a project (24 CFR 960.208).
      b.   Participant: PHA grievance procedures are required to assure that a tenant is
           afforded an opportunity for a hearing if the tenant disputes any PHA action, or
           failure to act, involving the tenant’s lease or adverse effects on the tenant’s rights,
           duties, welfare, or status (24 CFR Part 966, Subpart B). These include termination
           of tenancy, denial of household composition changes, denial of transfers,
           determination of rent, and other adverse actions such as fees.

  Housing Choice Voucher (HCV), Project-Based Voucher (PBV), and Moderate
  Rehabilitation programs:


      c.   Applicant: An oral briefing is required for all new applicants to the HCV program
           (24 CFR 982.301(a)) and the PBV program (24 CFR 983.252(a)). A briefing is
           required for all new applicants to the Moderate Rehabilitation program (24 CFR
           882.514(d)).
      d.   Applicant: The PHA must provide an applicant an opportunity for an informal
           review of the PHA decision denying assistance to the applicant (24 CFR 982.554;
           24 CFR 882.514(f)).
      e.   Participant: The PHA must provide a participant an opportunity for an informal
           hearing if a participant contests the PHA’s determination of the family’s income,
           utility allowance, or unit size, or if the participant contests the PHA’s proposed
           termination of the participant’s assistance. If the PHA seeks to terminate the
           participant’s assistance, the PHA must first provide the opportunity for an informal
           hearing before it terminates housing assistance payments (HAP) for the family
           under a HAP contract (24 CFR 982.555(a)(2); 24 CFR 882.514(f)).
      f.   Tenant Protection Voucher (TPV) Family Briefing: Notice PIH-2013-27 requires
           PHAs to conduct a family briefing prior to obtaining a family’s voluntary written
           consent to relinquish their right to tenant-based assistance for families electing to
           remain in a project with TPVs. This applies to projects selected for PBV assistance
           that have undergone a Housing Conversion Action and projects that will undergo a
           Housing Conversion Action prior to the PHA’s selection of the PBV project.
           Likewise, Notice PIH-2019-05 also requires a family briefing prior to obtaining a
           family’s voluntary written consent to relinquish their right to tenant-based assistance
              if a PHA plans to use PBVs as part of, or immediately following, a Section 22
              streamlined voluntary conversion of a public housing property.

3.   Applicability. This notice applies to all PHAs, including Moving to Work agencies,
     administering Public Housing, HCV/PBV and the Moderate Rehabilitation programs.

4.   Definitions.

         a.   Remote Hearing. Under this notice, a “remote hearing” in public housing refers to
              the informal hearing for a denial of admission (24 CFR 960.208(a)), the informal
              settlement of a grievance for a participant (24 CFR 966.54) and the grievance
              hearing for a participant (24 CFR 966.56). In the HCV program, a “remote hearing”
              refers to the informal review for denial of assistance (24 CFR 982.554) and an
              informal hearing for a participant (24 CFR 982.555). In the Moderate Rehabilitation
              program, a “remote hearing” refers to the informal hearing for denial of assistance
              or termination of assistance (24 CFR 882.514(f)).


         b.   Remote Briefing. Under this notice, a “remote briefing” refers to the oral briefing
              PHAs are required to provide to every new HCV program applicant (24 CFR
              982.301(a)), including project-based voucher applicants (24 CFR 983.252(a)) and
              the TPV family briefing (as described in Section 2.f above. It also refers to the
              briefing PHAs are required to provide to every new Moderate Rehabilitation
              applicant (24 CFR 882.514(d)).

5.   Requirements for the Technology Platform.

         a.   Accessibility requirements for persons with disabilities. Under Section 504 and
              the ADA, PHAs are obligated to take appropriate steps to ensure effective
              communication with applicants, participants, members of the public, and
              companions with disabilities through the use of appropriate auxiliary aids and
              services (AA/S) (28 CFR 35.160(a)(1); 24 CFR 8.6).       PHAs are required to furnish
              appropriate auxiliary aids and services to afford individuals with disabilities an
              equal opportunity to participate in, and enjoy the benefits of, each of the PHA’s
              services, programs, and activities (28 CFR 35.160(b)(1); 24 CFR 8.6). The Fair
              Housing Act has similar requirements (24 CFR 100.202(b); 24 CFR 100.204(a),
              (b)).   In addition, under these laws, PHAs are required to make reasonable
              accommodations in policies, practices, and procedures to ensure persons with
              disabilities have equal opportunity to participate in all the PHA’s privileges,
              benefits, and services (24 CFR 8.33; 28 CFR 35.130(b)(7); 24 CFR 100.204).


              i.      Accessible Platform. For a remote hearing or remote briefing, steps for an
                      accessible platform include ensuring any information, websites, emails, digital
       notifications, and platforms are accessible for persons with vision, hearing, and
       other disabilities. Helpful guidelines for ensuring the accessibility of web-
       based and digital materials are available through the World Wide Web
       Consortium’s Web Accessibility Initiative at https.//www.w3.org/WAI/.

 ii.   Individualized auxiliary aids or services. To provide effective
       communication in a digital context, individualized AA/S may include audio
       description, captioning, sign language and other types of interpreters, keyboard
       accessibility, accessible documents, screen reader support, and transcripts.
       Examples of AA/S that may be necessary when conducting a remote hearing or
       remote briefing can be found at 28 CFR 35.104.

       Under Section 504 and the ADA, the type of auxiliary aid or service necessary
       to ensure effective communication will vary in accordance with the method of
       communication used by the individual, the nature, length, and complexity of
       the communication involved, and the context in which the communication is
       taking place. Important information is conveyed during hearings and briefings.
       PHAs must give primary consideration to the auxiliary aid or service requested
       by the individual with a disability. In order to be effective, auxiliary aids or
       services as this term is defined in 28 CFR 35.104 and 24 CFR 8.3 must be
       provided in accessible formats, in a timely manner, and in such a way as to
       protect the privacy and independence of the individual with a disability as this
       term is defined in 28 CFR 35.108 (see also 28 CFR 35.160(b)(2); 24 CFR 8.6).


       PHAs may never request or require that individuals with disabilities provide
       their own auxiliary aids or services, including for remote hearings or remote
       briefings. PHAs may not rely on an adult or minor child accompanying a
       person with a disability to interpret or facilitate communication for such person,
       except in an emergency involving an imminent threat to the safety or welfare of
       an individual or the public where there is no interpreter available; or where the
       individual with a disability specifically requests that the accompanying adult
       interpret or facilitate communication, the accompanying adult agrees to provide
       such assistance, and reliance on that adult for such assistance is appropriate
       under the circumstances. (28 CFR 35.160-164; 24 CFR 8.6).


iil.   Reasonable Accommodations. PHAs are required to make reasonable
       accommodations in policies, practices, and procedures to ensure persons with
       disabilities have a full and equal opportunity to participate in and benefit from
       all aspects of the hearing process. This obligation is in addition to the
       obligation to ensure effective communication under Section 504 and the ADA.
                 If no method of conducting a remote hearing or remote briefing is available that
                 appropriately accommodates an individual’s disability, the PHA may not hold
                 against the individual his or her inability to participate in the remote hearing or
                 remote briefing. The PHA should consider whether postponing the hearing or
                 remote briefing to a later date is appropriate or whether there is a suitable
                 alternative to meet the participant’s satisfaction more expeditiously.

             Disabilities are individualized, and the appropriate auxiliary aid or service necessary
             or reasonable accommodation depends on the specific circumstances and
             requirements to ensure the individual with a disability has equal opportunity to
             participate in and benefit from the remote hearing or remote briefing. For example,
             individuals with cognitive or learning disabilities may require assistance from an
             advocate who may not be in the same location as that individual. Individuals with
             vision disabilities may request documents in different formats in order to increase
             the font size and to use with assistive technologies. Some persons who are deaf do
             not use sign language and may request captioning, which must be professionally
             prepared and not auto-generated by the hearing platform, since that would not result
             in effective communication (28 CFR 35.160(b)(2); 24 CFR 8.6).


        b.   Requirement for persons with limited English proficiency (LEP). PHAs must
             take reasonable steps to ensure full and meaningful access to the remote hearing or
             remote briefing for LEP persons consistent with its obligations under Title VI of the
             Civil Rights Act of 1964'. The obligation to provide meaningful access for LEP
             persons, regarding remote hearings and remote briefings, is particularly important
             meaning that the PHA will generally need to coordinate with a remote language
             interpretation service prior to the remote hearing or remote briefing. Further,
             conferencing technology may provide for remote interpretation; if video technology
             is available, remote interpretation using video is generally preferred over voice-only
             because of the additional visual cues. Importantly, though, PHAs cannot rely on
             minors to interpret.

             For written materials, PHAs should engage with a language translation service. All
             written materials related to the remote hearing or remote briefing, whether paper or
             electronic, and whether provided before, during, or after the hearing, may need to be
             provided in translated format.

6.   Identify and Resolve Technology Barriers Prior to Conducting the Remote Hearing or
     Remote Briefing. The lack of technology or inability to use technology for a remote
     hearing or remote briefing can impose a disadvantage for individuals or families that may


1 See also Lau v. Nichols, 414 U.S. 563 (1974).
   not be apparent to the PHA. Thus, the PHA should determine if barriers exist prior to
   scheduling the remote hearing or remote. If the participant does not have proper
   technology access which will allow the individual to fully participate, then the remote
   hearing or remote briefing should be postponed, or an in-person alternative must be
   provided’. This includes if an individual’s witness for the remote hearing is unable to
   participate due to a lack of access to technology. If the participant does not have proper
   technology access and the remote hearing or remote briefing warrants postponement due to
   the lack of proper technology access, the PHA may not hold against the individual his or
   her inability to participate in the remote hearing or remote briefing. For use of videos or
   telephones, all materials to be presented during the remote hearing or remote briefing,
   whether paper or electronic, must be provided to the individual or family prior to the remote
   hearing or remote briefing (see Section 7 of this notice for more information) and the
   participant shall be provided an accessible means by which to transmit the individual’s own
   evidence, such as through email or text. Below are best practices in making the
   determination if a remote hearing or remote briefing can take place.

        a.   Survey the Family to Identify Barriers. To determine if there are technology
             barriers, the PHA should survey what technology resources the family has to
             conduct a remote hearing or remote briefing. For example, the PHA could ask if
             the resident has a computer, phone, tablet or laptop that has a camera, does the
             resident have internet access or can the resident go to a place with sufficient
             privacy and internet access (family, friend or neighbor’s home), or can technology
             be borrowed. During such surveys, PHAs must still meet their obligations under
              Section 504 and the ADA to effectively communicate to persons with disabilities,
             and under Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 to provide meaningful access to
             individuals with LEP.

        b.   Resolve Barriers. Depending on the barriers identified, HUD offers the following
             best practices that PHAs could consider when resolving a barrier and proceeding
             with scheduling a remote hearing or remote briefing.

             i.   PHA supplied devices or private PHA office space (community
                  laptop/tablet, building Wi-Fi, mobile hot spot, private room in the PHA
                  office building). For the public housing program, PHAs can use traditional
                  operating funds to establish community rooms with computers and internet
                  service to conduct the remote hearing or remote briefing. PHAs could also
                  provide the individual or family with temporary access to the property’s
                  password protected Wi-Fi or provide a mobile hotspot that can be accessed


* HUD regulations require that the hearing must be scheduled promptly and within a reasonable time. A
postponement is not an indefinite delay that would contradict HUD regulations or become a due process
violation.
       from the parking lot or in the building.   PHAs could also consider using a
       portion of the CARES    Act funds (Notice PIH-2020-07) to purchase one (1) or
       multiple devices that could be delivered or otherwise made available at the
       participants’ residences. Finally, PHAs could offer a private room in the PHA
       office building.

 ii.   Smartphone Apps. Many video conferencing platforms have smartphone
       apps, which can be used where the individual or family does not have access to
       computers. In addition, smartphone apps can operate on Wi-Fi , and this may
       be advantageous for individuals with restricted data plans.

iil.   Community Resources. Research community resources, such as broadband
       internet providers offering free or low-cost internet access, find local charities
       or other resources for free or low-cost phones or computers, or as stated in
       Section 6(b)(i) above, offer the individual or family temporary access to the
       property’s password-protected Wi-Fi or provide a mobile hotspot.

Iv.    Personal Resources. Assess personal resources for technology access, such as
       supportive services, family members, mentors, or friends who could lend the
       individual or family a phone or computer.

       Voice Only Option (Telephone). Most individuals have, or can use, a
       telephone. However, conducting a remote hearing or remote briefing by
       telephone is the least preferred option due to the challenges of not being able to
       view documents being presented at the remote hearing or remote briefing (e.g.,
       screen sharing) and not being able to identify who is speaking during a phone
       call with multiple attendees. In addition, the participant should not feel
       pressured to conduct a remote hearing or remote briefing by telephone.
       However, if the PHA and participant choose to proceed with a telephone
       hearing or briefing, the PHA should provide the resident with a consent form,
       that meets the requirements for accessibility for persons with disabilities and
       persons with LEP (see Section 5 of this notice), so the resident has complete
       knowledge of their rights, as well as the risks and benefits of conducting the
       remote hearing or remote briefing by phone. To obtain valid consent, it may be
       necessary for the PHA to verbally inform a participant of the content of the
       consent form prior to signing, or the PHA may need to get consent from the
       participant’s appointed representative or guardian. The PHA should also
       consider that some residents may have restricted data plans or a limited
       number of minutes, so a PHA could use voice-only participation through a toll-
       free phone number. Further, some cell phone carriers charge differently for
                  incoming and outgoing calls. The PHA should consider calling the resident to
                  minimize cost.

7.   Presenting Documents Prior to a Remote Hearing and/or Remote Briefing. If video or
     telephone conference is used for the remote hearing or remote briefing, all materials being
     presented, whether paper or electronic, must be provided to the individual or family prior to
     the remote hearing or remote briefing, and may be submitted electronically to the HUD
     Field Office of Public Housing for TPV family briefings (see Section 2.f of this notice).
     Individuals or families may prefer paper printouts over electronic documents, due to lack of
     access to printers, difficulty viewing detailed documents on a cell phone, or difficulty
     viewing screen sharing on an app. Any materials made available to the individual or family
     must meet the requirements for accessibility for persons with disabilities and persons with
     LEP (see Section 5 of this notice).


        a.   Establish Procedures. The PHA must establish written procedures of all aspects
             of how the remote hearing or remote briefing will be conducted and the procedures
             should be readily available to the public. The procedures should also explain how
             documents will be presented prior to a remote hearing or remote briefing. Note that
             when making procedures readily available to the public, PHAs must still meet their
             obligations under Section 504 and the ADA to effectively communicate to persons
             with disabilities, and under Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 to provide
             meaningful access to individuals with LEP. See Sections 8 and 9 of this notice for
             program specific requirements regarding written procedures.

        b.   Personally Identifiable Information (PII). For documents that contain PI and
             are provided prior to a remote hearing or remote briefing, the PHA is responsible
             for minimizing the risk of exposure or misuse of the data collected, used, and
             shared. Safeguard sensitive information, including all PII at all times. PII is
             information that can be used to distinguish or trace an individual's identity, either
             alone or when combined with other personal or identifying information directly
             linked or linkable to a specific individual. Examples of PII include name, social
             security number, biometric records, date and place of birth, and mother's maiden
             name. PHAs are reminded not to transmit sensitive PII via an unsecured
             information system (e.g., electronic mail, Internet, or electronic bulletin board)
             without first encrypting the information.   See Notice PIH-2015-06 for more
             regarding privacy protection.

        c.   TPV Family Briefings — Written Consent.         In addition to the provisions of this
             notice, PHAs must follow the provisions of Notice PIH-2013-27 and Notice PIH-
             2019-05, as applicable, on obtaining the family’s voluntary written consent for
             voluntary relinquishment of their right to tenant-based assistance.
        d.    Due Process for Remote Hearings. For Public Housing, PHAs must follow HUD
              regulations at 24 CFR part 966, subpart B (public housing grievance process) and
              include the procedures in the resident’s lease. For the HCV Program, PHAs must
              follow 24 CFR 982.554 (informal review for applicant) and 982.555 (informal
              hearing for participant).

              i.   Conducting Discovery and Providing Evidence. PHAs may request and
                   copy any of the individual’s or family’s documents at the PHAs’ own expense
                   in accordance with the applicable regulations. Additionally, the individual or
                   family must be given the opportunity to examine any PHA documents that are
                   directly relevant to the hearing prior to the remote hearing. This may include
                   transmitting documents electronically or by mail that would normally be
                   exchanged at the PHA’s office. Under Section 504, the ADA, and the Fair
                   Housing Act, PHAs may need to make reasonable accommodations and take
                   appropriate steps to ensure effective communication with individuals with
                   disabilities through the provision of AA/S before, during, and after any
                   hearing. This may require changes in how the individual or family seeks
                   discovery of information held by the PHA and the manner in which evidence is
                   made available to persons with disabilities during remote hearings (while still
                   meeting any applicable rules concerning the acceptance of evidence by the
                   hearing officer). PHAs must also take reasonable steps to ensure meaningful
                   access for LEP persons before, during, and after such remote hearings (28 CFR
                   35.160-164; 24 CFR 8.6; 24 CFR 982.555(e)(2) and (5); 24 CFR 966.56(b)).

8.   Public Housing Specific Requirements

         a.   PHA’s Grievance Procedure: PHAs are required to provide reasonable
              accommodations for persons with disabilities under 24 CFR 966.56(f) and comply
              with cited guidance for persons with limited English proficiency (LEP) under 24
              CFR 966.56(g). If the PHA would like to implement a remote hearing as described
              in this notice, then the PHA must update its grievance procedure policy as
              described in 24 CFR 966.52 to include provisions to allow for the use of mail,
              electronic mail, telephone, and video call, as appropriate and as described in this
              notice. When considering how the grievance hearing will be conducted under 24
              CFR 966.56 (a), “reasonably convenient” must meet the requirements for
              accessibility for persons with disabilities and persons with LEP in Section 5 of this
              notice and consider technology barriers in Section 6 of this notice. Under 24 CFR
              966.56 (b)(1), the PHA may provide “PHA documents, including records and
              regulations, that are directly relevant to the hearing” directly to the resident via
              email, or on a secure website or cloud-based server. The PHA shall ensure that
                electronic information stored or transmitted is secure per Notice PIH-2015-06,
                meets the requirements for accessibility for persons with disabilities and persons
                with LEP in Section 5 of this notice, considers technology barriers described in
                Section 6 of this notice, and explains how documents will be presented prior to a
                remote hearing in Section 7 this notice.

9.   HCV Specific Requirements

         a.     Remote Hearings — PHA’s Administrative Plan: The administrative plan must
                state the PHA procedures for conducting informal hearings for applicants and
                participants (see 24 CFR 982.554(b) and 24 CFR 982.555(e)). If the PHA would
                like to implement a remote hearing as described in this notice, then the PHA must
                update its administrative plan as described in 24 CFR 982.54 to include provisions
                 to allow for the use of mail, electronic mail, telephone, and video call, as
                 appropriate and as described in this notice. When considering how the informal
                remote hearing will be conducted, the PHA shall ensure that electronic information
                 stored or transmitted is secure per Notice PIH-2015-06, meets the requirements for
                 accessibility for persons with disabilities and persons with LEP in Section 5 of this
                 notice, considers technology barriers described in Section 6 of this notice, and
                 explains how documents will be presented prior to a remote hearing in Section 7
                 this notice.

        b.       Remote Briefings:

                i.   Further Background: While the HCV guidebook has provided guidance for
                     in-person briefings and many PHAs have conducted these oral briefings in
                     person, there is no explicit requirement for the briefing to be held in person.
                     Even after the waivers and alternative requirements provided through Notice
                     PIH-2020-13, or its successor, expire, this notice clarifies that PHAs may
                     continue to conduct briefings remotely via webcast, video call, or other
                     methods provided they meet the minimum requirements described in this
                     notice.

               ii.   Opportunity to Ask Questions: In addition to the requirements described in
                     Sections 5, 6 and 7 of this notice, PHAs must provide an opportunity for
                     remote briefing participants to ask questions.

              ili.   PHA’s Administrative Plan: If the PHA would like to implement a remote
                     briefing as described in this notice, then the PHA must update its
                     administrative plan as described in 24 CFR 982.54(d)(1) to include provisions
                     to allow for use the of mail, electronic mail, webcast, and video call, as
                     appropriate and as described in this notice. When considering how the remote
                 briefing will be conducted, the PHA shall ensure that electronic information
                 stored or transmitted is secure per Notice PIH-2015-06, meets the requirements
                 for accessibility for persons with disabilities and persons with LEP in Section 5
                 of this notice, considers technology barriers described in Section 6 of this
                 notice, and explains how documents will be presented prior to a remote
                 briefing in Section 7 this notice.

          Iv.    Best Practices and Considerations:

                1.    Review voucher obligations with families at reexamination. Use other
                      opportunities, such as the regularly scheduled reexamination, with the
                      family to remind them of their program obligations to help avoid
                      termination.

                      Have PHA staff reach out directly to tenants by phone after the
                      briefing. Particularly if the briefing is not interactive, have staff reach out
                      directly to families by phone to make sure their questions have been
                      answered.

                      Consider the impact of families attending briefings remotely on other
                      program functions. For PHAs that already conduct their reexaminations
                      by mail, conducting remote briefings may mean that families never meet
                      face-to-face with the housing authority. PHAs need to consider if this
                      change impacts any other program functions and plan accordingly.

10. Information Contact: Inquiries about this notice should be directed to the appropriate field
    office. Find your local field office at:
   https://www.hud.gov/program_offices/public_    indian   housing/about/field_office.

11. Paperwork Reduction Act: The information collection requirements contained in this notice
   have been approved by the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) under the Paperwork
   Reduction Act (PRA) of 1995 (44 U.S.C 3520).      In accordance with the PRA, HUD may not
   conduct or sponsor, and a person is not required to respond to, a collection of information
   unless the collection displays a currently valid OMB control number. The following active
   information collections contained in this notice have been approved under the PRA-OMB
   Control Numbers 2577-0169, 2577-0083, and 2577-0220.




                                                                       /s/
                                               R. Hunter Kurtz, Assistant Secretary
                                               for Public and Indian Housing

                                                                                                        11
