Health, Housing           Vac.
& Human Services           & ™                                                          Rodney A. Cook
   CLACKAMAS         COUNTY                                                                Director




June 8, 2023                                                           BCC Agenda Date/Item:


Board of County Commissioners
Clackamas County

Approval of a Grant Agreement with the State of Oregon, Housing & Community Services
      Department for programs related to the Governor’s State of Emergency due to
    Homelessness. Total value is $1,883,236. Funding through the State of Oregon. No
                          County General Funds are Involved

 Previous Board          Briefed at issues 6/6/23
 Action/Review
 Performance             This funding aligns with the strategic priorities
 Clackamas                     e   To assist individuals and families in need to be healthy and safe
                               e   To increase self-sufficiency
 Counsel Review          Yes                           Procurement Review | No
 Contact Person          Teresa Christopherson       | Contact Phone               503-650-5718



EXECUTIVE SUMMARY: The Social Services Division (SSD) of the Health, Housing and
Human Services Department requests the approval of an Intergovernmental Agreement with the
State of Oregon’s Housing and Community Services Department (OHCS) to fund eviction
prevention and rent assistance associated with Governor Kotek’s Emergency Order on
homelessness (EO 23-02).

On January 10, 2023, the Oregon Governor signed a trio of emergency orders intended to
address the ongoing homelessness crisis across the state. The three orders: 1) declared a state
of emergency due to homelessness; 2) directed state agencies to prioritize reducing
homelessness; and 3) established a statewide housing production goal and housing production
advisory council. Shortly after the orders were signed, the State outlined a series of goals for
homelessness prevention, increased shelter capacity, and rapid rehousing. This included goals
in each of these categories for Clackamas County. In late March, the Oregon Legislature
passed the $200 million Affordable Housing & Emergency Homelessness Response Package in




                                                                  For Filing Use Only




                               Healthy Families. Strong Communities.
        2051 Kaen Road, Oregon City, OR 97045 e Phone (503) 650-5697 e Fax (503) 655-8677
                                         www.clackamas.us
 Health, Housing
 & Human Services            & ™                                                  Rodney A. Cook
      CLACKAMAS        COUNTY                                                         Director




 House Bills 2001 and 5019 to fund additional investments in affordable housing and
 homelessness, including to achieve the stated goals.

 The Housing & Community Development Division worked with State partners at OHCS ona
 budget proposal to fund the programs and services to achieve the goals for Clackamas County.
 During the development of the proposal, the State decided to bifurcate its allocation process,
 sending the homeless prevention funds through Community Action Agencies (Clackamas
 County Social Services) and shelter and rapid-rehousing funds through Continuum of Care
 (CoC) Lead Agencies (Clackamas County Housing & Community Development).

 The intergovernmental agreement being presented today represents the portion of State funding
 flowing through Social Services, as the county’s Community Action Agency. This $1,883,236 will
 fund eviction prevention and housing stability services to eligible tenants at risk of
 homelessness or facing eviction, with a particular focus on serving rural communities.


 RECOMMENDATION: Staff recommends approval of this contract and that Tootie Smith, Board
 Chair, or her designee; be authorized to sign all documents on behalf of the Clackamas County
 Board of Commissioners.



 Respectfully submitted,
fos         A. eek
 Rodney A. Cook
 Health, Housing & Human Services




                              Healthy Families. Strong Communities.
         2051 Kaen Road, Oregon City, OR 97045 e Phone (503) 650-5697 e Fax (503) 655-8677
                                        www.clackamas.us
                                                                                 Agreement No. 7630


                                            Grant Agreement

                               State of Emergency Due to Homelessness

This Agreement (this “Agreement’”) is by and between the State of Oregon (“State”), acting by
and through its Housing and Community Services Department (“Agency”), and Clackamas
County, acting by and through its Health, Housing, and Human Services Department, Social
Services Division, an Oregon local government entity (“Recipient”), each individually a “Party”
and collectively the “Parties”.

1.   Effective Date and Duration
     This Agreement shall become effective upon full execution by the Parties and, if required,
     approval by the Oregon Department of Justice, and shall expire on January 10, 2024, unless
     extended or terminated or sooner under the provisions identified within this Agreement.
     Expiration or termination of this Agreement will not preyudice Agency’s right to exercise
     remedies under this Agreement with respect to any breach that has occurred prior to
     expiration or termination.

2.   Background and Definitions
     The Parties acknowledge the following background related to this Agreement:

     a.   On January 10, 2023, Governor Tina Kotek issued Executive Order 23-02 (the “EO”),
          which declared a state of emergency due to homelessness. The EO is necessary to rapidly
          expand the State’s low-barrier shelter capacity, to rehouse people experiencing
          unsheltered homelessness, and to prevent homelessness to the greatest extent possible.
          All executive state agencies are authorized, upon further direction from Governor Kotek
          and the Governor’s office, to take any actions authorized under the provisions set forth in
          ORS 401.168 through ORS 401.192. The EO took immediate effect and remains in effect
          until   January 10, 2024, unless extended or terminated earlier by the Governor.

     b.   During the 2023 Session of the Oregon Legislature, Agency was awarded funding from
          House Bill 5019, subject to passage and approval. Agency was appropriated funding for
          both the Biennium ending on June 30, 2023, and the Biennium beginning on July 1,
          2023. Agency will grant funding from this bill through a variety of agreements to further
          the objectives of Executive Order 23-02, including by granting funds under this
          Agreement.

     c.   All references to “days” in this Agreement shall mean calendar days.

3.   Consideration
     Agency agrees to pay Recipient, from available and authorized funds, the amount of actual
     expenses incurred by Recipient in performing the grant activities referenced below in Section
     4 of this Agreement (“Authorized Expenses”), but not to exceed $1,883,236 (the “Grant
     Funds”), as follows:
                                                                                Agreement No. 7630


3.1     On full execution of this Agreement by the Parties and, when required, approval by the
Oregon Department of Justice, Agency will issue a notice of allocation (“NOA”) to Recipient,
pursuant to which Recipient will submit a request for funds and Agency will make a lump-sum
payment to Recipient in the amount of $414,022 (the “Initial Payment’), which Recipient will
expend in accordance with the NOA. Recipient may use such funds to reimburse Authorized
Expenses that were incurred by Recipient at any time during the period from January 10, 2023 to
January 10, 2024 (the “Performance Period”).

3.2     After July 1, 2023, and following expenditure of the Initial Payment by Recipient and
submission to Agency of a report detailing such expenditures in such form as is satisfactory to or
required by Agency, Agency will reimburse Recipient for additional Authorized Expenses up to
the amount of $1,469,214 (the “Additional Allotment”), following receipt of requests by
Recipient for such reimbursement. The total Grant Funds amount will equal the Initial Payment
amount plus the Additional Allotment amount. Funds from the Additional Allotment will only
be used to reimburse Authorized Expenses incurred from July 1, 2023 until the end of the
Performance Period (January 10, 2024). Each such reimbursement request will be made
following, and in accordance with, a NOA issued by Agency to Recipient, including but not
limited to any allocation of Grant Funds in the applicable NOA to specific expense categories.
Recipient will submit requests for reimbursement under this Section 3.2 at least quarterly and in
such form and manner as is satisfactory to or required by Agency. Agency and Recipient may by
mutual agreement modify or terminate a NOA at any time. In the event of a conflict between any
NOA and the terms of this Agreement, including but not limited to the not-to-exceed amount set
forth under this Agreement, the terms of this Agreement will prevail.

4.     Grant Activities
       Recipient will use Grant Funds to conduct the grant activities set forth in Exhibit A (the
       “Grant Activities”), which is attached to and incorporated into this Agreement. Recipient’s
       receipt of Grant Funds is conditioned on Recipient’s compliance with Exhibit A, including
       but not limited to any performance measures set forth in Exhibit A.

5.     Authorized Representatives

5.1       Agency’s Authorized Representative is:

          Mike Savara
          725 Summer Street NE, Suite B
          Salem, OR 97301
          Mike.Savara@hcs.oregon.gov

5.2.     —_ Recipient’s Authorized Representative is:

          Teresa D. Christopherson
          2051 Kaen Road #135
          Oregon City, OR 97045
          teresachr@clackamas.us
                                                                                  Agreement No. 7630


5.3.      A Party may designate a new Authorized Representative by written notice to the other
Party.


6.     Online Systems

6.1     Recipient and its subrecipients must enter all appropriate and necessary data into OPUS
(a web-based application developed by Agency), Homeless Management Information System
(HMIS), Procorem or any other Agency-approved system designated by Agency (collectively,
the “Sites”) at the time of client intake, if applicable, or at such other times required by Agency.
Exceptions are only allowed with prior written approval by Agency.
6.2       As acondition of use of the Sites, Recipient and its subrecipients (collectively, “User”)
agree to all terms and conditions contained in this Agreement, notices on the Sites, or other
directives by Agency regarding use of the Sites. User agrees to not use the Sites for any unlawful
purpose. Agency reserves the right, in its sole discretion, to update or revise the terms and
conditions for use of the Sites.
6.3      Use of the Sites for additional reported “local” program data is at the Recipient’s and
subrecipients’ own risk. Agency will not modify or otherwise create any screen, report, or tool in
the Sites to meet needs related to this local data.
6.4      Recipient hereby grants and will require and cause any subrecipient to grant Agency the
right to reproduce, use, display, adapt, modify, distribute, and promote the content on the Sites in
any form and disclose, to the extent permitted by law, any or all of the information or data
furnished to or received by Agency directly or indirectly resulting from this Agreement.
Recipient also shall use and shall require and cause its subrecipients to use appropriate client
release forms and privacy policy forms in connection with obtaining and transmitting client data
6.5       Recipient understands and agrees, and shall require its subrecipients to agree, that all
materials, information, software, products, and services included in or available through the Sites
(the “Content”) are provided “as is” and “as available” for use. The Content is provided without
warranties of any kind, either express or implied, including, but not limited to, implied
warranties of merchantability, fitness for a particular purpose, or non-infringement.     Agency
does not represent or warrant that: (1) the Content is accurate, reliable, or correct; (2) the Sites
will be available at any particular time or location; (3) any defects or errors in the Content will be
corrected; or (4) the Content is free of viruses or other harmful components. Use of the Sites is
solely at the User’s risk. User hereby accepts the risk of its use of the Sites, and of the use of the
Sites by its subrecipients.
6.6       Recipient agrees that under no circumstances will Agency be liable for any direct,
indirect, punitive, incidental, special, or consequential damages that result from the use of, or
inability to use the Sites. This limitation applies whether the alleged liability is based on contract,
tort, negligence, strict liability, or any other basis, even if Agency has been informed of the
possibility of such damage.


7.     Headings
                                                                                Agreement No. 7630


   The headings or captions in this Agreement are for convenience only and in no way define,
   limit, or describe the intent of any provisions of this Agreement.

   Amendments
   The terms of this Agreement shall not be modified, supplemented, or amended in any manner
   whatsoever, except in writing by Agency.

   Nonexclusive Remedies Related to Funding
   Agency may withhold any and all undisbursed Grant Funds from Recipient if Agency, in its
   sole discretion, determines that Recipient has failed to timely satisfy any material obligation
   arising under this Agreement or otherwise. Recipient’s material obligations include, but are
   not limited to, providing complete, accurate and timely reports satisfactory to Agency about
   Recipient’s performance under this Agreement as well as timely satisfying all Agreement
   obligations relating to any Grant Funds.

   If Grant Funds are not obligated for reimbursement by Recipient in a timely manner as
   determined by Agency in its sole discretion, Agency may reduce Recipient’s funding as it
   determines to be appropriate in its sole discretion and redistribute such Grant Funds to other
   parties or retain such Grant Funds for other use. This remedy is in addition to any other
   remedies available to Agency under this Agreement or otherwise.

10. Independent Contractor Relationship
    The Parties agree and acknowledge that their relationship is that of independent contracting
   parties and that neither Recipient, nor any of its directors, officers, employees or agents, is an
   officer, employee, or agent of the State of Oregon as those terms are used in ORS 30.265 or
   otherwise.

11. Access to Records
    Recipient shall maintain all financial records relating to this Agreement in accordance with
    generally accepted accounting principles. In addition, Recipient shall maintain any other
    records, books, documents, papers, plans, records of shipments and payments and writings of
    Recipient, whether in paper, electronic or other form, that are pertinent to this Agreement in
    such a manner as to clearly document Recipient’s performance. All financial records, other
    records, books, documents, papers, plans, records of shipments and payments and writings of
    Recipient, whether in paper, electronic or other form, that are pertinent to this Agreement, are
    collectively referred to as “Records.” Recipient acknowledges and agrees that Agency and
    the Oregon Secretary of State's Office and their duly authorized representatives will have
    access to all Records to perform examinations and audits and make excerpts and transcripts.
    Recipient shall retain and keep accessible all Records for a minimum of six (6) years, or such
    longer period as may be required by applicable law, following termination of this Agreement,
    or until the conclusion of any audit, controversy or litigation arising out of or related to this
    Agreement, whichever date is later. Subject to the foregoing minimum records retention
    requirement, Recipient shall maintain Records in accordance with the records retention
    schedules set forth in OAR Chapter 166.

12. Compliance with Law
                                                                                   Agreement No. 7630


        In connection with their activities under this Agreement, the Parties shall comply with all
        applicable law.

13. Contribution

13.1         If any third party makes any claim or brings any action, suit or proceeding alleging a tort
        as now or hereafter defined in ORS 30.260 (a “Third Party Claim’) against a Party (the
        “Notified Party”) with respect to which the other Party (the “Other Party”) may have
        liability, the Notified Party shall promptly notify the Other Party in writing of the Third Party
        Claim and deliver to the Other Party, along with the written notice, a copy of the claim,
        process and all legal pleadings with respect to the Third Party Claim that have been received
        by the Notified Party. Each Party is entitled to participate in the defense of a Third Party
        Claim, and to defend a Third Party Claim with counsel of its own choosing. Receipt by the
        Other Party of the notice and copies required in this Section and a meaningful opportunity for
        the Other Party to participate in the investigation, defense and settlement of the Third Party
        Claim with counsel of its own choosing are conditions precedent to the Other Party’s
        contribution obligation under this Section 13 with respect to the Third Party Claim.

13.2        With respect to a Third Party Claim for which Agency is jointly liable with Recipient (or
        would be if joined in the Third Party Claim ), Agency shall contribute to the amount of
        expenses (including attorneys’ fees), judgments, fines and amounts paid in settlement
        actually and reasonably incurred and paid or payable by Recipient in such proportion as is
        appropriate to reflect the relative fault of Agency on the one hand and of Recipient on the
        other hand in connection with the events that resulted in such expenses, judgments, fines or
        settlement amounts, as well as any other relevant equitable considerations. The relative fault
        of Agency on the one hand and of Recipient on the other hand shall be determined by
        reference to, among other things, the Parties’ relative intent, knowledge, access to
        information and opportunity to correct or prevent the circumstances resulting in such
        expenses, judgments, fines, or settlement amounts. Agency’s contribution amount in any
        instance is capped to the same extent it would have been capped under Oregon law if the
        State had sole liability in the proceeding.

13.3.       With respect to a Third Party Claim for which Recipient is jointly liable with Agency (or
        would be if joined in the Third Party Claim), Recipient shall contribute to the amount of
        expenses (including attorneys’ fees), judgments, fines and amounts paid in settlement
        actually and reasonably incurred and paid or payable by Agency in such proportion as is
        appropriate to reflect the relative fault of Recipient on the one hand and of Agency on the
        other hand in connection with the events that resulted in such expenses, judgments, fines or
        settlement amounts, as well as any other relevant equitable considerations. The relative fault
        of Recipient on the one hand and of Agency on the other hand shall be determined by
        reference to, among other things, the Parties’ relative intent, knowledge, access to
        information and opportunity to correct or prevent the circumstances resulting in such
        expenses, judgments, fines, or settlement amounts. Recipient’s contribution amount in any
                                                                                      Agreement No. 7630


        instance is capped to the same extent it would have been capped under Oregon law if it had
        sole liability in the proceeding.

13.4         Recipient shall take all reasonable steps to cause its contractor(s) that are not units of
        local government as defined in ORS 190.003, if any, to indemnify, defend. Save and hold
        harmless the State of Oregon and its officers, employees and agents (“Indemnitee”) from and
        against any and all claims, actions, liabilities, damages, losses, or expenses (including
        attorneys’ fees) arising from a tort (as now or hereafter defined in ORS 30.260) caused, or
        alleged to be caused, in whole or in part, by the negligent or willful acts or omissions of
        Recipient’s contractor or any of the officers, agents, employees or subcontractors of the
        contractor (“Claims”). It is the specific intention of the parties that the Indemnitee shall, in all
        instances, except for Claims arising solely from the negligent or willful acts or omissions of
        the Indemnitee, be indemnified by the contractor from and against any and all Claims. Any
        defense obligations to Indemnitee are subject to compliance with applicable provisions of
        ORS chapter 180.

14. Recipient Default

        Recipient will be in default under this Agreement upon the occurrence of any of the
        following events:

14.1        Recipient fails to perform, observe, or discharge any of its covenants, agreements, or
        obligations under this Agreement, including but not limited to failure to perform Grant
        Activities or satisfy performance measures as set forth in Exhibit A and such failure is not
        remedied within thirty (30) days following notice from Agency to Recipient specifying such
        failure; or

14.2         Any representation, warranty or statement made by Recipient in this Agreement or in any
        documents or reports submitted by Recipient in connection with this Agreement, concerning
        the expenditure of Grant Funds or Recipient’s performance of any of its obligations under
        this Agreement, is untrue in any material respect when made; or

14.3.       Recipient fails to incur expenses, or to satisfy performance measures, at a rate or ina
        manner that would result in complete expenditure of the Grant Funds in accordance with this
        Agreement, or successful completion of all performance measures under this Agreement, on
        or before January 10, 2024, as determined by Agency in its sole discretion.

15. Agency Default

        Agency will be in default under this Agreement if Agency fails to perform, observe, or
        discharge any of its covenants, agreements, or obligations under this Agreement.

16. Remedies
                                                                                    Agreement No. 7630


16.1         Inthe event Recipient is in default under Section 14, Agency may, at its option, pursue
         any or all of the remedies available to it under this Agreement and at law or in equity,
         including, but not limited to: (a) termination of this Agreement under Section 18, (b)
         reducing, withholding or recovering payment of Grant Funds for activities that Recipient has
         failed to perform in accordance with this Agreement, (c) initiation of an action or proceeding
         for damages, specific performance, or declaratory or injunctive relief, or (d) exercise of its
         right of recovery of overpayments under Section 17 of this Agreement or setoff, or both.

         All of the above remedies in this Section 16.1 are cumulative to the extent the remedies are
         not inconsistent, and Agency may pursue any remedy or remedies singly, collectively,
         successively, or in any order whatsoever.

16.2.‘        Prior to any termination of this Agreement by Agency pursuant to Section 18.2.3, Agency
         will provide Recipient with a written notice of such default and will include in such notice an
         offer to meet with the senior manager of Recipient who has primary responsibility for
         oversight of the Grant Activities to provide Recipient an opportunity to explain the reasons
         for the default and to present a proposal for curing the default within a time period that is
         acceptable to Agency. Recipient shall have 5 days to accept such offer. If Recipient does not
         accept such offer within such 5-day period, Agency may terminate this Agreement upon 10
         days’ written notice as provided in Section 18.2.3 or exercise any other remedies available to
         Agency under this Agreement unless Recipient has fully cured such default prior to the
         expiration of such 10-day notice period. If Recipient accepts such offer, the meeting must be
         held within 14 days of such acceptance or at such other time as agreed by Agency. Following
         the meeting, Agency shall make a determination, in its reasonable discretion, of whether to
         accept Recipient’s proposal, with such modifications as are mutually acceptable to the
         Parties, and shall give written notice of such determination to Recipient. If Agency’s written
         notice states that Agency does not agree to such proposal, or if Agency accepts such proposal
         but Recipient does not satisfy the terms of the proposal, Agency may terminate this
         Agreement upon 10 days’ written notice as provided in Section 18.2.3 or exercise any other
         remedies available to Agency under this Agreement unless Recipient has fully cured such
         default prior to the expiration of such 10-day notice period.

16.3         In the event Agency is in default under Section 15 and whether or not Recipient elects to
         exercise its right to terminate this Agreement under Section 18, or in the event Agency
         terminates this Agreement under Sections 18.2.1, 18.2.2, or 18.2.4, Recipient’s sole remedy
         will be a claim for reimbursement of expenses incurred in accordance with this Agreement,
         less any claims Agency has against Recipient. In no event will Agency be liable to Recipient
         for any expenses related to termination of this Agreement or for anticipated profits or loss. If
         previous amounts paid to Recipient exceed the amount due to Recipient under this Section
         16.2, Recipient shall promptly pay any excess to Agency.

17. Recovery of Overpayments; Withholding of Funds
                                                                                  Agreement No. 7630


17.1       If payments to Recipient under this Agreement, or any other agreement between Agency
       and Recipient, exceed the amount to which Recipient is entitled, Agency may, after notifying
       Recipient in writing, withhold from payments due Recipient under this Agreement, such
       amounts, over such periods of times, as are necessary to recover the amount of the
       overpayment.

17.2       Agency may withhold any and all undisbursed Grant Funds from Recipient if Agency
       determines, in its sole discretion, that Recipient has failed to timely satisfy any material
       obligation arising under this Agreement, including but not limited to providing complete,
       accurate, and timely reports in a form satisfactory to Agency, or if Agency determines that
       the rate or scale of requests for Grant Funds in any expenditure category materially deviates
       from an applicable NOA or is unsubstantiated by related documentation.

18. Termination


18.1      This Agreement may be terminated at any time by mutual written consent of the Parties.

18.2      Agency may terminate this Agreement as follows:

18.2.1    Immediately upon written notice to Recipient, if Agency fails to receive funding,
          appropriations, limitations, or other expenditure authority at levels sufficient, in Agency’s
          reasonable administrative discretion, to perform its obligations under this Agreement;

18.2.2 Immediately upon written notice to Recipient, if federal or state laws, rules, regulations,
       or guidelines are modified or interpreted in such a way that Agency’s performance under
       this Agreement is prohibited or Agency is prohibited from paying for such performance
       from the planned funding source;

18.2.3 If Recipient is in default under this Agreement and such default remains uncured for a
       period of 10 days following completion of the process outlined in Section 16.2; or

18.2.4 As otherwise expressly provided in this Agreement.

18.3       Recipient may terminate this Agreement immediately upon written notice to Agency, if
       Agency is in default under this Agreement and such default remains uncured 15 days after
       written notice to Agency.

18.4        Upon receiving a notice of termination of this Agreement, Recipient will immediately
       cease all activities under this Agreement, unless Agency expressly directs otherwise in such
       notice.

19. Insurance
                                                                                    Agreement No. 7630


19.1        Recipient shall insure, or self-insure, and be independently responsible for the risk of its
        own liability for claims within the scope of the Oregon Tort Claims Act (ORS 30.260
        through 30.300).

19.2.      Recipient shall require its first-tier contractor(s) that are not units of local government as
        defined in ORS   190.003, if any, to obtain the insurance specified in Exhibit C.

20. Availability of Funds
Agency’s obligation to pay any amounts and otherwise perform its duties under this Agreement
is conditioned upon Agency receiving funding, appropriations, limitations, allotments, or other
expenditure authority sufficient to allow Agency, in the exercise of its reasonable administrative
discretion, to meet its obligations under this Agreement. Nothing in this Agreement may be
construed as permitting any violation of Article XI, section 7 of the Oregon Constitution or any
other law limiting the activities, liabilities, or monetary obligations of Agency.

21. Governing Law
This Agreement shall be governed by and construed and enforced in accordance with the laws of
the State of Oregon, without regard to principles of conflicts of law. Any claim, action, suit or
proceeding (collectively “claim”) between Recipient and Agency or the State of Oregon that
arises from or relates to this Agreement shall be brought and conducted solely and exclusively
within the Circuit Court of Marion County for the State of Oregon, provided that in the event that
a claim must be brought in a federal forum, the claim shall be brought and conducted solely and
exclusively within the United States District Court for the District of Oregon. Recipient consents
to the exclusive jurisdiction of such courts. Nothing in this Agreement constitutes consent by the
State of Oregon to the jurisdiction of any court or a waiver by the State of Oregon of any defense
or immunity, including but not limited to sovereign immunity and immunity under the Eleventh
Amendment to the United States Constitution.

22. Notice.
Except as otherwise expressly provided in this Agreement, any notices to be given relating to this
Agreement must be given in writing by email, personal delivery, or postage prepaid certified or
registered mail, with return receipt, to a Party’s Authorized Representative at the physical
address or email address set forth in Section 5 of this Agreement, or to such other addresses as
either Party may indicate pursuant to this Section 22. Any notice so addressed and mailed
becomes effective five days after mailing. Any notice given by personal delivery becomes
effective when actually delivered. Any notice given by email becomes effective upon the
sender’s receipt of confirmation of delivery, either by return email or by demonstrating through
other technological means that the email has been delivered to the Recipient’s email address.

23. Survival
All rights and obligations of the Parties under this Agreement will cease upon termination of this
Agreement, other than those rights and obligations that by their express terms survive
termination of this Agreement or would reasonably be expected to survive termination of this
Agreement; provided, however, that termination of this Agreement will not prejudice any rights
or obligations accrued to the Parties under this Agreement prior to termination.
                                                                               Agreement No. 7630


24. Intended Beneficiaries
Agency and Recipient are the only parties to this Agreement and are the only parties entitled to
enforce its terms. Nothing in this Agreement provides, is intended to provide, or may be
construed to provide any direct or indirect benefit or right to third persons unless such third
persons are individually identified by name herein and expressly described as intended
beneficiaries of this Agreement.

25. Assignment
Recipient may not assign or transfer its interest in this Agreement without the prior written
consent of Agency and any attempt by Recipient to assign or transfer its interest in this
Agreement without such consent will be void and of no force or effect. Agency’s consent to
Recipient’s assignment or transfer of its interest in this Agreement will not relieve Recipient of
any of its duties or obligations under this Agreement. The provisions of this Agreement will be
binding upon and inure to the benefit of the Parties hereto, and their respective successors and
permitted assigns.

26. Subcontracts
Recipient shall notify Agency prior to entering into any subcontracts for any of the activities
required of Recipient under this Agreement. Agency’s receipt of notice of any subcontract will
not relieve Recipient of any of its duties or obligations under this Agreement. For purposes of
this Agreement, including but not limited to any exhibits incorporated into this Agreement,
“subcontract” means any agreement pursuant to which Recipient compensates another party to
carry out any activities under this Agreement, whether by contract for goods or services, grant
agreement, or otherwise. For avoidance of doubt, the term “subcontractor” includes any
subgrantee or subrecipient to which Recipient awards any funds received by Recipient under this
Agreement.

27. Merger; Waiver
This Agreement and all exhibits and attachments, if any, constitute the entire agreement between
the Parties on the subject matter hereof. There are no understandings, agreements, or
representations, oral or written, not specified herein regarding this Agreement. No waiver or
consent under this Agreement binds either Party unless in writing and signed by the applicable
Party. Such waiver or consent, if made, is effective only in the specific instance and for the
specific purpose given.

28. Counterparts
This Agreement may be executed in several counterparts, all of which when taken together shall
constitute one agreement, notwithstanding that all Parties are not signatories to the same
counterpart. Each copy of the Agreement so executed constitutes an original.




                           [Remainder of page intentionally left blank]




                                                 10
                                                                                Agreement No. 7630


29. Signatures

Oregon Housing and Community Services                        Clackamas County, acting by and
Department                                                   through its Health, Housing, and
                                                             Human Services Department,
                                                             Social Services Division




Signature                                                    Signature




Printed Name     & Title                                     Printed Name & Title



Date                                                         Date



Approved
       for legal sufficiency by Senior AAG Marc Bocci via email on 5/10/2023.




                                                11
                                                                                    Agreement No. 7630


                                2021 — 2023 MASTER GRANT AGREEMENT
                                                   Exhibit A
                               Oregon Eviction Diversion and Prevention Program
                                   Emergency Order (ORE-DAP EO) Program


Description. On January 10, 2023, Governor Tina Kotek declared a homelessness state of
emergency in response to the 80% rise in unsheltered homelessness in emergency areas since
2017. The Governor directed state agencies to prioritize efforts to reduce homelessness and
established a statewide housing production advisory council. In addition to these efforts on the
part of the state government, Agency will play a major role in the delivery of the Governor’s
early investment package that was awarded through House Bill (HB) 5019 during the 2023
Session of the Oregon Legislature. Most of these resources will be delivered to local emergency
response regional planning bodies, including Continuums of Care (“CoC”) within the areas that
are included within the emergency declaration as determined by Agency. Agency will support
communities in deploying these funds, in a coordinated effort to accomplish the following
statewide objectives:

   1.        Prevent homelessness for 8,750 households statewide;

   2.        Increase shelter capacity, quality, and utilization in emergency areas by 600 beds,
             and

   3.        Rehouse at least 1,200 households experiencing unsheltered homelessness in
             emergency areas.

In order to help accomplish the first goal of preventing 8,750 households from becoming
homeless, Agency will deploy the Oregon Eviction and Prevention Emergency Order (ORE-
DAP EO) Program (the “Program”). Objectives number two and three will be accomplished
utilizing other agreements. Agency may also deploy additional programs at its sole discretion
to accomplish the above three goals. Recipient must prevent homelessness for a specific
number of households as outlined in the Implementation Report attached as Exhibit B to this
Agreement.

        1.    Scope of Work.

              A) Recipient shall, and shall cause and require its subcontractors by contract to, comply
                 and perform all work to the satisfaction of Agency, and in accordance with the terms
                 of this Agreement. The remaining provisions of this Section | are supplemental to
                 and do not limit the obligations of Recipient or its subcontractors arising under this
                 Subsection 1A or otherwise under this Agreement.

              B)   Recipient shall, and shall cause and require its subcontractors by contract to,
                   administer the Program in a manner satisfactory to Agency and in compliance with
                   the Program requirements, including but not limited to (i) the requirements set forth
                   in the Agency’s ORE-DAP Program Guidance Manual, as amended from time to
                   time by Agency with written notice to Recipient, and (11) the following terms and

                                                       12
                                                                                               Agreement No. 7630


        conditions (all of the foregoing collectively referred to herein as the “Program
        Requirements”):

            a.   Conduct an initial evaluation to determine eligibility for Program services in
                 alignment with Program Requirements.

            b.   Proactively outreach and market available resources to tenants at high risk
                 for eviction and homelessness,             court staff and other key                 stakeholders       as
                 defined in Program Requirements to ensure a systemic approach to eviction
                 prevention.

            c.   Ensure    that Program      services       are available        to low-income               households,
                 including but not limited to, veterans, persons more than 65 years of age,
                 disabled persons, Black, Indigenous and other People of Color, farm workers
                 and Native Americans, who meet Program eligibility requirements. Specific
                 targeting of funds shall not violate any Fair Housing Act or anti-
                 discriminatory requirements.

            d.   Coordinate    services    and support with other programs                         and services that
                 support   renters,   including,      but     not    limited     to   the     local        Multi-Agency
                 Coordinating (“MAC”) Groups if available, the Oregon Emergency Rental
                 Assistance Program, the Oregon Eviction Defense Program and others as
                 defined in Program Requirements and available in the Recipient’s service
                 region.

            e.   If Recipient operates within the geographic boundaries of Executive Order
                 23-02 or coordinates with, or participates as part of, a local Multi-Agency
                 Coordination (“MAC”) Group (defined as an Agency designated group for
                 interagency management planning, coordination, and operational leadership
                 to provide strategic coordination, identify resources, and manage goals),
                 Recipient shall use reasonable efforts to collaborate with the MAC Group
                 on any homeless prevention goals in the applicable community plan in order
                 to coordinate the use of funds and shall carry out all Program activities in
                 alignment with MAC Group goals and strategies.

            f.   Utilization of Program           funds     to support households              who         have become
                 homeless or    are   in   need     of rental       assistance    and       move      in    assistance   is
                 allowable.


2.   Program Data Collection and Reporting

     A) Recipient shall, and shall cause and shall require its subcontractors by contract to,
        submit to the satisfaction of Agency all Homeless Management Information System
        (“HMIS”) reports as required in this Agreement or as requested by Agency.
        Recipient shall, and shall cause and shall require its subcontractors by contract to,
        ensure that data collection and reporting, including personally identifiable

                                                    13
                                                                                Agreement No. 7630


              information, be conducted through the use of the Agency-approved HMIS. Recipient
              may request a reporting deadline extension when necessary. All such extension
              requests are subject to approval by Agency, which approval may be granted or
              denied in Agency’s sole discretion.
         B)   Recipient and its subcontractors are required to enter reliable, valid, and accurate
              Program-related participant and service data into HMIS. Both an HMIS entry/exit
              and HMIS Service Transaction must be entered into HMIS. Each allowable service
              must be represented with a Service Transaction. Same-day services will have the
              same Service Start and End Date. Service Transactions that utilize Grant Funds,
              including all payments, arrearages, deposits, fees, landlord engagement and client
              non-categorical services, must include    a HMIS fund source and amount.
         C)   Timely and accurate data entry is critical to ensuring meaningful data analysis.
              Recipient and its subcontractors must enter all data required under this Agreement
              or the Program Requirements within 72 hours after the service is provided or by any
              earlier deadline as required by local CoC HMIS policies.

     D) Required reports shall include:


                  a.   Requests for funds through the OPUS system must be submitted within 60
                       days of the end of each quarter. A final request for funds must be submitted
                       for all fiscal year expenses within 60 days of each fiscal year end. Backup
                       documentation for expenditures made from the Initial Payment must be
                       submitted to Agency within 30 days of June 30, 2023. Backup
                       documentation for expenditures made from the Additional Allotment must
                       be submitted through Agency’s OPUS system.
                  b.   Aggregated Quarterly Reports - Recipient must directly submit aggregated
                       reports using the report provided in the HMIS reporting tool, SAP Business
                       Objects, or the Agency-provided template twenty (20) days following the
                       end of each calendar quarter.
                  c.   System Data - Recipients must directly submit or allow the export of all
                       disaggregated HMIS participant, Program and service transaction data,
                       required pursuant to the Agency’s ORE-DAP Program Guidance Manual,
                       within twenty (20) days following the end of each month. These data may be
                       used in published data visualizations (Tableau dashboards).
                  d.   Recipient shall provide additional reports as requested by Agency.

3.   Performance Measures.

     A) Recipient shall, and shall cause and require its subcontractors by contract to, administer
        the Program in a manner consistent with the Program Requirements and in a manner
        designed to achieve the following performance goals:

         1)   Increased housing stability as measured by the percentage of total Program
              participants who reside in permanent housing at time of their exit from the Program
              or from the project funded by the Program.

                                                   14
                                                                     Agreement No. 7630


2)   Increased housing stability for, at minimum, the specific number of households that
     are at risk of eviction or homelessness as outlined in the Implementation Report
     attached as Exhibit B to this Agreement.




                   [Remainder of page intentionally left blank. ]




                                         15
                                                                                      Agreement No. 7630


                                                 Exhibit B

                                         Implementation Report

Primary Contact Point: Teresa Christopherson, Admin Services Manager


Email Address: teresachr@clackamas.us



All-In ORE-DAP     Strategy and Implementation Description

Please describe your overall strategy for accomplishing the objectives of the funding in alignment
with the Governor’s Executive Order 23-02. The strategy must include a description of the methods
that you will use, with the available funding, to prevent the specific number of households from
experiencing homelessness or eviction as outlined in the All-In ORE-DAP Formula.

Clackamas County has convened internal and external partners, in compliance with Governor Kotek’s
State of Emergency Declaration to form a Multi-Agency Coordination Group that is focusing on solutions
for short and long-term housing stabilization. Among community priorities identified as part of that
planning process, lack of tenant-based rental assistance is one of the major barriers to housing
stabilization. Clackamas County Social Services Division (CCSSD), through its Rent Assistance work
unit, is focused on meeting the needs of vulnerable households through housing financial assistance,
particularly paying rent arrearages, rent assistance and utility assistance.

CCSSD has an existing partnership with the local eviction court. CCSSD in partnership with Resolution
Services mediators go to the Justice Court every Monday to obtain the eviction docket for Friday. CCSSD
then uses available contact information to attempt to obtain enough documentation to determine eligibility
and issue an intent to pay letter, as well as working with impacted tenants ahead of time to prevent
evictions.

CCSSD works closely with the Oregon Eviction Defense Project, and also operates a Housing Rights and
Resources project that focuses on Fair Housing and Landlord Tenant information for both landlords and
tenants with a prioritized, funded referral relationship with Legal Aid Services of Oregon and the Fair
Housing Council.

CCSSD is also working diligently to avoid incentivizing applicants getting eviction notices. By putting
systems in place and performing outreach to vulnerable households, CCSSD is committed to serving low-
income community members who are having a hard time paying rent, before they get to the point of an
eviction. The Coordinated Entry system can be accessed by phone or using an on-line form to apply for
rent assistance. CCSSD is working to establish a contract with the developer of Allita to allow the agency
to continue to process applications submitted through Allita. This will result in efficiencies for processing
applications for vulnerable households.

Program Prioritization

Please describe how you will prioritize those who are at the most acute risk of losing their housing
through eviction or other means. If you have additional areas of prioritization, please describe
those as well.



                                                      16
                                                                                       Agreement No. 7630


CCSSD’s rent assistance Standard Operating Procedures allow the agency to prioritize persons with the
highest vulnerability. The at-risk referral populations include households with at least one of the
vulnerability factors listed below:

    Eviction for nonpayment of rent notices or on the actual eviction court docket
    At least one member age 58 or older
    Chronic health vulnerability/disability/fixed income and no housing subsidy
    English is not the primary or preferred language spoken
    Escaping domestic violence when other providers have no resources or the household prefers to work
    with CCSSD

People who are not in any of the above vulnerable populations will not be excluded from services, and it
is our belief that the prioritizations are broad enough so as not to have a disparate impact on any particular
protected class. All ORE-DAP applicants will meet the required criteria for the program.

MAC   Group Collaboration (if applicable)

What is a Multi-Agency Coordination (MAC) Group?

A Multi-Agency Coordination (MAC) Group is a group for interagency management planning,
coordination, and operational leadership to provide strategic coordination, identify resources, and
manage goals.

The MAC group will lead in the development, completion, and deployment of the community plan.
Local communities will work to identify interventions based on the needs of people experiencing
housing instability within the service region. The MAC groups will work continuously with OHCS
throughout the year to review data and amend plans as needed to ensure goals are met.

The local MAC group will include:

        Local jurisdictions (homelessness and emergency management staff)
        Public housing authority
        Local homelessness agencies
        Rapid rehousing service providers
        Shelter developer/operator
        Landlord associations
        Behavioral Health providers

If your agency is ina MAC group region as designated by Executive Order 23-02, there is a
requirement for your organization to collaborate with your MAC group throughout All-In ORE-
DAP planning and implementation. The MAC group will set strategy and approach for all three of
the Governor’s goals, including prevention, rehousing and shelter creation. The CAA will be
responsible for implementing the strategy to reach the Governor’s overall goal of preventing
homelessness for 8750 households by January 10, 2024.

If this applies to your agency, please describe how you have collaborated with your MAC group to
produce your All-In ORE-DAP strategy and plans? Describe any outreach or engagement the MAC
group may have completed to inform the plan.




                                                      17
                                                                                     Agreement No. 7630


The Community Action Agency function in Clackamas County is administered by the Social Services
Division of Clackamas County’s Health, Housing & Human Services (H3S) Department. The Social Services
Division Director, Brenda Durbin, is on the local MAC Group, which is being led by the Housing &
Community Development Division of the H3S Department. Based on this structure, both the prevention
funding flowing through Community Action Agencies and the rest of the HB 5019 funding flowing
through MAC Groups (Continuums of Care) are being administered by Clackamas County’s H3S
Department.

From August, 2020, to April, 2021, Clackamas County conducted extensive and inclusive community
engagement to inform the development of a Local Implementation Plan (LIP), as required by the passage
of Metro ballot measure 26-210, the Supportive Housing Services (SHS) Measure. This engagement
sought to elicit stakeholder perspectives on gaps in the current homelessness response system of care;
investment priorities for the first years of implementation of the SHS Measure; and gaps and priorities
for communities of color. Over   a dozen community advisory groups and stakeholder tables were
engaged. Additionally, public listening sessions were held, consultants conducted focus groups and
listening sessions with communities of color, and a diverse and inclusive LIP Steering Committee was
established. By charter, the LIP Steering Committee membership was not less than half representatives
from communities of color, and with a priority for lived experience, nearly half of the at-large
membership    had lived experience of homelessness and/or extreme poverty. The resulting LIP was
approved by the Housing Authority Board of Commissioners in April 2021 and subsequently approved by
Metro. The LIP guides the County’s work in prioritizing the use of funds for the delivery of housing and
homeless services, and a regional Oversight Committee maintains the County’s accountability for the
implementation of the plans strategies and achieving the LIP’s goals. The County annually updates the
LIP goals with an Annual Work Plan, establishing outcome goals for housing placements, shelter unit
development/support, eviction prevention, and other goals related to the County’s LIP.



The County also staffs additional year-round engagement and decision-making activities in multiple
arenas. The Housing Services (formerly CoC) Steering Committee, with representation of people with
lived experience, serves as the County’s CoC governing body, as well as the local advisory body for the
overall delivery of housing services, including those funded by the SHS Measure. A larger table, the
Housing Services (formerly CoC) Community Group, consists of service providers and other system
partners, and provides input on challenges and needs in the community. Both meet monthly. Staff also
engage with the provider community through periodic meetings with the Here Together Clackamas
Cohort, a coalition of local housing service providers. Staff engage with the County’s 16 cities through
the Clackamas County Coordination Committee, regular updates and work sessions with city councils
and commissions, and through regular engagements with the monthly gathering of Clackamas County
mayors convened by the Chair of the Board of County Commissioners. Staff engage with people with
lived experience through the County’s Youth Action Board, comprising youth with lived experience of
homelessness who provide input toward the County’s implementation of housing services for youth,
and through a lived experience panel, which convenes to provide input on specific initiatives, grant
opportunities, or overall strategic issues. Both the lived experience panel and the Youth Action Board
provide stipends from the County for the participants.




                                                     18
                                                                                        Agreement No. 7630


Clackamas County will leverage its comprehensive homeless services planning framework and advisory
structure to inform its Phase 2 impact and needs, community priorities, progress and possibilities, goals
and milestones, and regional plan. The County will take short- and longer-term approaches to
incorporating into its system of care the funding made available by Emergency Order 23-02 and ongoing
State commitments.    In the short-term, the funding will be allocated on a one-time basis to existing
contracted service providers and Clackamas County direct-service programs to quickly meet Emergency
Order 23-02 goals. In the longer-term, one of the biggest gaps for Clackamas County is the availability of
funding to serve the rural areas.




Clackamas County’s share of Metro Supportive Housing Services Measure funding brings approximately
$40.0 million per year to fund services within the Urban Growth Boundary (UGB). Since the Measure’s
passage, Clackamas County has been working to reallocate other local, state, and federal funding for
services outside the UGB. However, the need for households outside of the UGB is far greater than what
can be funded with currently available resources, and the rural areas also lack critical homeless services
infrastructure. The funding made available here will help to close this critical gap and help Clackamas
County build the more geographically equitable system of care that it has long needed. The County
recently entered into a contract with a vendor to carry out a rural area needs assessment and develop a
strategic plan. The timing of that work aligns with the opportunity to meet short-term goals now with
one-time allocations and meet long-term goals with the intentional allocation of ongoing resources to
the rural areas, and meet other system needs as part of the overall rebalancing of funding and build-out
of services across the whole county.



All-In ORE-DAP      Spending/ Allowable Expenditures

Which allowable ORE-DAP expenditures will you prioritize? Will there be any allowable expenses
from the ORE-DAP program manual that will not be offered to your program participants?

ORE-DAP funds will be prioritized for housing financial assistance (rent assistance, rent arrearages and
utility assistance), but will also allow for prevention activities, diversion activities, stabilization support
services, outreach and engagement and administrative costs. All funds spent during this phase of ORE-
DAP will focus on Eviction Diversion and Homelessness Prevention. Local and other funds will be
leveraged to assist with providing wrap around support services and referral to additional resources to
assist with developing long-term stabilization solutions beyond the short-term solution provided by ORE-
DAP funds. All allowable expenses with sufficient documentation and demonstration of need will be
provided if necessary for eviction diversion and homelessness prevention. Cash payments and gift cards
are not allowed for this program.


Anticipated Spenddown Timeline

All-In ORE-DAP funds can be spent in support of the stability outcomes for the number of
households communicated in your All-in ORE- DAP funding formula workbook between January
10, 2023 and January 10, 2024. Based on your analysis, when do you anticipate your funds will be
fully expended, with your required outcomes reached?


                                                       19
                                                                                                  Agreement No. 7630


NOTE: By executing this Agreement, Recipient acknowledges and agrees that all performance
goals under this Agreement must be completed by January 10, 2024 and that only eligible expenses
incurred prior to January 10, 2024 will be reimbursed pursuant to this Agreement.

It is our intention to fully expend funds by the deadline of January 10, 2024.


Progress Milestone Timeline

OHCS has populated a proposed Progress Milestone Timeline below. This timeline will serve as a
means to ensure the overall project is on task and the State is collectively meeting our goals by the
deadline of the end of the Executive Order emergency declaration, January 10, 2024.

Please confirm below that this template milestone is sufficient or produce an alternative progress
milestone timeline below that your organization will commit to. Timelines may be amended
through an Implementation Report amendment at the approval of OHCS.

Proposed Progress Milestone Timeline also attached in Implementation Report email.

This template is sufficient at this time, although we will evaluate it more fully as we launch this
program.


        March 2023 -
               Receive allocation amount from OHCS.


       April 2023 -
                Convene MAC group to strategize All-in ORE-DAP spending to meet required service outcomes.
                Receive All-in ORE-DAP program guidance update.
                Complete All-In ORE-DAP Implementation Report for submission.
       May 2023 -
                Continue assessment of system gaps in partnership with MAC Group, if applicable.
                Internal review of ORE-DAP EO grant agreement.
                Grant agreement execution goal: May 15, 2023
       June 2023 -
                Service goal:
                5% of HH goal served.
                Meet with OHCS program staff during scheduled quarterly benchmark meeting.
       July 2023 -
                Service goal:
                15% of HH goal served (20% to date)
       August 2023 -
                Service goal:
                15% of HH goal served (35% to date)
       September 2023 -
                Service goal:
                15% of HH goal served (50% to date)
                Meet with OHCS program staff during scheduled quarterly benchmark meeting.
       October 2023 -
                Service goal:
                15% of HH goal served (65% to date)
       November 2023 -
                Service goal:
                15% of HH goal served (80% to date)
       December 2023 —
                Service goal:
                15% of HH goal served (95% to date).
                Meet with OHCS program staff during scheduled quarterly benchmark meeting.
       January 2024 —
                Service goal:
                5% of HH goal served (100% to date)
                                                                                       Agreement No. 7630


Training and Technical Assistance

OHCS believes that training and technical assistance can serve as a support for the expertise and
knowledge that local providers have available to them. We have contracted with national TA
providers to support in the implementation of these programs. We want to encourage local
communities to submit TA requests through the following form:

https://app.smartsheet.com/b/form/b8d8efc0bb204567965dc7fd51f8870e

If you have questions about TTA available through this process, please contact
EO2302.questions    @ HCS.oregon.gov




Please provide any additional comments:

Our primary concern is the amount of funding provided per household is extremely low for eviction
prevention purposes. Clackamas County is allocated $1.6M in program funds and is expected to provide
services to 490 households. This will allow for an average payment of $3,267 per household. With fair
market rents in Clackamas County at $1,839 for a two bedroom apartment (FY 2023, HUD), the typical
amount to prevent an eviction is likely, at a minimum, to be 2 months of rent plus late fees (at least
$3,876) and does not include utility arrearages or any other charges. If any additional supports are
required or if short-term rent assistance for up to 6 months is required to stabilize the individual or family
in housing, costs will rapidly exceed the available funds per household.




                                             [End of Exhibit B]




                                                      21
                                                                                  Agreement No. 7630


                                               Exhibit C

                                        Insurance Requirements

Grantee shall obtain at Grantee’s expense the insurance specified in this Exhibit C prior to performing
under this Contract and shall maintain it in full force and at its own expense throughout the duration
of this Contract, as required by any extended reporting period or continuous claims made coverage
requirements, and all warranty periods that apply. Grantee shall obtain the following insurance from
insurance companies or entities that are authorized to transact the business of insurance and issue
coverage in the State of Oregon and that are acceptable to Agency. Coverage shall be primary and non-
contributory with any other insurance and self-insurance, with the exception of Professional Liability
and Workers’ Compensation. Grantee shall pay for all deductibles, self-insured retention and self-
insurance, if any.

WORKERS’ COMPENSATION & EMPLOYERS’ LIABILITY
All employers, including Grantee, that employ subject workers, as defined in ORS 656.027, shall
comply with ORS 656.017 and provide workers' compensation insurance coverage for those workers,
unless they meet the requirement for an exemption under ORS 656.126(2). Grantee shall require and
ensure that each of its subcontractors complies with these requirements. If Grantee is a subject
employer, as defined in ORS 656.023, Grantee shall also obtain employers’ liability insurance coverage
with limits not less than $500,000 each accident. If Grantee is an employer subject to any other state’s
workers’ compensation law, Contactor shall provide workers’ compensation insurance coverage for its
employees as required by applicable workers’ compensation laws including employers’ liability
insurance coverage with limits not less than $500,000 and shall require and ensure that each of its out-
of-state subcontractors complies with these requirements.

COMMERCIAL GENERAL LIABILITY:
[x] Required

Commercial General Liability Insurance covering bodily injury and property damage in a form and
with coverage that are satisfactory to the State. This insurance shall include personal and advertising
injury liability, products and completed operations, contractual liability coverage for the indemnity
provided under this contract, and have no limitation of coverage to designated premises, project or
operation. Coverage shall be written on an occurrence basis in an amount of not less than $1,000,000
per occurrence. Annual aggregate limit shall not be less than $2,000,000.

AUTOMOBILE LIABILITY INSURANCE:
[Lx] Required        [_] Not required

Automobile Liability Insurance covering Grantee’s business use including coverage for all owned,
non-owned, or hired vehicles with a combined single limit of not less than $1,000,000 for bodily injury
and property damage. This coverage may be written in combination with the Commercial General
Liability Insurance (with separate limits for Commercial General Liability and Automobile Liability).
Use of personal automobile liability insurance coverage may be acceptable if evidence that the policy
includes a business use endorsement is provided.

PROFESSIONAL            LIABILITY:


                                                   22
                                                                                   Agreement No. 7630


><] Required     [_] Not required

Professional Liability covering any damages       caused by an error, omission or any negligent acts
related to the services to be provided under this Contract by the Grantee and Grantee’s subcontractors,
agents, officers or employees in an amount not less than $1,000,000 per claim. Annual aggregate limit
shall not be less than $2,000,000. If coverage is on a claims made basis, then either an extended
reporting period of not less than 24 months shall be included in the Professional Liability insurance
coverage, or the Grantee shall provide continuous claims made coverage as stated below.

NETWORK         SECURITY AND PRIVACY LIABILITY:
[LX] Required    [_] Not required

Grantee shall provide network security and privacy liability insurance for the duration of the contract
and for the period of time in which Grantee (or its Business Associates or subcontractor(s)) maintains,
possesses, stores or has access to Agency or client data, whichever is longer, with a combined single
limit of no less than $1,000,000 per claim or incident. This insurance shall include coverage for third
party claims and for losses, thefts, unauthorized disclosures, access or use of Agency or client data
(which may include, but is not limited to, Personally Identifiable Information (“PII”), Payment Card
Data and Protected Health Information (“PHI’)) in any format, including coverage for accidental loss,
theft, unauthorized disclosure access or use of Agency data.

DIRECTORS, OFFICERS AND ORGANIZATION LIABILITY:
[LX] Required    [_] Not required

Directors, Officers and Organization insurance covering the Grantee’s Organization, Directors,
Officers, and Trustees actual or alleged errors, omissions, negligent, or wrongful acts, including
improper governance, employment practices and financial oversight - including improper oversight
and/or use of use of grant funds and donor contributions which includes state or federal funds - with a
combined single limit of no less than $1,000,000 per claim.

CRIME PROTECTION COVERAGE: EMPLOYEE DISHONESTY or FIDELITY BOND
[x] Required     [_] Not required

Third party Employee Dishonesty or Fidelity Bond coverages for loss of state-owned property by
dishonest acts of an employee of the Grantee. Coverage limits shall not be less than $1,000,000.

EXCESS/UMBRELLA INSURANCE:
A combination of primary and excess/umbrella insurance may be used to meet the required limits of
insurance.

ADDITIONAL INSURED:
All liability insurance, except for Workers’ Compensation, Professional Liability, and Network
Security and Privacy Liability Gf applicable), required under this Contract must include an additional
insured endorsement specifying the State of Oregon, its officers, employees and agents as Additional
Insureds, including additional insured status with respect to liability arising out of ongoing operations
and completed operations, but only with respect to Grantee's activities to be performed under this
Contract. Coverage shall be primary and non-contributory with any other insurance and self-insurance.
The Additional Insured endorsement with respect to liability arising out of your ongoing operations


                                                   23
                                                                                    Agreement No. 7630


must be on ISO Form CG 20 10 07 04 or equivalent and the Additional Insured endorsement with
respect to completed operations must be on ISO form CG 20 37 07 04 or equivalent.

WAIVER OF SUBROGATION:
Grantee shall waive rights of subrogation which Grantee or any insurer of Grantee may acquire against
the Agency     or State of Oregon      by virtue of the payment   of any   loss. Grantee   will obtain   any
endorsement that may be necessary to affect this waiver of subrogation, but this provision applies
regardless of whether or not the Agency has received a waiver of subrogation endorsement from the
Grantee or the Grantee’s insurer(s).
CONTINUOUS CLAIMS MADE COVERAGE:
If any of the required liability insurance is on a claims made basis and does not include an extended
reporting period of at least 24 months, then Grantee shall maintain continuous claims made liability
coverage, provided the effective date of the continuous claims made coverage is on or before the
effective date of the Grant Agreement, for a minimum of 24 months following the later of:
    (i)     Grantee ’s completion and Agency’s acceptance of all Services required under the Contract,
            or
    (ii)    Agency or Grantee termination of this Contract, or
    (iii)   The expiration of all warranty periods provided under this Contract.

CERTIFICATE(S) AND PROOF OF INSURANCE:
Grantee shall provide to Agency Certificate(s) of Insurance for all required insurance before delivering
any Goods and performing any Services required under this Contract. The Certificate(s) shall list the
State of Oregon, its officers, employees and agents as a Certificate holder and as an endorsed
Additional Insured. The Certificate(s) shall also include all required endorsements or copies of the
applicable policy language effecting coverage required by this Contract. If excess/umbrella insurance
is used to meet the minimum insurance requirement, the Certificate of Insurance must include a list of
all policies that fall under the excess/umbrella insurance. As proof of insurance Agency has the right
to request copies of insurance policies and endorsements relating to the insurance requirements in this
Contract.

NOTICE OF CHANGE OR CANCELLATION:
The Grantee or its insurer must provide at least 30 days’ written notice to Agency before cancellation
of, material change to, potential exhaustion of aggregate limits of, or non-renewal of the required
insurance coverage(s).

INSURANCE REQUIREMENT REVIEW:
Grantee agrees to periodic review of insurance requirements by Agency under this Contract and to
provide updated requirements as mutually agreed upon by Grantee and Agency.

STATE ACCEPTANCE:
All insurance providers are subject to Agency       acceptance.   If requested by Agency,    Grantee shall
provide complete copies of insurance policies, endorsements, self-insurance documents and related
insurance documents to Agency’s representatives responsible for verification of the insurance
coverages required under this Exhibit C.




                                                     24
