                                   John D. Wentworth, Clackamas County District Attorney

                                                     807 Main Street, Oregon City, Oregon 97045
                                         P: 503.655.8431 | F: 503.650.8943 | districtattorney@clackamas.us




February 1, 2024                                                             BCC Agenda Date/Item:

Board of County Commissioners
Clackamas County


Approval of a Grant Agreement with the Federal Bureau of Justice Assistance for the Matthew Shepard
     and James Byrd, Jr. Hates Crimes Program. Anticipated Grant Award is $800,000 over 4 years.
         Funding through the US Department of Justice. No County General Funds are involved.

 Previous Board            Approval to Apply, 20240118 IV.A.2
 Action/Review
 Performance               Ensure safe, healthy, and secure communities.
 Clackamas
 Counsel Review            Yes                            Procurement Review | No
 Contact Person            Scott Healy                    Contact Phone        503-655-8343



EXECUTIVE SUMMARY: In recent years, the county has experienced not only an increase in size and
diversity, but in reported hate crimes as well. Along with this population growth, Clackamas County has seen a
366% increase in bias reports to the DOJ Bias Crime Hotline since 2020. According to estimates by the U.S.
Bureau of Justice Statistics, this increase accounts for only a small fraction of hate crimes, as 97% of bias
incidents go unreported.
However, the large increase in reporting to the DOJ          has not translated into law enforcement referrals to the
Clackamas County District Attorney's Office (CCDA). Based on this significant difference, we believe our current
referral rate does not reflect the number of bias crimes occurring in the county.

Our office recognizes the vital role we play in closing the gap between the real number of bias crimes occurring
in Our Community and what is ultimately reported to law enforcement, investigated, and subsequently referred to
the CCDA. Tackling this complex issue requires enhanced work in all areas of prevention, incident/crime
response, and prosecution. We know that a significant factor in improving bias crime reporting and response is
building trust with those directly impacted by these hate crimes in our community.

As a result of these challenges, the CCDA will receive $800,000 ($200,000 annually over four years) from this
grant opportunity to fund the following new bias crime initiatives:

    1.   Creation and implementation of a District Attorney’s Community Advisory Council (CAC).
   2.    Development and implementation of a Bias Crimes Multi-Disciplinary Team (Bias Crimes MDT).
   3.    Development and dissemination of bias crime training for law enforcement, CCDA employees, and other
         community partner agencies.
         Participation in community outreach opportunities.
   oe




         Building ongoing evaluation tools to provide opportunity for continuous improvement and community
         input.
   6.    Adding bilingual or polylingual victim advocate who specializes in bias crimes to the District Attorney’s
         staff.

                                                  [Department Footer]
                                                                        Staff Report - <<Business Meeting Date>>
                                                                                                       Page 2 of 2
The District Attorney’s Office will establish a Community Advisory Council (CAC) with the intent of building
relationships and improving trust with law enforcement and other community partners. This will include recruiting
a diverse group of community members to serve. The CAC will work to provide insight, strategies, and
recommendations to the CCDA on how to establish better connections with communities and ultimately advise
around strategic plans for improving law enforcement and other support services for victims of bias crimes in the
county.
Additionally, funds will be utilized to create and provide bias crime training for law enforcement, prosecutors,
victim advocates, and community members. This training will focus on prevention, law enforcement response,
and best practices for bias crime investigation and prosecution.

A new Bias Crime MDT will be created and comprised of members from the CCDA, law enforcement agencies,
the Oregon Department of Justice Civil Rights Unit, as well as local community partner organizations. The MDT
will meet regularly to discuss and implement strategies to combat bias crimes, support interagency collaboration,
and coordinate training, education, and outreach events. The MDT will be led by a specially trained CCDA
prosecutor.
Our office will simultaneously seek opportunities to provide or participate in community outreach events to help
build public trust and awareness of public safety and community resources. Funds will also be used to support
the printing, translating, and distribution of informational outreach materials.

The CCDA will also create comprehensive evaluation tools and assessments to ensure ongoing meaningful
community engagement, positive organizational change, and evidence-based decision-making to improve bias
crime prevention, response, and prosecution.

Finally, the CCDA plans to add a bilingual or polylingual victim advocate employee who specializes in bias
crime victim support. This person will receive bias crime training on a regular basis, help with the training of
other MDT and community members, be involved in outreach to affected communities, and provide best-
practice and trauma informed services to victims of bias crimes.



RECOMMENDATION: | respectfully recommend that the Board of County Commissioners approve the receipt of
the DOJ Bias Crimes Grant for 2023-2027 between Clackamas County, acting by and through its District
Attorney’s Office, and the Federal Bureau of Justice Assistance, acting by and through the BUA Matthew Shepard
and James Byrd, Jr. Hate Crimes Program.


Respectfully submitted,



John D. Wentworth
Clackamas County District Attorney




                                                                             For Filing Use Only




                                               [Department Footer]
                                            Department of Justice (DOJ)

                                                 Office of   Justice Programs

                                                Bureau of Justice Assistance




                                                                                                      Washington, D.C. 20531



Name and Address of Recipient:                 COUNTY OF CLACKAMAS
                                               2051 KAEN RD

City, State and Zip:                           OREGON        CITY, OR 97045

Recipient UEI:                                 NVWKAVB8JND6
Project Title: Clackamas County District
Attorney's Enhanced Bias Crime
                                               Award    Number:    15PBJA-23-GG-05360-HATE
Prevention, Response, and Prosecution
Initiative
Solicitation Title: BUA FY 23 Matthew Shepard and James Byrd, Jr. Hate Crimes Program
Federal Award Amount: $800,000.00              Federal Award Date: 9/28/23
Awarding Agency:                           Office of Justice Programs
                                           Bureau of Justice Assistance
Funding Instrument Type:                   Grant
Opportunity Category: D
Assistance Listing:
16.040 - Matthew Shepard and James Byrd, Jr. Hate Crimes Education, Investigation and Prosecution Program
Project Period Start Date: 10/1/23             Project Period End Date: 9/30/27
Budget Period Start Date: 10/1/23              Budget Period End Date: 9/30/27
Project Description:
With the increased ability for communities to document hate crimes, such as the use of cell phone video footage and
social media, the public has unprecedented access to the realities of bias crimes occurring in the United States.
Consequently, while this type of crime is not new, reports are on the rise within the State of Oregon.Clackamas County
is the third most populous county in Oregon. In recent years, the county has experienced not only an increase in size
and diversity, but in reported hate crimes as well. Clackamas County has seen a 366% increase in bias reports to the
Oregon DOJ since 2020. According to estimates by the U.S. Bureau of Justice Statistics, this staggering increase
accounts for only a small fraction of hate crimes, as 97% of bias incidents go unreported.Based on this difference tn
DOJ reports versus the number of law enforcement referrals, we believe our current referral rate is nowhere near the
reality of community members lived experience. Tackling this complex issue requires enhanced work in all areas of
prevention, incident/crime response, and prosecution. We know that a significant factor in improving bias crime
reporting and response is building trust with those directly impacted by hate incidents and crimes in our community.     The
CCDA Is operating in a time of tight budget constraints that have hindered our office’s ability to make strides in these
essential areas of public safety and wellbeing for our community.In light of these challenges, the CCDA is requesting
funding for the following initiatives:Creation and implementation of a District Attorney's Community Advisory Council
(CAC).Development and implementation of a Bias Crimes Multi-Disciplinary Team (Bias Crimes MDT).Development
and dissemination of bias and discrimination training for law enforcement, CCDA employees, and partner
agencies.Participation in community outreach, including identifying community partner agencies serving groups
impacted by bias crimes.Building ongoing evaluation tools for continuous improvement and gathering community
inout. These proposed efforts have received support from all local law enforcement agencies in Clackamas County as
well as multiple community partners as documented tn the letters of support.




                                                                                                             Page: 1 of 20
Award Letter
September 28, 2023

Dear Elizabeth Comfort,

On behalf of Attorney General Merrick B. Garland, it is my pleasure to inform you the Office of Justice Programs
(OJP) has approved the application submitted by COUNTY OF CLACKAMAS for an award under the funding
opportunity entitled 2023 BJA FY 23 Matthew Shepard and James Byrd, Jr. Hate Crimes Program. The approved
award amount is $800,000.
Review the Award Instrument below carefully and familiarize yourself with all conditions and requirements before
accepting your award. The Award Instrument includes the Award Offer (Award Information, Project Information,
Financial Information, and Award Conditions) and Award Acceptance. For COPS Office and OVW funding the Award
Offer also includes any Other Award Documents.

Please note that award requirements include not only the conditions and limitations set forth in the Award Offer, but
also compliance with assurances and certifications that relate to conduct during the period of performance for the
award. These requirements encompass financial, administrative, and programmatic matters, as well as other important
matters (e.g., specific restrictions on use of funds). Therefore, all key staff should receive the award conditions, the
assurances and certifications, and the application as approved by OJP, so that they understand the award
requirements. Information on all pertinent award requirements also must be provided to any subrecipient of the award.


Should you accept the award and then fail to comply with an award requirement, DOJ will pursue appropriate remedies
for non-compliance, which may include termination of the award and/or a requirement to repay award funds.

Prior to accepting the award, your Entity Administrator must assign a Financial Manager, Grant Award Administrator,
and Authorized Representative(s) in the Justice Grants System (JustGrants). The Entity Administrator will need to
ensure the assigned Authorized Representative(s) is current and has the legal authority to accept awards and bind the
entity to the award terms and conditions. To accept the award, the Authorized Representative(s) must accept all parts
of the Award Offer in the Justice Grants System (JustGrants), including by executing the required declaration and
certification, within 45 days from the award date.

To access your funds, you will need to enroll in the Automated Standard Application for Payments (ASAP) system, if
you haven't already completed the enrollment process in ASAP. The Entity Administrator should have already received
an email from ASAP to initiate this process.

Congratulations, and we look forward to working with you.


Amy Solomon
Assistant Attorney General
Office for Civil Rights Notice for All Recipients


The Office for Civil Rights (OCR), Office of Justice Programs (OJP), U.S. Department of Justice (DOJ) has been
delegated the responsibility for ensuring that recipients of federal financial assistance from the OJP, the Office of
Community Oriented Policing Services (COPS), and the Office on Violence Against Women (OVW) are not engaged in
discrimination prohibited by law. Several federal civil rights laws, such as Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and
Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, require recipients of federal financial assistance to give assurances that
they will comply with those laws. Taken together, these civil rights laws prohibit recipients of federal financial
assistance from DOJ from discriminating in services and employment because of race, color, national origin, religion,
disability, sex, and, for grants authorized under the Violence Against Women Act, sexual orientation and gender
identity. Recipients are also prohibited from discriminating in services because of age. For a complete review of these
civil rights laws and nondiscrimination requirements, in connection with DOJ awards, see https://ojp.gov/funding/
Explore/LegalOverview/CivilRightsRequirements.htm.

Under the delegation of authority, the OCR investigates allegations of discrimination against recipients from individuals,
entities, or groups. In addition, the OCR conducts limited compliance reviews and audits based on regulatory criteria.

                                                                                                           Page: 2 of 20
These reviews and audits permit the OCR to evaluate whether recipients of financial assistance from the Department
are providing services in a nondiscriminatory manner to their service population or have employment practices that
meet equal-opportunity standards.

If you are a recipient of grant awards under the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act or the Juvenile Justice
and Delinquency Prevention Act and your agency is part of a criminal justice system, there are two additional
obligations that may apply in connection with the awards: (1) complying with the regulation relating to Equal
Employment Opportunity Programs (EEOPs); and (2) submitting findings of discrimination to OCR. For additional
information regarding the EEOP requirement, see 28 CFR Part 42, subpart E, and for additional information regarding
requirements when there is an adverse finding, see 28 C.F.R. §§ 42.204(c), .205(c)(5).

The OCR is available to help you and your organization meet the civil rights requirements that are associated with DOJ
grant funding. If you would like the OCR to assist you in fulfilling your organization's civil rights or nondiscrimination
responsibilities as a recipient of federal financial assistance, please do not hesitate to contact the OCR at
askOCR@ojp.usdoj.gov.



Memorandum      Regarding NEPA

NEPA Letter Type
OJP - Categorical Exclusion

NEPA Letter

None of the following activities will be conducted whether under the Office of Justice Programs federal action or a
related third-party action:

(1) New construction

(2) Any renovation or remodeling of a property located in an environmentally or historically sensitive area, including
property (a) listed on or eligible for listing on the National Register of Historic Places, or (b) located within a 100-year
flood plain, a wetland, or habitat for an endangered species

(3) A renovation that will change the basic prior use of a facility or significantly change its size

(4) Research and technology whose anticipated and future application could be expected to have an effect on the
environment

(5) Implementation of a program involving the use of chemicals (including the identification, seizure, or closure of
clandestine methamphetamine laboratories)

Additionally, the proposed action is neither a phase nor a segment of a project that when reviewed in its entirety would
not meet the criteria for a categorical exclusion.

Consequently, the subject federal action meets the Office of Justice Programs’ criteria for a categorical exclusion as
contained in paragraph 4(b) of Appendix D to Part 61 of Title 28 of the Code of Federal Regulations.

Questions about this determination may be directed to your grant manager or Orbin Terry, Environmental Coordinator
for the Bureau of Justice Assistance.

NEPA Coordinator
First Name                                 .                                       Last Name
Orbin                                    Middle Name                               Terry




Award    Information

This award is offered subject to the conditions or limitations set forth in the Award Information, Project
                                                                                                                Page: 3 of 20
Information, Financial Information, and Award Conditions.

Recipient Information

Recipient Name
COUNTY OF CLACKAMAS

UEI
NVWKAVB8JND6
Street 1
2051 KAEN RD                                                 Street 2

City                                                         State/U.S. Territory
OREGON         CITY                                          Oregon

Zip/Postal Code                                              Country
97045                                                        United States

County/Parish                                                Province



Award         Details

Federal Award Date                                           Award Type
9/28/23                                                      Initial

Award Number                                                 Supplement Number
15PBJA-23-GG-05360-HATE                                      00

Federal Award Amount                                         Funding Instrument Type
$800,000.00                                                  Grant


     Assistance Listing        Assistance Listings Program Title
     Number

     16.040                    Matthew Shepard and James Byrd, Jr. Hate Crimes Education, Investigation and
                               Prosecution Program

     Statutory Authority

     Pub. L. No. 111-84, Div. E, Sec. 4704 (codified at 34 U.S.C. 30503); Department of Justice Appropriations Act, 2023
     (Pub. L. No. 117-328; 136 Stat. 4459, 4537)

[]
| have read and understand the information presented in this section of the Federal Award Instrument.




Project Information
This award is offered subject to the conditions or limitations set forth in the Award Information, Project
Information, Financial Information, and Award Conditions.

Solicitation Title                                           Awarding Agency
                                                                                                           Page: 4 of 20
                                                             OJP
2023 BJA FY 23 Matthew Shepard and James Byrd, Jr.
Hate Crimes Program                                          Program Office
      ~      og,                                             BJA
Application Number
GRANT 13909589



Grant Manager Name
Tamaro White
Phone Number
202-598-7548
E-mail Address
Tamaro.White@usdoj.gov

Project Title
Clackamas County District Attorney’s Enhanced Bias Crime Prevention, Response, and Prosecution Initiative

Performance Period Start
Date                                    Performance Period End Date
10/01/2023                              09/30/2027


Budget Period Start Date                Budget Period End Date
10/01/2023                              09/30/2027


Project Description
With the increased ability for communities to document hate crimes, such as the use of cell phone video footage and
social media, the public has unprecedented access to the realities of bias crimes occurring in the United States.
Consequently, while this type of crime is not new, reports are on the rise within the State of Oregon.Clackamas County
is the third most populous county in Oregon. In recent years, the county has experienced not only an increase in size
and diversity, but in reported hate crimes as well. Clackamas County has seen a 366% increase in bias reports to the
Oregon DOJ since 2020. According to estimates by the U.S. Bureau of Justice Statistics, this staggering increase
accounts for only a small fraction of hate crimes, as 97% of bias incidents go unreported.Based on this difference in
DOJ reports versus the number of law enforcement referrals, we believe our current referral rate is nowhere near the
reality of community members’ lived experience. Tackling this complex issue requires enhanced work in all areas of
prevention, incident/crime response, and prosecution. We know that a significant factor in improving bias crime
reporting and response is building trust with those directly impacted by hate incidents and crimes in our community.     The
CCDA is operating in a time of tight budget constraints that have hindered our office’s ability to make strides in these
essential areas of public safety and wellbeing for our community.|n light of these challenges, the CCDA is requesting
funding for the following initiatives:Creation and implementation of a District Attorney’s Community Advisory Council
(CAC).Development and implementation of a Bias Crimes Multi-Disciplinary Team (Bias Crimes MDT).Development
and dissemination of bias and discrimination training for law enforcement, CCDA employees, and partner
agencies.Participation in community outreach, including identifying community partner agencies serving groups
impacted by bias crimes.Building ongoing evaluation tools for continuous improvement and gathering community
input. These proposed efforts have received support from all local law enforcement agencies in Clackamas County as
well as multiple community partners as documented in the letters of support.

[]
| have read and understand the information presented in this section of the Federal Award Instrument.




Financial Information

This award is offered subject to the conditions or limitations set forth in the Award Information, Project

                                                                                                             Page: 5 of 20
Information, Financial Information, and Award Conditions.

The recipient budget is currently under review.

[]
| have read and understand the information presented in this section of the Federal Award Instrument.




Award Conditions
This award is offered subject to the conditions or limitations set forth in the Award Information, Project
Information, Financial Information, and Award Conditions.
{

Compliance with restrictions on the use of federal funds--prohibited and controlled equipment under OJP awards

Consistent with Executive Order 14074, “Advancing Effective, Accountable Policing and Criminal Justice Practices To
Enhance Public Trust and Public Safety,” OJP has prohibited the use of federal funds under this award for purchases
or transfers of specified equipment by law enforcement agencies. In addition, OJP requires the recipient, and any
subrecipient (“subgrantee”) at any tier, to put in place specified controls prior to using federal funds under this award to
acquire or transfer any property identified on the “controlled equipment” list. The details of the requirement are posted
on the OJP web site at https://www.ojp.gov/funding/explore/prohibited-and-controlled-equipment (Award condition:
Compliance with restrictions on the use of federal funds--prohibited and controlled equipment under OJP awards), and
are incorporated by reference here.

2
Compliance with DOJ regulations pertaining to civil rights and nondiscrimination - 28 C.F.R. Part 54

The recipient, and any subrecipient ("subgrantee") at any tier, must comply with all applicable requirements of 28
C.F.R. Part 54, which relates to nondiscrimination on the basis of sex in certain "education programs.”

3
Compliance with 41 U.S.C. 4712 (including prohibitions on reprisal; notice to employees)

The recipient (and any subrecipient at any tier) must comply with, and Is subject to, all applicable provisions of 41
U.S.C. 4712, including all applicable provisions that prohibit, under specified circumstances, discrimination against an
employee as reprisal for the employee's disclosure of information related to gross mismanagement of a federal grant, a
gross waste of federal funds, an abuse of authority relating to a federal grant, a substantial and specific danger to
public health or safety, or a violation of law, rule, or regulation related to a federal grant.

The recipient also must inform its employees, in writing (and in the predominant native language of the workforce), of
employee rights and remedies under 41 U.S.C. 4712.

Should a question arise as to the applicability of the provisions of 41 U.S.C. 4712 to this award, the recipient is to
contact the DOJ awarding agency (OJP or OVW, as appropriate) for guidance.

4

Applicability of Part 200 Uniform Requirements

The Uniform Administrative Requirements, Cost Principles, and Audit Requirements in 2 C.F.R. Part 200, as adopted
and supplemented by DOJ in 2 C.F.R. Part 2800 (together, the "Part 200 Uniform Requirements") apply to this FY
2022 award from OJP.

The Part 200 Uniform Requirements were first adopted by DOJ on December 26, 2014. If this FY 2022 award
supplements funds previously awarded by OJP under the same award number (e.g., funds awarded during or before

                                                                                                             Page: 6 of 20
December 2014), the Part 200 Uniform Requirements apply with respect to all funds under that award number
(regardless of the award date, and regardless of whether derived from the initial award or a supplemental award) that
are obligated on or after the acceptance date of this FY 2022 award.

For more information and resources on the Part 200 Uniform Requirements as they relate to OJP awards and
subawards ("subgrants"), see the OJP website at https://ojp.gov/funding/Part200UniformRequirements.htm.

Record retention and access: Records pertinent to the award that the recipient (and any subrecipient ("subgrantee”) at
any tier) must retain -- typically for a period of 3 years from the date of submission of the final expenditure report (SF
425), unless a different retention period applies -- and to which the recipient (and any subrecipient ("subgrantee") at
any tier) must provide access, include performance measurement information, in addition to the financial records,
supporting documents, statistical records, and other pertinent records indicated at 2 C.F.R. 200.334.

In the event that an award-related question arises from documents or other materials prepared or distributed by OJP
that may appear to conflict with, or differ in some way from, the provisions of the Part 200 Uniform Requirements, the
recipient is to contact OJP promptly for clarification.

fs)
Compliance with applicable rules regarding approval, planning, and reporting of conferences, meetings, trainings, and
other events

The recipient, and any subrecipient ("subgrantee") at any tier, must comply with all applicable laws, regulations,
policies, and official DOJ guidance (including specific cost limits, prior approval and reporting requirements, where
applicable) governing the use of federal funds for expenses related to conferences (as that term is defined by DOJ),
including the provision of food and/or beverages at such conferences, and costs of attendance at such conferences.

Information on the pertinent DOJ definition of conferences and the rules applicable to this award appears in the DOJ
Grants Financial Guide (currently, as section 3.10 of "Postaward Requirements” in the "DOJ Grants Financial Guide").

6
Requirement for data on performance and effectiveness under the award

The recipient must collect and maintain data that measure the performance and effectiveness of work under this
award. The data must be provided to OJP in the manner (including within the timeframes) specified by OJP in the
program solicitation or other applicable written guidance. Data collection supports compliance with the Government
Performance and Results Act (GPRA) and the GPRA Modernization Act of 2010, and other applicable laws.

7
Compliance with DOJ Grants Financial Guide

References to the DOJ Grants Financial Guide are to the DOJ Grants Financial Guide as posted on the OJP website
(currently, the "DOJ Grants Financial Guide" available at https://ojp.gov/financialguide/DOJ/index.htm), including any
updated version that may be posted during the period of performance. The recipient agrees to comply with the DOJ
Grants Financial Guide.

8
Compliance with general appropriations-law restrictions on the use of federal funds (FY 2022)

The recipient, and any subrecipient ("Ssubgrantee") at any tier, must comply with all applicable restrictions on the use of
federal funds set out in federal appropriations statutes. Pertinent restrictions, including from various "general
provisions” in the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2022, are set out at https://www.ojp.gov/funding/Explore/
FY 22AppropriationsRestrictions.htm, and are incorporated by reference here.

Should a question arise as to whether a particular use of federal funds by a recipient (or a subrecipient) would or might
fall within the scope of an appropriations-law restriction, the recipient is to contact OJP for guidance, and may not
proceed without the express prior written approval of OJP.

                                                                                                            Page: 7 of 20
9
Compliance with DOJ regulations pertaining to civil rights and nondiscrimination - 28 C.F.R. Part 38

The recipient, and any subrecipient ("Ssubgrantee") at any tier, must comply with all applicable requirements of 28
C.F.R. Part 38 (as may be applicable from time to time), specifically including any applicable requirements regarding
written notice to program beneficiaries and prospective program beneficiaries.

Currently, among other things, 28 C.F.R. Part 38 includes rules that prohibit specific forms of discrimination on the
basis of religion, a religious belief, a refusal to hold a religious belief, or refusal to attend or participate in a religious
practice. Part 38, currently, also sets out rules and requirements that pertain to recipient and subrecipient
("“subgrantee") organizations that engage in or conduct explicitly religious activities, as well as rules and requirements
that pertain to recipients and subrecipients that are faith-based or religious organizations.

The text of 28 C.F.R. Part 38 is available via the Electronic Code of Federal Regulations (currently accessible at https:/
/www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/ECFR?page=browse), by browsing to Title 28-Judicial Administration, Chapter 1, Part 38, under
e-CFR "current" data.

10
Effect of failure to address audit issues

The recipient understands and agrees that the DOJ awarding agency (OJP or OVW, as appropriate) may withhold
award funds, or may impose other related requirements, if (as determined by the DOJ awarding agency) the recipient
does not satisfactorily and promptly address outstanding issues from audits required by the Part 200 Uniform
Requirements (or by the terms of this award), or other outstanding issues that arise in connection with audits,
investigations, or reviews of DOJ awards.

11
Requirements of the award; remedies for non-compliance or for materially false statements

The conditions of this award are material requirements of the award. Compliance with any assurances or certifications
submitted by or on behalf of the recipient that relate to conduct during the period of performance also Is a material
requirement of this award.

Limited Exceptions. In certain special circumstances, the U.S. Department of Justice ("DOJ") may determine that it will
not enforce, or enforce only in part, one or more requirements otherwise applicable to the award. Any such exceptions
regarding enforcement, including any such exceptions made during the period of performance, are (or will be during
the period of performance) set out through the Office of Justice Programs ("OJP") webpage entitled "Legal Notices:
Special circumstances as to particular award conditions” (ojp.gov/funding/Explore/LegalNotices-AwardReats.htm), and
incorporated by reference into the award.

By signing and accepting this award on behalf of the recipient, the authorized recipient official accepts all material
requirements of the award, and specifically adopts, as if personally executed by the authorized recipient official, all
assurances or certifications submitted by or on behalf of the recipient that relate to conduct during the period of
performance.

Failure to comply with one or more award requirements -- whether a condition set out in full below, a condition
incorporated by reference below, or an assurance or certification related to conduct during the award period -- may
result in OJP taking appropriate action with respect to the recipient and the award. Among other things, the OJP may
withhold award funds, disallow costs, or suspend or terminate the award. DOJ, including OJP, also may take other
legal action as appropriate.

Any materially false, fictitious, or fraudulent statement to the federal government related to this award (or concealment
or omission of a material fact) may be the subject of criminal prosecution (including under 18 U.S.C. 1001 and/or 1621,
and/or 34 U.S.C. 10271-10273), and also may lead to imposition of civil penalties and administrative remedies for false
claims or otherwise (including under 31 U.S.C. 3729-3730 and 3801-3812).

Should any provision of a requirement of this award be held to be invalid or unenforceable by its terms, that provision

                                                                                                                  Page: 8 of 20
shall first be applied with a limited construction so as to give it the maximum effect permitted by law. Should it be held,
instead, that the provision is utterly invalid or -unenforceable, such provision shall be deemed severable from this
award.

12
Compliance with DOJ regulations pertaining to civil rights and nondiscrimination - 28 C.F.R. Part 42

The recipient, and any subrecipient ("Ssubgrantee") at any tier, must comply with all applicable requirements of 28
C.F.R. Part 42, specifically including any applicable requirements in Subpart E of 28 C.F.R. Part 42 that relate to an
equal employment opportunity program.

13
Requirements related to "de minimis” indirect cost rate

A recipient that is eligible under the Part 200 Uniform Requirements and other applicable law to use the "de minimis”
indirect cost rate described in 2 C.F.R. 200.414(f), and that elects to use the "de minimis” indirect cost rate, must
advise OJP in writing of both its eligibility and its election, and must comply with all associated requirements in the Part
200 Uniform Requirements. The "de minimis” rate may be applied only to modified total direct costs (MTDC) as defined
by the Part 200 Uniform Requirements.

14
Employment eligibility verification for hiring under the award

1. The recipient (and any subrecipient at any tier) must--

A. Ensure that, as part of the hiring process for any position within the United States that is or will be funded (in whole
or in part) with award funds, the recipient (or any subrecipient) properly verifies the employment eligibility of the
individual who is being hired, consistent with the provisions of 8 U.S.C. 1324a(a)(1).

B. Notify all persons associated with the recipient (or any subrecipient) who are or will be involved in activities under
this award of both--

(1) this award requirement for verification of employment eligibility, and

(2) the associated provisions in 8 U.S.C. 1324a(a)(1) that, generally speaking, make it unlawful, in the United States, to
hire (or recruit for employment) certain aliens.

C. Provide training (to the extent necessary) to those persons required by this condition to be notified of the award
requirement for employment eligibility verification and of the associated provisions of 8 U.S.C. 1324a(a)(1).

D. As part of the recordkeeping for the award (including pursuant to the Part 200 Uniform Requirements), maintain
records of all employment eligibility verifications pertinent to compliance with this award condition in accordance with
Form I-9 record retention requirements, as well as records of all pertinent notifications and trainings.

2. Monitoring

The recipient's monitoring responsibilities include monitoring of subrecipient compliance with this condition.

3. Allowable costs

To the extent that such costs are not reimbursed under any other federal program, award funds may be obligated for
the reasonable, necessary, and allocable costs (if any) of actions designed to ensure compliance with this condition.

4. Rules of construction

A. Staff involved in the hiring process


                                                                                                              Page: 9 of 20
For purposes of this condition, persons "who are or will be involved in activities under this award" specifically includes
(without limitation) any and all recipient (or any subrecipient) officials or other staff who are or will be involved in the
hiring process with respect to a position that is or will be funded (in whole or in part) with award funds.

B. Employment eligibility confirmation with E-Verify

For purposes of satisfying the requirement of this condition regarding verification of employment eligibility, the recipient
(or any subrecipient) may choose to participate in, and use, E-Verify (www.e-verify.gov), provided an appropriate
person authorized to act on behalf of the recipient (or subrecipient) uses E-Verify (and follows the proper E-Verify
procedures, including in the event of a "Tentative Nonconfirmation” or a "Final Nonconfirmation") to confirm
employment eligibility for each hiring for a position in the United States that is or will be funded (in whole or in part) with
award funds.

C. "United States” specifically includes the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, Guam, the Virgin Islands of the United
States, and the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands.

D. Nothing in this condition shall be understood to authorize or require any recipient, any subrecipient at any tier, or
any person or other entity, to violate any federal law, including any applicable civil rights or nondiscrimination law.

E. Nothing in this condition, including in paragraph 4.B., shall be understood to relieve any recipient, any subrecipient
at any tier, or any person or other entity, of any obligation otherwise imposed by law, including 8 U.S.C. 1324a(a)(1).

Questions about E-Verify should be directed to DHS. For more information about E-Verify visit the E-Verify website
(https://www.e-verify.gov/) or email E-Verify at E-Verify@dhs.gov. E-Verify employer agents can email E-Verify at E-
VerifyEmployerAgent@dhs.gov.

Questions about the meaning or scope of this condition should be directed to OJP, before award acceptance.

15
OJP Training Guiding Principles

Any training or training materials that the recipient -- or any subrecipient ("Ssubgrantee") at any tier -- develops or
delivers with OJP award funds must adhere to the OJP Training Guiding Principles for Grantees and Subgrantees,
available at httos://www.ojp.gov/funding/implement/training-guiding-principles-grantees-and-subgrantees.

16
Determination of suitability to interact with participating minors

SCOPE. This condition applies to this award if it is indicated -- in the application for the award (as approved by DOJ)(or
in the application for any subaward, at any tier), the DOJ funding announcement (solicitation), or an associated federal
statute -- that a purpose of some or all of the activities to be carried out under the award (whether by the recipient, or a
subrecipient at any tier) is to benefit a set of individuals under 18 years of age.

The recipient, and any subrecipient at any tier, must make determinations of suitability before certain individuals may
interact with participating minors. This requirement applies regardless of an individual's employment status.

The details of this requirement are posted on the OJP web site at https://ojp.gov/funding/Explore/Interact-Minors.htm
(Award condition: Determination of suitability required, in advance, for certain individuals who may interact with
participating minors), and are incorporated by reference here.

17
Potential imposition of additional requirements

The recipient agrees to comply with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the DOJ awarding agency
(OJP or OVW, as appropriate) during the period of performance for this award, if the recipient is designated as "high-
risk" for purposes of the DOJ high-risk grantee list.


                                                                                                              Page: 10 of 20
18
Required training for Grant Award Administrator and Financial Manager

The Grant Award Administrator and all Financial Managers for this award must have successfully completed an "OJP
financial management and grant administration training” by 120 days after the date of the recipient's acceptance of the
award. Successful completion of such a training on or after October 15, 2020, will satisfy this condition.

In the event that either the Grant Award Administrator or a Financial Manager for this award changes during the period
of performance, the new Grant Award Administrator or Financial Manager must have successfully completed an "OJP
financial management and grant administration training” by 120 calendar days after the date the Entity Administrator
enters updated Grant Award Administrator or Financial Manager information in JustGrants. Successful completion of
such a training on or after October 15, 2020, will satisfy this condition.

A list of OJP trainings that OJP will consider "OJP financial management and grant administration training” for
 purposes of this condition is available at https://onlinegfmt.training.ojp.gov/. All trainings that satisfy this condition
 include a session on grant fraud prevention and detection.

The recipient should anticipate that OJP will immediately withhold ("freeze") award funds if the recipient fails to comply
with this condition. The recipient's failure to comply also may lead OJP to impose additional appropriate conditions on
this award.

19
Restrictions and certifications regarding non-disclosure agreements and related matters

No recipient or subrecipient ("subgrantee") under this award, or entity that receives a procurement contract or
subcontract with any funds under this award, may require any employee or contractor to sign an internal confidentiality
agreement or statement that prohibits or otherwise restricts, or purports to prohibit or restrict, the reporting (in
accordance with law) of waste, fraud, or abuse to an investigative or law enforcement representative of a federal
department or agency authorized to receive such information.

The foregoing is not intended, and shall not be understood by the agency making this award, to contravene
requirements applicable to Standard Form 312 (which relates to classified information), Form 4414 (which relates to
sensitive compartmented information), or any other form issued by a federal department or agency governing the
nondisclosure of classified information.

1. In accepting this award, the recipient--

a. represents that it neither requires nor has required internal confidentiality agreements or statements from employees
or contractors that currently prohibit or otherwise currently restrict (or purport to prohibit or restrict) employees or
contractors from reporting waste, fraud, or abuse as described above; and

b. certifies that, if it learns or is notified that it is or has been requiring its employees or contractors to execute
agreements or statements that prohibit or otherwise restrict (or purport to prohibit or restrict), reporting of waste, fraud,
or abuse as described above, it will immediately stop any further obligations of award funds, will provide prompt written
notification to the federal agency making this award, and will resume (or permit resumption of) such obligations only if
expressly authorized to do so by that agency.

2. If the recipient does or is authorized under this award to make subawards ("subgrants"), procurement contracts, or
both--

a. it represents that--

(1) it has determined that no other entity that the recipient's application proposes may or will receive award funds
(whether through a subaward ("subgrant"), procurement contract, or subcontract under a procurement contract) either
requires or has required internal confidentiality agreements or statements from employees or contractors that currently
prohibit or otherwise currently restrict (or purport to prohibit or restrict) employees or contractors from reporting waste,
fraud, or abuse as described above; and


                                                                                                                 Page: 11 of 20
(2) it has made appropriate inquiry, or otherwise has an adequate factual basis, to support this representation; and

b. it certifies that, if it learns or is notified that any subrecipient, contractor, or subcontractor entity that receives funds
under this award is or has been requiring its employees or contractors to execute agreements or statements that
prohibit or otherwise restrict (or purport to prohibit or restrict), reporting of waste, fraud, or abuse as described above, it
will immediately stop any further obligations of award funds to or by that entity, will provide prompt written notification to
the federal agency making this award, and will resume (or permit resumption of) such obligations only if expressly
authorized to do so by that agency.

20
Reclassification of various statutory provisions to a new Title 34 of the United States Code

On September 1, 2017, various statutory provisions previously codified elsewhere in the U.S. Code were editorially
reclassified (that is, moved and renumbered) to a new Title 34, entitled "Crime Control and Law Enforcement." The
reclassification encompassed a number of statutory provisions pertinent to OJP awards (that is, OJP grants and
cooperative agreements), including many provisions previously codified in Title 42 of the U.S. Code.

Effective as of September 1, 2017, any reference in this award document to a statutory provision that has been
reclassified to the new Title 34 of the U.S. Code is to be read as a reference to that statutory provision as reclassified
to Title 34. This rule of construction specifically includes references set out in award conditions, references set out in
material incorporated by reference through award conditions, and references set out in other award requirements.

21
Requirement to report actual or imminent breach of personally identifiable information (PII)

The recipient (and any "subrecipient” at any tier) must have written procedures in place to respond in the event of an
actual or imminent "breach" (OMB M-17-12) if it (or a subrecipient) -- (1) creates, collects, uses, processes, stores,
maintains, disseminates, discloses, or disposes of "Personally Identifiable Information (PIl)" (2 CFR 200.1) within the
scope of an OJP grant-funded program or activity, or (2) uses or operates a "Federal information system" (OMB
Circular A-130). The recipient's breach procedures must include a requirement to report actual or imminent breach of
Pll to an OJP Program Manager no later than 24 hours after an occurrence of an actual breach, or the detection of an
imminent breach.

22
Requirement to disclose whether recipient is designated "high risk" by a federal grant-making agency outside of DOJ

If the recipient is designated "high risk" by a federal grant-making agency outside of DOJ, currently or at any time
during the course of the period of performance under this award, the recipient must disclose that fact and certain
related information to OJP by email at OJP.ComplianceReporting@ojp.usdoj.gov. For purposes of this disclosure, high
risk includes any status under which a federal awarding agency provides additional oversight due to the recipient's past
performance, or other programmatic or financial concerns with the recipient. The recipient's disclosure must include the
following: 1. The federal awarding agency that currently designates the recipient high risk, 2. The date the recipient
was designated high risk, 3. The high-risk point of contact at that federal awarding agency (name, phone number, and
email address), and 4. The reasons for the high-risk status, as set out by the federal awarding agency.

23
Encouragement of policies to ban text messaging while driving

Pursuant to Executive Order 13513, "Federal Leadership on Reducing Text Messaging While Driving,” 74 Fed. Reg.
51225 (October 1, 2009), DOJ encourages recipients and subrecipients ("subgrantees") to adopt and enforce policies
banning employees from text messaging while driving any vehicle during the course of performing work funded by this
award, and to establish workplace safety policies and conduct education, awareness, and other outreach to decrease
crashes caused by distracted drivers.

24
All subawards ("subgrants") must have specific federal authorization
                                                                                                               Page: 12 of 20
The recipient, and any subrecipient ("subgrantee") at any tier, must comply with all applicable requirements for
authorization of any subaward. This condition applies to agreements that -- for purposes of federal grants
administrative requirements -- OJP considers a "subaward"” (and therefore does not consider a procurement
"contract".

The details of the requirement for authorization of any subaward are posted on the OJP web site at https://ojp.gov/
funding/Explore/SubawardAuthorization.htm (Award condition: All subawards ("subgrants") must have specific federal
authorization), and are incorporated by reference here.

25
Specific post-award approval required to use a noncompetitive approach in any procurement contract that would
exceed $250,000

The recipient, and any subrecipient ("Subgrantee") at any tier, must comply with all applicable requirements to obtain
specific advance approval to use a noncompetitive approach in any procurement contract that would exceed the
Simplified Acquisition Threshold (currently, $250,000). This condition applies to agreements that -- for purposes of
federal grants administrative requirements -- OJP considers a procurement "contract" (and therefore does not consider
a subaward).

The details of the requirement for advance approval to use a noncompetitive approach in a procurement contract under
an OJP award are posted on the OJP web site at https://ojp.gov/funding/Explore/NoncompetitiveProcurement.htm
(Award condition: Specific post-award approval required to use a noncompetitive approach in a procurement contract
(if contract would exceed $250,000)), and are incorporated by reference here.

26
Requirements pertaining to prohibited conduct related to trafficking in persons (including reporting requirements and
OJP authority to terminate award)

The recipient, and any subrecipient ("subgrantee") at any tier, must comply with all applicable requirements (including
requirements to report allegations) pertaining to prohibited conduct related to the trafficking of persons, whether on the
part of recipients, subrecipients ("Subgrantees"), or individuals defined (for purposes of this condition) as "employees"
of the recipient or of any subrecipient.

The details of the recipient's obligations related to prohibited conduct related to trafficking in persons are posted on the
OJP web site at https://ojp.gov/funding/Explore/ProhibitedConduct-Trafficking.htm (Award condition: Prohibited
conduct by recipients and subrecipients related to trafficking in persons (including reporting requirements and OJP
authority to terminate award)), and are incorporated by reference here.

27
Requirement to report potentially duplicative funding

If the recipient currently has other active awards of federal funds, or if the recipient receives any other award of federal
funds during the period of performance for this award, the recipient promptly must determine whether funds from any of
those other federal awards have been, are being, or are to be used (in whole or in part) for one or more of the identical
cost items for which funds are provided under this award. If so, the recipient must promptly notify the DOJ awarding
agency (OJP or OVW, as appropriate) in writing of the potential duplication, and, if so requested by the DOJ awarding
agency, must seek a budget-modification or change-of-project-scope Grant Award Modification (GAM) to eliminate any
inappropriate duplication of funding.

28
Reporting potential fraud, waste, and abuse, and similar misconduct

The recipient, and any subrecipients ("Subgrantees") at any tier, must promptly refer to the DOJ Office of the Inspector
General (OIG) any credible evidence that a principal, employee, agent, subrecipient, contractor, subcontractor, or other
person has, in connection with funds under this award-- (1) submitted a claim that violates the False Claims Act; or (2)
committed a criminal or civil violation of laws pertaining to fraud, conflict of interest, bribery, gratuity, or similar
                                                                                                            Page: 13 of 20
misconduct.

Potential fraud, waste, abuse, or misconduct involving or relating to funds under this award should be reported to the
OIG by--(1) online submission accessible via the OIG webpage at https://oig.justice.gov/hotline/contact-grants.htm
(select "Submit Report Online"); (2) mail directed to: U.S. Department of Justice, Office of the Inspector General,
Investigations Division, ATTN: Grantee Reporting, 950 Pennsylvania Ave., NW, Washington, DC 20530; and/or (3) by
facsimile directed to the DOJ OIG Investigations Division (Attn: Grantee Reporting) at (202) 616-9881 (fax).

Additional information is available from the DOJ OIG website at https://oig.justice.gov/hotline.

29
Requirements related to System for Award Management and Universal Identifier Requirements

The recipient must comply with applicable requirements regarding the System for Award Management (SAM), currently
accessible at https://www.sam.gov/. This includes applicable requirements regarding registration with SAM, as well as
maintaining the currency of information in SAM.

The recipient also must comply with applicable restrictions on subawards ("subgrants") to first-tier subrecipients (first-
tier "subgrantees"), including restrictions on subawards to entities that do not acquire and provide (to the recipient) the
unique entity identifier required for SAM registration.

The details of the recipient's obligations related to SAM and to unique entity identifiers are posted on the OJP web site
at https://ojp.gov/funding/Explore/SAM.htm (Award condition: System for Award Management (SAM) and Universal
Identifier Requirements), and are incorporated by reference here.

This condition does not apply to an award to an individual who received the award as a natural person (i.e., unrelated
to any business or non-profit organization that he or she may own or operate in his or her name).

30
Restrictions on “lobbying”

In general, as a matter of federal law, federal funds awarded by OJP may not be used by the recipient, or any
subrecipient ("Subgrantee") at any tier, either directly or indirectly, to support or oppose the enactment, repeal,
modification, or adoption of any law, regulation, or policy, at any level of government. See 18 U.S.C. 1913. (There may
be exceptions if an applicable federal statute specifically authorizes certain activities that otherwise would be barred by
law.)

Another federal law generally prohibits federal funds awarded by OJP from being used by the recipient, or any
subrecipient at any tier, to pay any person to influence (or attempt to influence) a federal agency, a Member of
Congress, or Congress (or an official or employee of any of them) with respect to the awarding of a federal grant or
cooperative agreement, subgrant, contract, subcontract, or loan, or with respect to actions such as renewing,
extending, or modifying any such award. See 31 U.S.C. 1352. Certain exceptions to this law apply, including an
exception that applies to Indian tribes and tribal organizations.

Should any question arise as to whether a particular use of federal funds by a recipient (or subrecipient) would or might
fall within the scope of these prohibitions, the recipient is to contact OJP for guidance, and may not proceed without the
express prior written approval of OJP.

31
The recipient understands that, in accepting this award, the Authorized Representative declares and certifies, among
other things, that he or she possesses the requisite legal authority to accept the award on behalf of the recipient entity
and, in so doing, accepts (or adopts) all material requirements that relate to conduct throughout the period of
performance under this award. The recipient further understands, and agrees, that it will not assign anyone to the role
of Authorized Representative during the period of performance under the award without first ensuring that the
individual has the requisite legal authority.

32

                                                                                                            Page: 14 of 20
Verification and updating of recipient contact information

The recipient must verify its Grant Award Administrator, Financial Manager, and Authorized Representative contact
information in JustGrants, including telephone number and e-mail address. If any information is incorrect or has
changed, the award recipient’s Entity Administrator must make changes to contact information through DIAMD.
Instructions on how to update contact information in JustGrants can be found at https://justicegrants.usdoj.gov/training/
training-entity-management.

33
Compliance with 28 C.F.R. Part 23

With respect to any information technology system funded or supported by funds under this award, the recipient (and
any subrecipient at any tier) must comply with 28 C.F.R. Part 23, Criminal Intelligence Systems Operating Policies, if
OJP determines this regulation to be applicable. Should OJP determine 28 C.F.R. Part 23 to be applicable, OJP may,
at its discretion, perform audits of the system, as per the regulation. Should any violation of 28 C.F.R. Part 23 occur,
the recipient may be fined as per 34 U.S.C. 10231(c)-(d). The recipient may not satisfy such a fine with federal funds.

34
Protection of human research subjects

The recipient (and any subrecipient at any tier) must comply with the requirements of 28 C.F.R. Part 46 and all OJP
policies and procedures regarding the protection of human research subjects, including obtainment of Institutional
Review Board approval, if appropriate, and subject informed consent.

35
Confidentiality of data

The recipient (and any subrecipient at any tier) must comply with all confidentiality requirements of 34 U.S.C. 10231
and 28 C.F.R. Part 22 that are applicable to collection, use, and revelation of data or information. The recipient further
agrees, as a condition of award approval, to submit a Privacy Certificate that is in accord with requirements of 28
C.F.R. Part 22 and, in particular, 28 C.F.R. 22.23.

36
The recipient agrees to cooperate with any assessments, national evaluation efforts, or information or data collection
requests, including, but not limited to, the provision of any information required for the assessment or evaluation of any
activities within this project.

37
FFATA reporting: Subawards and executive compensation

The recipient must comply with applicable requirements to report first-tier subawards ("Subgrants") of $30,000 or more
and, in certain circumstances, to report the names and total compensation of the five most highly compensated
executives of the recipient and first-tier subrecipients (first-tier "subgrantees") of award funds. The details of recipient
obligations, which derive from the Federal Funding Accountability and Transparency Act of 2006 (FFATA), are posted
on the OJP web site at https://ojp.gov/funding/Explore/FFATA.htm (Award condition: Reporting Subawards and
Executive Compensation), and are incorporated by reference here.

This condition, including its reporting requirement, does not apply to-- (1) an award of less than $30,000, or (2) an
award made to an individual who received the award as a natural person (i.e., unrelated to any business or non-profit
organization that he or she may own or operate in his or her name).

38
The recipient agrees to comply with OJP grant monitoring guidelines, protocols, and procedures, and to cooperate with
BJA and OCFO on all grant monitoring requests, including requests related to desk reviews, enhanced programmatic
desk reviews, and/or site visits. The recipient agrees to provide to BUA and OCFO all documentation necessary to

                                                                                                             Page: 15 of 20
complete monitoring tasks, including documentation related to any subawards made under this award. Further, the
recipient agrees to abide by reasonable deadlines set by BUA and OCFO for providing the requested documents.
Failure to cooperate with BUA's/OCFO's grant monitoring activities may result in sanctions affecting the recipient's DOJ
awards, including, but not limited to: withholdings and/or other restrictions on the recipient's access to grant funds;
referral to the Office of the Inspector General for audit review; designation of the recipient as a DOJ High Risk grantee;
or termination of an award(s).

39
Limit on use of grant funds for grantees' employees’ salaries

With respect to this award, federal funds may not be used to pay cash compensation (salary plus bonuses) to any
employee of the award recipient at a rate that exceeds 110% of the maximum annual salary payable to a member of
the federal government's Senior Executive Service (SES) at an agency with a Certified SES Performance Appraisal
System for that year. (An award recipient may compensate an employee at a higher rate, provided the amount in
excess of this compensation limitation is paid with non-federal funds.)

This limitation on compensation rates allowable under this award may be waived on an individual basis at the
discretion of the OJP official indicated in the program announcement under which this award is made.

40
The recipient agrees to submit to BJA for review and approval any product (e.g., curricula, training materials,
publications, reports, videos, or any other written, web-based, or audio-visual, or other materials) that will be developed
and published under this award at least thirty (80) working days prior to the targeted dissemination date. The current
edition of the DOJ Grants Financial Guide provides guidance on allowable printing and publication activities. Any
products developed under this award, (with the exception of press releases, web sites, and mobile applications), shall
contain the following statements: “This project was supported by Grant No. <Award_Number> awarded by the Bureau
of Justice Assistance, Office of Justice Programs, U.S. Department of Justice. Points of view or opinions in this
document are those of the author and do not necessarily represent the official position or policies of the U.S.
Department of Justice." (Note: A separate disclaimer has been developed and is required for web sites and mobile
applications. No disclaimer is required for press releases.)

41
The recipient agrees to notify BUA of any change in the status or duties of the collaborating agency partners or key
individuals involved in implementing the activities under this award.

42
Required monitoring of subawards

The recipient must monitor subawards under this award in accordance with all applicable statutes, regulations, award
conditions, and the DOJ Grants Financial Guide, and must include the applicable conditions of this award in any
subaward. Among other things, the recipient is responsible for oversight of subrecipient spending and monitoring of
specific outcomes and benefits attributable to use of award funds by subrecipients. The recipient agrees to submit,
upon request, documentation of its policies and procedures for monitoring of subawards under this award.

43
lf award funds are used for DNA testing of evidentiary materials, any resulting eligible DNA profiles must be uploaded
to the Combined DNA Index System ("CODIS," the DNA database operated by the FBI) by a government DNA
laboratory with access to CODIS. With the exception of Forensic Genetic Genealogy, no profiles generated under this
award may be entered or uploaded into any non-governmental DNA database without prior express written approval
from BJA. Award funds may not be used for the purchase of DNA equipment and supplies unless the resulting DNA
profiles may be accepted for entry into CODIS. Booking agencies should work with their state CODIS agency to ensure
all requirements are met for participation in Rapid DNA (see National Rapid DNA Booking Operational Procedures
Manual).

44

                                                                                                           Page: 16 of 20
Any Web site that is funded in whole or in part under this award must include the following statement on the home
page, on all major entry pages (i.e., pages (exclusive of documents) whose primary purpose is to navigate the user to
interior content), and on any pages from which a visitor may access or use a Web-based service, including any pages
that provide results or outputs from the service: "This Web site is funded in whole or in part through a grant from the
Bureau of Justice Assistance, Office of Justice Programs, U.S. Department of Justice. Neither the U.S. Department of
Justice nor any of its components operate, control, are responsible for, or necessarily endorse, this Web site (including,
without limitation, its content, technical infrastructure, and policies, and any services or tools provided)." The full text of
the foregoing statement must be clearly visible on the home page. On other pages, the statement may be included
through a link, entitled "Notice of Federal Funding and Federal Disclaimer,” to the full text of the statement.

45
Recipients utilizing award funds for forensic genealogy testing must adhere to the United States Department of Justice
Interim Policy Forensic Genealogical DNA Analysis and Searching (https://www.justice.gov/olp/page/file/1204386/
download), and must collect and report the metrics identified in Section IX of that document to BJA.

46
Applicants must ensure that Limited English Proficiency persons have meaningful access to the services under this
program(s). National origin discrimination includes discrimination on the basis of limited English proficiency (LEP). To
ensure compliance with Title VI and the Safe Streets Act, recipients are required to take reasonable steps to ensure
that LEP persons have meaningful access to their programs. Meaningful access may entail providing language
assistance services, including oral and written translation when necessary. The U.S. Department of Justice has issued
guidance for grantees to help them comply with Title VI requirements. The guidance document can be accessed on the
Internet at www.lep.gov.

47
The recipient must submit an action plan for review no later than 6 months of award acceptance, unless an extension
for good cause shown has been granted by BJA. Failure to submit the action plan within 6 months of award
acceptance may result in the freezing of grant funds.

48
The recipient agrees that no funds under this grant award (including via subcontract or subaward, at any tier) may be
used for unmanned aircraft systems (UAS), which includes unmanned aircraft vehicles (UAV), or for any
accompanying accessories to support UAS.

49
Recipient integrity and performance matters: Requirement to report information on certain civil, criminal, and
administrative proceedings to SAM and FAPIIS

The recipient must comply with any and all applicable requirements regarding reporting of information on civil, criminal,
and administrative proceedings connected with (or connected to the performance of) either this OJP award or any
other grant, cooperative agreement, or procurement contract from the federal government. Under certain
circumstances, recipients of OJP awards are required to report information about such proceedings, through the
federal System for Award Management (known as "SAM"), to the designated federal integrity and performance system
(currently, "FAPIIS").

The details of recipient obligations regarding the required reporting (and updating) of information on certain civil,
criminal, and administrative proceedings to the federal designated integrity and performance system (currently,
"FAPIIS") within SAM are posted on the OJP web site at https://ojp.gov/funding/FAPIIS.htm (Award condition:
Recipient Integrity and Performance Matters, including Recipient Reporting to FAPIIS), and are incorporated by
reference here.

50
Withholding of funds: Disclosure of lobbying

The recipient may not obligate, expend, or draw down any funds under this award until it has provided to the grant

                                                                                                              Page: 17 of 20
manager for this OJP award a complete Disclosure of Lobbying Activities (SF-LLL) form, and OJP has issued an
Award Condition Modification (ACM) to remove this award condition.

51
Withholding of funds — Financial Capability Questionnaire Submission. The recipient may not obligate, expend, or draw
down any award funds until-- (1) it has submitted a Financial Capability Questionnaire (FCQ) and, if required by OJP,
written policies and procedures to address FCQ issues identified; and (2) OJP has issued an Award Condition
Modification (ACM) to modify or remove this condition.

52
Hate Crimes MOU Reauired - The recipient must submit a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) for review no later
than six months of award acceptance, unless an extension for good cause shown has been granted by BJA. Failure to
submit the MOU within six months of award acceptance may result in the freezing of grant funds.

53
The recipient's budget (and budget narrative) is pending clearance by OJP.

Prior to budget clearance (and unless there is a more restrictive condition on this award, in which case the terms of
that more restrictive condition apply): The recipient may not drawdown more than 10% of the award. Pre-clearance
obligations, expenditures, and drawdowns may be disallowed if not in compliance with program requirements.

The recipient should be judicious in using award funds prior to budget clearance. Generally, OJP expects that
recipients (depending on the specific project scope) may need to advertise for award-funded positions, pay personnel
and fringe benefits for positions budgeted under the award, plan for project activities, attend training and pay training-
related travel needed to begin the project, and engage in other limited activities conducted by recipient staff (i.e.,
generally not requiring a subaward or procurement contract under an award).

OJP will issue an Award Condition Modification upon budget clearance.

54
Recipient may not obligate, expend, or drawdown funds until the Bureau of Justice Assistance, Office of Justice
Programs has reviewed and approved the Budget Narrative portion of the application and has issued an Award
Condition Modification (ACM) informing the recipient of the approval.

[]
| have read and understand the information presented in this section of the Federal Award Instrument.




Award Acceptance

Declaration and Certification to the U.S. Department of Justice as to Acceptance

By checking the declaration and certification box below, I--

A.   Declare to the U.S. Department of Justice (DOJ), under penalty of perjury, that | have authority to make this
declaration and certification on behalf of the applicant.

B.     Certify to DOJ, under penalty of perjury, on behalf of myself and the applicant, to the best of my knowledge and
belief, that the following are true as of the date of this award acceptance: (1) | have conducted or there was conducted
(including by applicant’s legal counsel as appropriate and made available to me) a diligent review of all terms and
conditions of, and all supporting materials submitted in connection with, this award, including any assurances and
certifications (including anything submitted in connection therewith by a person on behalf of the applicant before, after,
or at the time of the application submission and any materials that accompany this acceptance and certification); and
(2) | have the legal authority to accept this award on behalf of the applicant.

                                                                                                            Page: 18 of 20
C.   Accept this award on behalf of the applicant.

D.    Declare the following to DOJ, under penalty of perjury, on behalf of myself and the applicant: (1) | understand
that, in taking (or not taking) any action pursuant to this declaration and certification, DOJ will rely upon this declaration
and certification as a material representation; and (2) | understand that any materially false, fictitious, or fraudulent
information or statement in this declaration and certification (or concealment or omission of a material fact as to either)
may be the subject of criminal prosecution (including under 18 U.S.C. §§ 1001 and/or 1621, and/or 34 U.S.C. §§
10271-10273), and also may subject me and the applicant to civil penalties and administrative remedies under the
federal False Claims Act (including under 31 U.S.C. §§ 3729-3730 and/or §§ 3801-3812) or otherwise.

Agency Approval

Title of Approving Official              Name of Approving Official               Signed Date And Time
Assistant Attorney General               Amy Solomon                              9/26/23 8:03 PM


Authorized Representative



Entity Acceptance

Title of Authorized Entity Official
Finance Director

Signed Date And Time




                                                                                                              Page: 19 of 20
Page: 20 of 20
                                                                                                                                                                                                20240118 IV.A.2

                                                                    Financial Assistance Application Lifecycle Form
                                                                    Use this form to track your potential award    from conception to submission.

                                             Sections of this form are designed to be completed in collaboration between department program and fiscal staff.

                                              If renewal or direct appropriation, complete sections I, Il, IV & V only. Section Ill is not required.

                                                    If Disaster or Emergency Relief Funding, EOC will need to approve prior to being sent to the BCC

                                                                                                      **CONCEPTION**



Section |: Funding Opportunity Information - To Be Completed by Requester                                                                                   TC] Direct Appropriation (no application}

                                                                                                                                    Award type:             CT]     Subrecipient    Award              Direct   Award




                                                                                                                                    Award     Renewal?       C      Yes            No

  Lead Fund #and Department:                        Fund #100; 24 DA District Attorney's Office
  Name of Funding Opportunity:                      FY 2023 Matthew Shepard and James Byrd, Jr. Hate Crimes Program

Funding Source:                 Federal — Direct                       |     Federal — Pass through               T]     State                       CT]    Local

  Requestor Information: (Name of staff initiating form)
                                                                             Scott Healy
  Requestor Contact Information:                                             503-655-8343; scotthea@clackamas.us
  Department      Fiscal Representative:                                      Bob   Willson

  Program Name & Prior Project #: (please specify)
                                                                              Program - 240102 - Office of the District Attorney / Will need new Project Number.

Brief Description of Project:

 The CCDA is requesting $800,000 ($200,000 annually) from this grant opportunity to fund the following new Bias Crime initiatives for the:
 1. Creation and implementation of a District Attorney’s Community Advisory Council (CAC).
 2. Development and implementation of a Bias Crimes Multi-Disciplinary Team (Bias Crimes MDT).
 3. Development and dissemination of bias and discrimination training for law enforcement, CCDA employees, and community partner agencies.
 4. Participation in community outreach opportunities.
 5. Building ongoing evaluation tools to provide opportunity for continuous improvement and community input.


Name of Funding Agency; | Bureau of Justice Assistance - Office of Justice Programs - US DOJ

Notification of Funding Opportunity Web Address:               [https://www.ojp.gov/ncjrs/new-ojp-resources


OR

Application    Packet    Attached:            Yes       C1     No



Completed By:         Scott P. Healy                                Date:   11/27/2023

                                                               1 ** NOW READY FOR SUBMISSION TO DEPARTMENT FISCAL REPRESENTATIVE **

Section II: Funding Opportunity Information - To Be Completed by Department Fiscal Rep

       C]   Competitive Application          TJ     Non-Competing   Application          C]   Other

  Assistance Listing Number (ALN), if applicable:                                                              Funding Agency Award         Notification Date:              9/30/2023

  Announcement        Date:                              3/06/2023                                            Announcement/Opportunity #:                                   O-BJA-2023-171642

  Grant Category/Title                                   Hate Crimes Program                                   Funding Amount Requested:                                    $800,000

  Allows Indirect/Rate:                                  Yes                                                   Match Requirement:                                           N/A

  Application Deadline:                                  5/25/2023                                            Total Project Cost:                                           $800,000
  Award Start Date:                                      10/01/2023                                            Other Deadlines and Description:                                             -    oye                          .
  A                                                                                                                                                                         5/30/23 - Application JustGrants Deadline
      ward End Date                                      9/30/2027

  Completed By:                                          Bob Willson                                           Program   Income Requirements:

  Pre-Application Meeting Schedule:



Additional funding sources available to fund this program? Please describe:
N/A

How much General Fund will be used to cover costs in this program, including indirect expenses?
 Estimated at $19,000 per year.

How much Fund Balance will be used to cover costs in this program, including indirect expenses?

N/A


                                                                                                                                                                                                                Revised 11/2023
                                             In the next section, limit answers to space available.

Section     Ill: Funding       Opportunity   Information      - To Be completed at Pre-Application Meeting by Dept Program and Fiscal Staff



Mission/Purpose:
1. How does the grant/funding opportunity support the Department and/or Division's Mission/Purpose/Goals?

The mission of the District Attorney’s Office is to provide leadership, accountability, and high-quality service in a fair and just manner so that those who live, work, and play in
Clackamas County can enjoy a safe and livable community. As bias crimes continue to rise across the United States, our office is committed to effectively prosecuting all bias
crimes that occur in our jurisdiction. This grant will allow our office to engage meaningfully with the Clackamas County community, build stronger relationships with community
partners, and to comprehensively address and prevent hate crimes through increased public awareness and reporting of hate crimes and to enhance law enforcement and
prosecution strategies to prevent and respond to hate crimes, thereby bringing justice for hate crime victims and other stakeholders.


2. Who,   if any, are the community partners who might be better suited to perform     this work?


We are the only bias crime prosecution agency in our County that works in conjunction with the State Department of Justice (DOJ) and Federal prosecution entities. Our office is
in a unique position to bring together the community and law enforcement to enhance bias crime prevention, response, and prosecution.




3. What are the objectives of this funding opportunity? How     will we meet these objectives?

Our office is seeking this grant to support enhanced prevention, response, and prosecution of bias crimes here in Clackamas County. The CCDA will concentrate on relationship
building and recruitment for a new Community Advisory Board that will tackle important issues, including bias crimes. Additionally, our office will work with local law enforcement
agencies and community based organizations to build stronger regional prevention of and response to hate crimes and bias incidents, including coordinating agency trainings on
bias crimes and best practices for prevention, response, and prosecution. The office will have staff time dedicated (as outlined here) to these projects, as well as building
partnership with community organizations to build ongoing stability. As part of the DOJ proposal we will submit to the DOJ within the first six months of the grant, we will solidify
the accountability factors that our office will be monitoring, evaluating, and reporting on to ensure strong, positive outcomes and continuous improvement.

4. Does the grant/financial assistance fund an existing program? If yes, which program? If no, what is the purpose of the program?

 No, this grant will be used to support the creation and implementation of new programs which will include a Community Advisory Council, a new bias incident crimes training
 program, and support the Bias Crimes Multidisciplinary Team. These are all new programs that the CCDA will be able to collaboratively facilitate and coordinate for our community
 regarding bias crime prevention, response, and prosecution.




Organizational     Capacity:

1. Does the organization have adequate and qualified staff? If no, can staff be hired within the grant/financial assistance funding opportunity timeframe ?

 Yes, current staffing will be utilized for the management and implementation of this grant, in conjunction with community partners. One new bilingual Victim Advocate position will
 be created as a result of this grant funding. The CCDA currently has two Deputy District Attorney's prosecuting bias crimes, we have a qualified team of employees that participate
 in our Core Equity Team, who have additional training and expertise in Equity, Diversity, and Inclusion issues, including bias and hate crimes, as well as developing training
 curriculum and providing community outreach.



2. Are there partnership efforts required? If yes, who are we partnering   with and what are their roles and responsibilities?

 Yes. The CCDA will partner with local law enforcement agencies as well as community based organizations. To effectively do this work, our office will begin building new and
 strengthening existing relationships with community partners; with special attention to those that are part of historically undeserved and marginalized groups in our community.
 Additionally, working with existing experts, such as the Oregon DOJ Civil Rights Unit, will be paramount to building an effective foundation for robust bias crimes prevention,
 response, and prosecution. We will be working with local law enforcement to train officers to enhance response, supporting efforts for outreach and relationship building with the
 public, and assisting with updating policies and practices as needed. We will be partnering with additional community agencies who work directly with marginalized groups to
 support their efforts, provide outreach, and enhance relationships to grow trust and accountability with the public. These agencies, alongside industry experts, will inform and guide
 our work in improving bias crime prevention, response, and prosecution.

3. If this is a pilot project, what is the plan for sun setting the project and/or staff
                                                                                      if it does not continue (e.g. making staff positions temporary or limited duration, etc.)?

 N/A




4. If funded,   would this grant/financial assistance create a new program,   does the department intend for the program      to continue after initial   funding   is exhausted? If yes, how   will
the department ensure funding (e.g. request new funding during the budget process, supplanted by a different program, etc.)?

 The new program will remain in place as long as grant/financial assistance is available from DOJ/OJP/BJA.




                                                                                                    2                                                                                  Revised 11/2023
Collaboration

1. List County departments that will collaborate on this award, if any.

 The Clackamas County Sheriff's Department and Clackamas County Community Corrections.




Reporting Requirements

1. What are the program      reporting requirements
                                                 for this grant/funding opportunity?

 Award recipients typically must submit quarterly financial reports, semi-annual performance reports, final financial and performance reports, and, if applicable, an annual audit
 report in accordance with the Part 200 Uniform Requirements or specific award conditions. Future awards and fund drawdowns may be withheld if reports are delinquent. (In
 appropriate cases, OJP may require additional reports.)




2. How    will performance   be evaluated? Are we using existing data sources? If yes, what are they and where are they housed? If not, is it feasible to develop a data source   within the
grant timeframe?

 The grant must focus on bias crime prevention, response, and/or prosecution. Within the first six months: submit an action plan and MOU's signed from all funded partners. Once
 the action plan must be submitted and approved by BJA our office will work with our partners to implement based on the action plan timeline - the BJA, the training and technical
 assistance providers, and our office will use this action plan to guide and track progress toward our programs' objectives.




3. What are the fiscal reporting requirements for this funding?

 Award recipients typically must submit quarterly financial reports, semi-annual performance reports, final financial and performance reports, and, if applicable, an annual audit
 report in accordance with the Part 200 Uniform Requirements or specific award conditions. Future awards and fund draw downs may be withheld if reports are delinquent. (In
 appropriate cases, OJP may require additional reports.)




Fiscal
 1.   Are there other revenue sources required, available, or will be used to fund the program? Have they already been secured? Please list all funding sources and amounts.

  None




2. For applications with a match requirement, how much is required (in dollars) and what type of funding will be used to meet it (CGF, In-kind, local grant, etc.)?

 N/A




3. Does this grant/financial assistance cover indirect costs? If yes, is there a rate cap? If no, can additional funds be obtained to support indirect expenses and what are those sources?

 Yes. based on the information and link in the Application Resources, two options are available for Indirect Costs. 1) The recipient has a current (unexpired), federally approved
 indirect cost rate; or 2) The recipient is eligible to use, and elects to use, the "de minimis" indirect cost rate described in the Part 200 Uniform Requirement, as set out at 2 C.F.R.
 200.414(f).



Other information necessary to understand this award, if any.




Program    Approval:




                   Name (Typed/Printed}                              Date                                                          Signature




                                                        ** NOW READY FOR PROGRAM MANAGER SUBMISSION TO DIVISION DIRECTOR**

                                       ** ATTACH ANY CERTIFICATIONS REQUIRED BY THE FUNDING AGENCY. COUNTY FINANCE OR ADMIN WILL SIGN**




                                                                                                                                                                                  Revised 11/2023
Section IV: Approvals


DIVISION DIRECTOR (or designee, if appilcable)




   Sect! Healy      Name (Typed/Printed)
                                                                           Dee."
                                                                              }-, 23
                                                                               Date                 ,                                             4S
                                                                                                                                                              0A:
                                                                                                                                                             nature              nw
                                                                                                                                                                                                    +
DEPARTMENT DIRECTOR (or designee, If applicable)

 John D. Wentworth                                                           ees                              2B                          th.
                    Name (Typed/Printed)                                      Date                                                                       bigrbture




FINANCE ADMINISTRATION

 Elizabeth Comfort                                                           12.7.2023                                                     CExabeth. Comfort
                    Name (Typed/Printed)                                      Date                                                                UY     Signature                        %




                    Name (Typed/Printed)                                      Date                                                                       Signature



Section V: Board of County Commissioners/County Administration

(Required for ail grant applicctions. lf your grant is awarded, oll grant gwards must be approved by the Board on their weekly consent agenda regardless of amount per focal budget Jaw 294.338.)

For applications less than $150,000:

COUNTY ADMINISTRATOR                                                             Approved: CJ                                                             Denled: C)




                    Name (Typed/Printed})                                     Date                                                                       Signature




For applications under $150,000 email form to Christina Fadenrecht at CFadenrecht@clackamas.us for Gary Schmidt's approval.

For applications $150,000 and above, email form with Staff Report to the Clerk to the Board ot ClerktotheBoard@clackamas.us to be
brought to the consent agenda.



  BCC Agenda item #:120240118 IV.A.2                                                        }      date: 101/18/2024                         _|                                                         P

  Policy Session pate:|
                                                                                            J
                                                                                       County Adminlstration Attestatlon


County AdmInIstration: re-route to department at |
 and

Grants Manager at financegrants@clackamas.us

when fully approved,



Department: keep original with your grant file.




                                                                                                                4                                                                                       Revised 10/04/2022
