      Oregon                                                         Department of Administrative Services
                                                                           Office of the Chief Operating Officer
        Tina Kotek, Governor
                                                                                           155 Cottage Street NE
                                                                                                      Salem, OR 97301
                                                                                                 PHONE: 503-378-5797

January 31, 2025

Co-Chair Chris Gorsek
Co-Chair Greg Smith
Members of the Joint Ways and Means General Government Subcommittee
Oregon State Legislature
900 Court St NE
Salem, OR 97301

Re: Joint Ways and Means General Government Subcommittee Follow-Up Information

Co-Chair Gorsek, Co-Chair Smith and members of the committee,

Thank you for being so generous with your time with the Department of Administrative
Service this week. We appreciate the opportunity to showcase the work DAS does for
Oregonians.

Below please find follow up information to questions asked during this week’s DAS
Rates and Assessments presentation.

As always, please don’t hesitate to let me know if there’s anything further DAS can
assist with.

Thank you!

-Meliah Masiba
DAS Legislative Director




                  Mission: Lead state agencies through collaboration in service of Oregonians.
January 31, 2025                                                                     Page | 2


Tuesday, Jan 28: DAS Rates and Assessment Overview
   1) Do semi-independent agencies pay for services and assessments?
The 2025-27 GB Price List State Government Services Charges (attached), lists Semi
Independent Boards and Agencies assessments. For complete information on current
fee-for-service rates, the current DAS pricelist is here.

    2) Can we see data of overall fees vs assessments further back than the previous
       biennia? We have updated the slide from Tuesday so you can see back to 2019.

   DAS Total: Assessment vs. Fee for
   Services




    3) Do agencies make (timely) payments or are we chasing down payments?
While we do have agencies where we have received payments late, we have not
experienced a cash flow challenge. On average, for agencies with late payments,
invoices are being paid approximately 19 days after they are due. We always inquire
with agencies as to their late payments and work with agencies when they are late.

    4) Does DAS do all of the printing for the state?
Generally speaking, and per ORS282.020, agencies need to start with DAS Print and
Distribution (P&D) for their printing service, which could turn into PnD doing to work,
contracting it out, or giving an exception to an agency to handle it on their own.

282.020 Control of state printing and printing purchases.
(1) The Director of the Oregon Department of Administrative Services or the designee of
the director shall:
    (a) Control and manage all state printing.
+
Sepa    areees
          van Rs
SAMS   Lkees




     (b) Control all state printing purchases, including those outside of the Oregon
Department of Administrative Services; and any printing conducted outside of the
department on behalf of state government may be conducted only through authority of the
director or the director's designee.
 (2) Printing and binding that advertises or promotes products, agricultural or
manufactured, shall not be considered state printing.
 (3) The director or the director’s designee may advertise for bids and award contracts for
state printing, but the policy of the director or the director’s designee in deciding what
work shall be let by contract shall be dictated by questions of good business and
economy. [Amended by 1959 c.293 §1; 1975 c.605 §2; 1995 c.452 §11; 2001 c.539 §2]

We have outlined the process for when a printing request is received by DAS P&D:
Evaluate the product requested:
    e Can Publishing & Distribution produce?
          o Ifnot
                              =    Consider granting a one-time exemption for the agency to pursue
                                   the print procurement?
                      o   Ifnot
                              =    Move to the buy decision process
                              =    Can it and should it be produced by Oregon Corrections Enterprises
                                   Print Shop?

                              =    Put out to bid to qualified vendors
                              =»   P&D will select the best price based on cost and quality
                              =    Preference for in state vendors

        -          DAS finds that the printers quote the state 10%-25% less than open market rates.
        -          Any printer in Oregon can be placed on the list after a simple application process.
        -          Last biennium DAS contracted over 6 million dollars out to private print vendors.
