                                                                                              Evelyn Minor-Lawrence
                                                                                                              Director

COUNT         Y                                                                DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN        RESOURCES

                                                                                         PUBLIC SERVICES BUILDING
                                                                             2051 Kaen Road   | Oregon City, OR 97045


                                               MEMORANDUM

 TO:              Clackamas County Board of County Commissioners (BCC)
 FROM:            Evelyn Minor-Lawrence, Human Resources Director
 RE:              EPP 2 — Discrimination and Harassment Free Workplace and Complaint
                  Procedure
 DATE:            December 6, 2022




 REQUEST: Approve new and revised definitions within Employment Policy and Practice 2 —
 Discrimination and Harassment Free Workplace and Complaint Procedure.

 BACKGROUND:

 The County’s EPP 2—- Discrimination and Harassment Free Workplace and Complaint
 Procedure was most recently revised in 2020, and since that time, the County’s Office of
 Equity and Inclusion recognized that the previous definition for sexual orientation needed
 updating because it had incorrectly included gender identity. In its place, the Equity and
 Inclusion Office has brought forth two recommended definition changes, based on changes in
 Oregon Revised Statutes and current standards within the field.

 e     Add definition of Gender Identity:

 The 2020 version of EPP 2 did not define gender identity. During the 2021 legislative
 session, the Oregon legislature enacted a definition of gender identity at ORS 174.100. The
 new language to add to County policy uses the ORS definition and defines gender identity as:

       “An individual's gender-related identity, appearance, expression or behavior, regardless
       of whether the identity, appearance, expression or behavior differs from that associated
       with the gender assigned to the individual at birth.”

 e     Revise the definition of Sexual Orientation:

 Replace existing definition of Sexual Orientation in the EPP with most current language
 reflected in the following statement:

       “A person’s physical, romantic, emotional, aesthetic, and/or other form of attraction to
       others.”

 This definition would replace the following existing language:

       “An individual’s actual or perceived heterosexuality, homosexuality, bisexuality or gender
       identity, regardless of whether the individual’s gender identity, appearance, expression or
       behavior differs from that traditionally associated with the individual’s sex at birth.”

                  P-   503-655-8459   |   F-   503-?42-54b4    |   WWW-CO.CLACKAMAS.OR-US
                                                                                             Evelyn Minor-Lawrence
                                                                                                             Director
CLACKAMAS
  COUNT       Y                                                               DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN        RESOURCES

                                                                                        PUBLIC SERVICES BUILDING
                                                                            2051 Kaen Road   | Oregon City, OR 97045


   During the 2019 legislative session, the Oregon Senate passed bill 479, which stated that
   public employers must establish and adopt written policies seeking to prevent workplace
   harassment. The scope of the policy must include elected officials, volunteers, and interns.
   Based on this bill, the County's EPP 2 applies to all County employees, including elected
   officials, prompting submission of these recommended changes to the Board of County
   Commissioners for approval.

   Respectfully Submitted,




   Evelyn Minor-Lawrence
   Human   Resources      Director

   Attachments:

   EPP 2 — Discrimination and Harassment Free Workplace and Complaint Procedure 2022
            BCC FINAL




                  P-   503-655-8459   |   F-   503-?42-54b4   |   WWW-CO.CLACKAMAS.OR-US
                                                                                 []   Administrative Policy
     =                                                                           [1   Operational Policy
CLACKAMAS
                                        Clackamas County Policy
     Name of Policy            Discrimination and Harassment Free     Policy #                 EPP 2
                               Workplace and Complaint Procedure
     Policy Owner Name         Evelyn Minor-Lawrence                  Effective Date           12/31/92
     Policy Owner Position     Human Resources Director               Approved Date            06/11/20
     Approved By               Board of County Commissioners          Next Review Date         07/01/23



l.          PURPOSE
To affirm the County’s commitment to providing a workplace that is free of discrimination,
harassment or retaliatory conduct and to outline the associated complaint procedure. The
County is committed to creating and maintaining a respectful and professional work
environment in which each person is valued and respected without regard to protected
class status. This policy outlines types of prohibited conduct and procedures for reporting
and investigating prohibited conduct.

            SCOPE
            This policy applies to the following: elected officials; employees, including part-time,
            limited term, temporary and seasonal; unpaid interns; volunteers; and contractors doing
            business with the County.

ll.  AUTHORITY
ORS 203.035 authorizes the Board of County Commissioners to promulgate polices for the
management and operation of Clackamas County Government.

lil.  GENERAL POLICY
The County provides a work environment free from unlawful discrimination or harassment
based on or because of an employee's protected class status. Additionally, the County is
committed to providing a work environment free from sexual harassment. Employees at every
level of the organization, including temporary employees and volunteers, must not engage in
any form of discrimination or harassment, which includes workplace intimidation, sexual
assault, or sexual harassment. This policy applies to discrimination or harassment that occurs
In the workplace and at work-related events that are off County premises but coordinated by or
through the County.

Managers and supervisors are expected to be proactive in creating and maintaining a
discrimination and harassment free workplace. Managers and supervisors must take
appropriate measures to prevent and promptly correct any discrimination or harassment.

Conduct in violation of this policy will not be tolerated. Employees engaging in conduct that
violates this policy may be subject to disciplinary action up to and including dismissal.
Managers and supervisors who know or should know of conduct in violation of this policy and
who fail to report such behavior or fail to take prompt, appropriate action may be subject to
disciplinary action up to and including dismissal.

IV.     DEFINITIONS
Complainant: A person (or persons) allegedly subjected to, or who witnessed or observed,
discrimination, workplace harassment or sexual harassment and who files a complaint.
Contractor: An individual or business with whom the County has entered into an agreement
or contract to provide goods or services.

Designated Individual: An individual designated by the County who is responsible for
receiving reports of discrimination or harassment covered by this policy.

Discrimination: Making employment decisions related to hiring, firing, transferring,
promoting, demoting, benefits, compensation, and other terms and conditions of
employment, based on or because of an employee’s protected class status. (See also
Harassment.)

Gender Identity: An individual's gender-related identity, appearance, expression or
behavior, regardless of whether the identity, appearance, expression or behavior differs
from that associated with the gender assigned to the individual at birth.

Harassment: Discriminatory conduct that is directed at someone because they are
members of a protected class, associate with someone who is a member of a protected
class, or are perceived as a member of a protected class.

Non-disclosure Agreement: An agreement between the employer and employee not to
disclose information related to complaints or personnel actions related to violations of this
policy.

Non-disparagement Agreement: An agreement between the employer and employee not to
make negative statements about the other related to complaints or personnel actions
related to violations of County policies.

Protected Class: A group of people protected by law from discrimination on the basis of a
shared characteristic, such as race, sex, sexual orientation, disability, or other, ora
perception of that characteristic.

Respondent: The person who is the subject of the complaint.

Retaliation: Failing to treat a person who makes a complaint or has been a witness to an
investigation impartially with regards to employment-related decisions, including but not
limited to demotion, suspension, failure to promote or the provision of training opportunities,
or any actions by any employee to ostracize, intimidate, ignore, demean or target any other
person because they participated in a workplace investigation or otherwise engaged in
protected activity.

Sexual Assault: Unwanted conduct of a sexual nature that is inflicted upon a person
or compelled through the use of physical force, manipulation, threat or intimidation;
or a sexual offense has been threatened or committed as described in ORS 163.305 to
163.467 or 163.525.

Sexual Harassment: Unwelcome, unwanted or offensive sexual advances, requests for
sexual favors, and other verbal or physical conduct of a sexual nature when:
(1)        | Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly a term or condition
of the individual's employment, or is used as a basis for any employment decision (granting
leave requests, promotion, favorable performance appraisal, etc.); or

(2)        | Such conduct is unwelcome, unwanted or offensive and has the purpose or effect of
unreasonably interfering with an individual's work performance or creating an intimidating,
hostile or offensive working environment.

Examples of sexual harassment include but are not limited to: unwelcome, unwanted or
offensive touching or physical contact of a sexual nature, such as closeness, impeding or
blocking movement, assaulting or pinching; gestures; innuendoes; teasing, jokes, and other
sexual talk; intimate inquiries; persistent courting; gender-based put-downs or insults;
epithets; slurs; or derogatory comments.

Sexual Orientation: A person’s physical, romantic, emotional, aesthetic, and/or other form
of attraction to others.

Workplace Intimidation: Unwelcome, unwanted or offensive conduct based on or because
of an employee’s protected class status. Workplace intimidation may occur between a
manager or supervisor and a subordinate, between employees, and among non-employees
who have business contact with employees. A complainant does not have to be the person
harassed, but could be a person affected by the offensive conduct.

Examples of workplace intimidation include, but are not limited to, derogatory remarks,
slurs and jokes about a person’s protected class status.

V.           PROCESS      AND PROCEDURES
      A.     Reporting   Discrimination and Harassment

Employees, volunteers, or interns who have experienced discrimination, harassment, sexual
assault, sexual harassment, or retaliation in violation of this policy, or who have witnessed
such behavior, or who have credible information about such behavior occurring, are expected
and should bring the matter to the attention of the Internal Complaint Coordinator or the
Director of Human Resources, who are Designated Individuals to receive such reports.
Employees may also report their concerns to any supervisor or member of management.
Reports may be made orally or in writing. Reports of discrimination and harassment may be
made to the County within five years of the incident.

      B.     Investigation of Complaints

All complaints and reports of discrimination or harassment covered by this policy will be
promptly and impartially investigated. To the extent possible, the County will investigate
complaints and reports subject to this policy in a discrete and confidential manner.        The County
may need to take steps to ensure employees are protected from further potential discrimination
or harassment.

All employees are expected to cooperate with the investigation and keep information regarding
the investigation confidential. The County’s Designated Individual or designee will notify the
respondent and all witnesses that retaliating against a person for making a report of
discrimination, harassment, workplace intimidation, sexual harassment, or sexual assault will
not be tolerated. The County’s Designated Individual or designee will notify the complainant
and the accused when the investigation is concluded.

Prompt and appropriate action will be taken if a complaint is substantiated.   The County’s
Designated Individual or designee will inform the complainant if any part of a complaint is
substantiated and action has been taken. The complainant will not be given the specifics of the
action.    The complainant and the accused will be notified by the County’s Designated
Individual or designee if a complaint is not substantiated.

Unless the complainant has signed a waiver of the employer’s responsibility to conduct follow
up contacts with the complainant, the employer shall follow up with the complainant once every
three months for the calendar year following the date on which the employer received a report
of discrimination or harassment to determine whether the alleged harassment has stopped or if
the victim has experienced retaliation.

    C.    Protection Against Retaliation

This policy prohibits retaliation against anyone who files a complaint, participates in an
investigation, or reports observing discrimination, harassment, workplace intimidation, sexual
assault, or sexual harassment.

Anyone who believes they have been retaliated against because they filed a complaint,
participated in an investigation, or reported observing discrimination or harassment, should
report this behavior to the Human Resources Internal Complaint Coordinator. Complaints of
retaliation will be investigated promptly. Employees who violate this policy by retaliating
against others may be subject to disciplinary action, up to and including dismissal.
    D.    Employee   Rights

          a.     Resources

Individuals who believe they are the victim of workplace harassment should contact their
immediate supervisor, another manager, Internal Complaint Coordinator, Human Resources
Director or designee, for information related to counseling, and support services, including the
Employee Assistance Program.

The County cannot provide legal resources to its employees or referrals to specific attorneys.
Employees may contact the Oregon State Bar for information about available legal services:
http://www.osbar.org/public/.

          b.     Prohibited employment or settlement agreements
The County may not require, coerce, or enter into an agreement with an employee or
prospective employee, as a condition of employment, continued employment, promotion,
compensation or the receipt of benefits, that contains a nondisclosure provision, a non-
disparagement provision or any other provision that has the purpose or effect of preventing the
employee from disclosing or discussing conduct that is prohibited by this policy.
If an employee who has been aggrieved by workplace harassment, discrimination, or sexual
assault wants to enter into a settlement, separation or severance agreement with the County
regarding their experience and/or employment status, the employee should contact the Internal

                                                                                                   4
Complaints Coordinator. The employee’s request to enter into such an agreement must be in
writing (email or text is acceptable). If the County and employee reach an agreement, the
employee will have seven days to revoke the agreement after signing it. However, the
employee may request that nondisclosure and non-disparagement provisions be included in
any such agreement.

The County is committed to creating and maintaining a workplace free of sexual assault,
harassment, discrimination, and retaliation and it has confidence in the process it has
developed for addressing good-faith complaints. However, Oregon law requires the County to
inform employees that if they have been aggrieved by workplace harassment, discrimination,
or sexual assault and want to enter into an agreement with the County regarding their
experiences and/or employment status, the employee should contact the Internal Complaints
Coordinator.    The employee’s request to enter into such an agreement must be in writing
(email or text is acceptable). Requests of this nature will be considered on a case-by-case
basis; such agreements are not appropriate for every situation. If the County and employee do
reach an agreement, the County will comply with Oregon law applicable to such agreements,
including the prohibition on nondisclosure and non-disparagement provisions described above.
The employee will have seven days to revoke the agreement after signing it.

        C.      Other reporting options

Nothing in this policy prevents any person from filing a grievance in accordance with a
Collective Bargaining Agreement, a complaint with the Bureau of Labor and Industries (BOLI)
or the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC), or if applicable, the U.S.
Department of Labor (USDOL) Civil Rights Center. A complaint filed with BOLI alleging an
unlawful employment practices under ORS 659A.030, 659A.082 to 659A.865, 659A.112 or
Section 2 of the SB726 (2019) must be filed no later than 5 years after the occurrence of the
alleged unlawful employment practice. Nothing in this policy prevents any person from
seeking remedy under any other available law, whether civil or criminal.

An employee or claimant must provide notice to the County of a claim against it within 180
days of the incident as required by ORS 30.275.

   E.   Documentation

The Human      Resources Department will be the official record keeper for all reports of
discrimination or harassment or related employment or settlement agreements containing
prohibited provisions. All records will be maintained in a secure and confidential manner.

Any supervisor, manager or employee who observes or experiences what they believe to be
incidents of discrimination or harassment should also document such incidents.

The Human Resources Department will maintain records of workplace harassment including:
the date of the incident; the date the complaint was received by the Designated Individual or
designee; the dates the investigation was started and closed; the investigation report; the
outcome of the investigation and any actions taken by the agency; and the date the agency
followed up with the victim, or a signed waiver of the employer’s responsibility to conduct follow
up contacts with the victim. The County may be required by law to disclose records related to
compaints of discrimination or harassment in taking appropriate disciplinary action. The
County will take appropriate measures to protect confidentiality to the extent possible.

VI.   ACCESS TO POLICY
Access to this administrative policy shall be as follows:
       e   Filed in the County’s policy management system.
       e   Posted to the County’s intranet.
       e   Posted to the County’s internet.

Vil.       RESOURCES
For questions related to this policy, please contact the Human   Resources Department.

See also:

EPP 1 - Equal Employment Opportunity
