The Oregon Encyclopedia Skip to main content A project of the Oregon Historical Society Search Explore Entries A-Z Browse the complete list of entries Entries by Themes Browse curated collections of entries For Educators In the Classroom Primary Source Packets Support Us Donate Donors About Us Staff and Board Authors FAQ Contact Us Statement on Language Digital Exhibits Permissions Entries Themes For Educators In the Classroom Primary Source Packets Support Us Donate Donors About Us Staff and Board Authors FAQ Contact Us Statement on Language Digital Exhibits Permissions © 2025 Portland State University and the Oregon Historical Society The Oregon Historical Society is a 501(c)(3) non-profit organization. Federal Tax ID 93-0391599 Close modal View Source Welcome to the Oregon Encyclopedia. Explore Oregon's history and culture — from Athapaskan Indians to Zigzag Ranger Station Monthly Spotlight December: Oregoniana - you know it when you see it. Explore The OE's Oregoniana entries. Zoom image 24 Hour Church of Elvis For three decades, one of the best known and quirkiest Portland tourist attractions was the 24 Hour… Zoom image Bigfoot (Sasquatch) legend Bigfoot is a large and mysterious humanoid creature purported to inhabit the wild and forested area… Zoom image Florence Whale Explosion On November 9, 1970, a forty-five-foot, eight-ton sperm whale washed ashore near Florence on Oregon… Zoom image Herman the Sturgeon Herman the Sturgeon is a 10-foot-long, 500-pound white sturgeon who has lived at the Bonneville Fis… Zoom image Mill Ends Park Mill Ends Park once held the record as the world's smallest park in the Guinness Book of World Reco… Zoom image Oregon Vortex (House of Mystery) The Oregon Vortex and House of Mystery, located on Sardine Creek in Gold Hill, is one of Oregon’s o… Zoom image Petersen Rock Garden Petersen Rock Garden is a unique folk art environment in central Oregon that has drawn visitors fro… Zoom image Pixieland Pixieland was a short-lived but popular amusement park on the Oregon Coast northeast of Lincoln Cit… Zoom image Prehistoric Gardens Prehistoric Gardens, with its twenty-foot-tall concrete Tyrannosaurus greeting travelers a few mile… Zoom image Pronto Pups A Pronto Pup is a popular fast food invented in Oregon and marketed nationwide, beginning in the 19… Zoom image Scappoose Peace Candle of the World The Peace Candle of the World is a distinctive landmark on Highway 30, near the southern boundary o… Zoom image Tater Tots and Ore-Ida Foods, Co. Tater Tots, one of America’s most beloved frozen foods, was invented in 1953 by two enterprising br… Zoom image Voodoo Doughnut Voodoo Doughnut is an independently owned business in Portland and Eugene known for its off-kilter … Slide carouosel left Slide carousel right Feeling adventurous? How Oregonian of you. Search Search Advanced Search Or may we suggest… Bigfoot (Sasquatch) legend Black Cowboys in Oregon Blueberries and Huckleberries James Beard (1903-1985) Ken Kesey (1935-2001) Oregon Trail Rogue River Roundup Yaquina Bay Lighthouse Explore OHS Digital History Projects Wayfinder An interactive map of notable places, people, and events in Oregon history. Oregon History Project The Research Library at the Oregon Historical Society provides direct access to digitized and digital materials as well as narratives from Pacific Northwest historians. Oregon TimeWeb An interactive timeline of archival materials and historical scholarship on the history of Oregon. This Just In New Entries "We could see the top of one hill and think that was the last. But when we gained that, others kept rising before us. To look back, in retreat, seemed utterly out of the question. To look forward was to look directly upwards, as the ascent seemed almost perpendicular." Harriet Hitchcock, 13, 1865, Oregon Trail Read more New Entries No. 7 7 Afghans in Oregon The first wave of Afghans arrived in Oregon in the early 1980s, fleeing… Al Faussett (1879-1948) Al Faussett was an accomplished daredevil in the Pacific Northwest who,… Bruce Guenther (1948-) An influential art historian, curator, and author, Bruce Guenther has c… David George Foster (1924–2002) David George Foster was a master teacher, an innovative artist, and an … Elden Rosenthal (1947–) A respected and successful trial lawyer, Elden Rosenthal practiced law … Emperor of the North (film) Forty-six years after a Hollywood production company spent the summer i… Fort Rock (formation) Fort Rock is a volcanic citadel at the western end of the Fort Rock Val… Gail Achterman (1949 - 2012) Gail Achterman, a fourth-generation Oregonian, was one of the state’s l… George Stanley Turnbull (1882-1977) George Stanley Turnbull was a journalist, educator, and historian and o… Josiah L. Parrish (1806–1895) Josiah Parrish played a central role in foundational activities at the … Lee Owen Stone (1903-1977) In 1937, Lee Owen Stone became the first Black Episcopal priest in Oreg… Renée Watson (1978 -) Renée Watson is a bestselling author, educator, and community activist … Tongue Point Naval Air Station (Astoria) Located some three-miles east of Astoria, Oregon, the Tongue Point Nava… Willamette Woolen Mill (Salem) The Willamette Woolen Mill (1857-1876) in Salem was among the first woo… Wilson River Highway (Oregon Route 6) The Wilson River Highway (Oregon Route 6) begins in Tillamook near the … Slide carouosel left Slide carousel right Join our social clubs Facebook Instagram The OE is Green! Our editorial process is completely paperless — authors and editors use a one-of-a-kind online workshop developed by Portland State University. We've published hundreds of authoritative entries on Oregon history and culture without hurting a single Douglas Fir. Donate your green to The OE and keep us — and the trees — growing. Additional Funding This project has been funded in part by the Oregon Heritage Commission and the Oregon Cultural Trust This project has been funded in part by an American Rescue Plan Act Grant from the Institute of Museum and Library Services through the Library Services and Technology Act, administered by the State Library of Oregon. Project Partners Back to top FAQs Workshop Login Donate Contact Us © 2025 Portland State University and the Oregon Historical Society The Oregon Historical Society is a 501(c)(3) non-profit organization. Federal Tax ID 93-0391599 © 2025 Portland State University and the Oregon Historical Society The Oregon Historical Society is a 501(c)(3) non-profit organization. Federal Tax ID 93-0391599 .