     WW %                U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
     i.ali * :
     2%                  Community
                                       y Planning Planig and Development
Special Attention of:                                                        Notice:        CPD-21-10

CPD Division Directors
                                                                             Issued: September 13, 2021
All HOME            Coordinators
All HOME Participating Jurisdictions
                                                                             Expires: This NOTICE is effective until it is
                                                                             amended, superseded, or rescinded
                                                                             Cross Reference: 24 CFR Part 92


Subje ct: Requirements for the Use of Funds in the HOME-American
Rescue Plan Program


Table of Contents
I.         1d OD 5.0 od © la)   ae                                                                                                          2
II.         BACKGROUND .......0.....ccccccccccccesssccesenececessseccneneeeeseseeecessaeeeseaeeeessaeeseesueeseseaeeseneaaaeeeeageess 2
HiIl.       ESTABLISHMENT                    OF HOME-ARP REQUIREMENTS .............cccccccccsscceeenseeeesees 2
IV.         QUALIFYING POPULATIONS, TARGETING AND PREFERENCES ................. 3
V.          HOME-ARP ALLOCATION PLAN ............cccccccccsssccessteccesseeeeseeeecessneseseneesensaesenaees 12
VI.         ELIGIBLE ACTIVITIES 1.0.0... ccccssccesenccecessneccnsseeeeseeeeeeseesensseeseseaeeeeeas 18
      A.      Administration and Planning ..................0.cccccccccccesessscceececceseeeessseeeeeeecenseeeaaeeeeeeeeenes 18
      B.      HOME-ARP Rental HOusing.................                     ccc ccccccccsessscceeeecceseeeensneceeeeecenseeesaeeeeeeeeenes 20
      C.         Tenant-Based Rental Assistance (TBRA)..................ccccccesseccccceeeessecccssceeeeeseeseeseeeees 38
      D.         SUPPOTtive SELVICES ............ ccc ccccccccesesssecceececcnesseesaeeeeseeseeeessneeeeeeceeeeeeessseeeeseeeeneneeaaas 42
      E.      Acquisition and Development of Non-Congregate Shelter ..........0........cccceccceceeeees 55
      F.      Nonprofit Operating and Capacity Building Assistance..............0......ccccccssceeeeeeees 67
VII.        OTHER FEDERAL                    REQUIREMENTS ...0.0.....0 ccc cccccccccesseceeseeceesseeecsstesesseseeeeas 68
VITI.       PROGRAM              ADMINISTRATION                    0... cccccccccseccceessseeccesnecesseeeeeesseeeceseeeseaeeeeeas 75
TX.         PERFORMANCE                    REVIEW. ...............cccccccccccssccssscecessseeecsseccsseeeeeesseesssseesesenaeeesas 95
X.          FINDING OF NO SIGNIFICANT IMPACT .........                                      ccc cccccccccesseecessteceneseeeessnseeeesanes 97
Appendix — Waivers and Alternative Requirements for HOME Investment Partnerships
Program — American Rescue Plan (HOME-ARP)
I.     PURPOSE

This Notice establishes requirements for funds appropriated under section 3205 of the American
Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (P.L. 117-2) (‘ARP’) for the HOME        Investment Partnerships
Program (HOME) to provide homelessness assistance and supportive services.

I.     BACKGROUND
On March 11, 2021, President Biden signed ARP into law, which provides over $1.9 trillion in
relief to address the continued impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the economy, public
health, State and local governments, individuals, and businesses.

To address the need for homelessness assistance and supportive services, Congress
appropriated $5 billion in ARP funds to be administered through HOME to perform four
activities that must primarily benefit qualifying individuals and families who are homeless, at
risk of homelessness, or in other vulnerable populations. These activities include: (1)
development and support of affordable housing, (2) tenant-based rental assistance (TBRA), (3)
provision of supportive services; and (4) acquisition and development of non-congregate
shelter units. The program described in this notice for the use of the $5 billion in ARP funds is
the HOME-American Rescue Plan or “HOME-ARP.”

ARP defines qualifying individuals or families as those that are (1) homeless, as defined in
section 103(a) of the McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act, as amended (42 U.S.C.
11302(a)) ““McKinney-Vento”’); (2) at risk of homelessness, as defined in section 401 of
McKinney-Vento; (3) fleeing, or attempting to flee domestic violence, dating violence, sexual
assault, stalking, or human trafficking; (4) part of other populations where providing supportive
services or assistance would prevent a family’s homelessness or would serve those with the
greatest risk of housing instability; or (5) veterans and families that include a veteran family
member that meet the criteria in one of (1)-(4) above.

ARP authorized HUD to allocate HOME-ARP         funds to states, units of general local
government, insular areas, and consortia of units of general local government that qualified
for an allocation of HOME funds in Fiscal Year (FY) 2021, pursuant to section 217 of the
Cranston-Gonzalez National Affordable Housing Act of 1990, as amended (42 U.S.C. 12701 et
seq.) (“NAHA”). On April 8, 2021, HUD allocated HOME-ARP funds to 651 grantees using
the HOME formula established at 24 CEFR 92.50 and 92.60. The HOME-ARP allocation
amounts can be found here.


Hil.   ESTABLISHMENT OF HOME-ARP REQUIREMENTS
ARP provides funds for homelessness and supportive services assistance under the HOME
statute of Title Il of NAHA   (42 U.S.C. 12721 et seq.) and authorizes the Secretary of HUD to
waive or specify alternative requirements for any provision of NAHA or regulation for the
administration of the HOME-ARP program, except requirements related to fair housing, civil
rights, nondiscrimination, labor standards, and the environment, upon a finding that the waiver
or alternative requirement is necessary to expedite or facilitate the use of HOME-ARP funds.
Pursuant to ARP, the per-unit cost limits (42 U.S.C. 12742(e)), commitment requirements (42
U.S.C. 12748(g)), matching requirements (42 U.S.C. 12750), and set-aside for housing
developed, sponsored, or owned by community housing development organizations (CHDOs)
(42 U.S.C. 12771) in NAHA do not apply to HOME-ARP funds.

This Notice describes the requirements applicable to a participating jurisdiction’s (PJ’s) use of
HOME-ARP funds. Consolidated plan requirements for HOME are in title I of NAHA and 24
CFR part 91. HOME program regulations are in 24 CFR part 92. Except as described in ARP
and this Notice, HOME statutory and regulatory provisions apply to a PJ’s use of HOME-ARP
funds. Sections I-[X of this Notice describe the HOME-ARP requirements imposed on a PJ for
the use of HOME-ARP funds to assist the qualifying populations through HOME-ARP projects
or activities. The Appendix describes the waivers and alternative requirements imposed on PJs
for the use of HOME-ARP funds and is included in any reference to “this Notice.” Specific
citations in the Notice shall mean the statute or regulation cited, as may be revised by the
Appendix to this Notice. PJs and insular areas must comply with all applicable statutory,
regulatory, and alternative requirements, as described in this Notice, including the Appendix.

IV.        QUALIFYING POPULATIONS, TARGETING AND
           PREFERENCES
ARP requires that funds be used to primarily benefit individuals and families in the following
specified “qualifying populations.” Any individual or family who meets the criteria for these
populations is eligible to receive assistance or services funded through HOME-ARP without
meeting additional criteria (e.g., additional income criteria). All income calculations to meet
income criteria of a qualifying population or required for income determinations in HOME-
ARP eligible activities must use the annual income definition in 24 CFR 5.609 in accordance
with the requirements of 24 CFR 92.203(a)(1).

A. Qualifying Populations

      1.   Homeless, as defined in 24 CFR 91.5 Homeless (1), (2), or (3):

       (1) An individual or family who lacks a fixed, regular, and adequate nighttime residence,
       meaning:

           (i) An individual or family with a primary nighttime residence that is a public or private
           place not designed for or ordinarily used as a regular sleeping accommodation for
           human beings, including a car, park, abandoned building, bus or train station, airport, or
           camping ground;

           (ii) An individual or family living in a supervised publicly or privately operated shelter
           designated to provide temporary living arrangements (including congregate shelters,
           transitional housing, and hotels and motels paid for by charitable organizations or by
           federal, state, or local government programs for low-income individuals); or
       (iii) An individual who is exiting an institution where he or she resided for 90 days or
       less and who resided in an emergency shelter or place not meant for human habitation
       immediately before entering that institution;

 (2) An individual or family who will imminently lose their primary nighttime residence,
 provided that:

       (i) The primary nighttime residence will be lost within 14 days of the date of application
       for homeless assistance;

       (11) No subsequent residence has been identified; and

       (iii) The individual or family lacks the resources or support networks, e.g., family,
       friends, faith-based or other social networks needed to obtain other permanent housing;

     (3) Unaccompanied youth under 25 years of age, or families with children and youth, who
     do not otherwise qualify as homeless under this definition, but who:

       (1) Are defined as homeless under section 387 of the Runaway and Homeless Youth Act
       (42 U.S.C. 5732a), section 637 of the Head Start Act (42 U.S.C. 9832), section 41403 of
       the Violence Against Women Act of 1994 (42 U.S.C. 14043e-2), section 330(h) of the
       Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 254b(h)), section 3 of the Food and Nutrition Act
       of 2008 (7 U.S.C. 2012), section 17(b) of the Child Nutrition Act of 1966 (42 U.S.C.
       1786(b)), or section 725 of the McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act (42 U.S.C.
       11434a);

       (11) Have not had a lease, ownership interest, or occupancy agreement in permanent
       housing at any time during the 60 days immediately preceding the date of application for
       homeless assistance;

       (111) Have experienced persistent instability as measured by two moves or more during
       the 60-day period immediately preceding the date of applying for homeless assistance;
       and

       (iv) Can be expected to continue in such status for an extended period of time because of
       chronic disabilities, chronic physical health or mental health conditions, substance
       addiction, histories of domestic violence or childhood abuse (including neglect), the
       presence of a child or youth with a disability, or two or more barriers to employment,
       which include the lack of a high school degree or General Education Development
       (GED), illiteracy, low English proficiency, a history of incarceration or detention for
       criminal activity, and a history of unstable employment;

2.     Atrisk of Homelessness, as defined in 24 CFR 91.5 At risk of homelessness:

 (1) An individual or family who:
  (1) Has an annual income below 30 percent of median family income for the area, as
  determined by HUD;

  (ii) Does not have sufficient resources or support networks, e.g., family, friends, faith-
  based or other social networks, immediately available to prevent them from moving to
  an emergency shelter or another place described in paragraph (1) of the “Homeless”
  definition in this section; and

  (iii) Meets one of the following conditions:

     (A) Has moved because of economic reasons two or more times during the 60 days
     immediately preceding the application for homelessness prevention assistance;

     (B) Is living in the home of another because of economic hardship;

     (C) Has been notified in writing that their right to occupy their current housing or
     living situation will be terminated within 21 days after the date of application for
     assistance;

     (D) Lives in a hotel or motel and the cost of the hotel or motel stay is not paid by
     charitable organizations or by federal, State, or local government programs for low-
     income individuals;

     (E) Lives in a single-room occupancy or efficiency apartment unit in which there
     reside more than two persons or lives in a larger housing unit in which there reside
     more than 1.5 people per room, as defined by the U.S. Census Bureau;

     (F) Is exiting a publicly funded institution, or system of care (such as a health-care
     facility,   a mental health facility, foster care or other youth facility, or correction
     program or institution); or

     (G) Otherwise lives in housing that has characteristics associated with instability and
     an increased risk of homelessness, as identified in the recipient's approved
     consolidated plan;

(2) A child or youth who does not qualify as “homeless” under this section, but qualifies as
“homeless” under section 387(3) of the Runaway and Homeless Youth Act (42 U.S.C.
5732a(3)), section 637(11) of the Head Start Act (42 U.S.C. 9832(11)), section 41403(6) of
the Violence Against Women Act of 1994 (42 U.S.C. 14043e-2(6)), section 330(h)(5)(A)
of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 254b(h)(5)(A)), section 3(1) of the Food and
Nutrition Act of 2008 (7 U.S.C. 2012()), or section 17(b)(15) of the Child Nutrition Act of
1966 (42 U.S.C. 1786(b)(15)); or

(3) A child or youth who does not qualify as “homeless” under this section but qualifies as
“homeless” under section 725(2) of the McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act (42
 U.S.C. 11434a(2)), and the parent(s) or guardian(s) of that child or youth if living with her
 or him.

3.   Fleeing, or Attempting to Flee, Domestic Violence, Dating Violence, Sexual Assault,
     Stalking, or Human Trafficking, as defined by HUD.

     For HOME-ARP, this population includes any individual or family who is fleeing, or is
     attempting to flee, domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, stalking, or human
     trafficking. This population includes cases where an individual or family reasonably
     believes that there is a threat of imminent harm from further violence due to dangerous
     or life-threatening conditions that relate to violence against the individual or a family
     member, including a child, that has either taken place within the individual’s or family’s
     primary nighttime residence or has made the individual or family afraid to return or
     remain within the same dwelling unit. In the case of sexual assault, this also includes
     cases where an individual reasonably believes there is a threat of imminent harm from
     further violence if the individual remains within the same dwelling unit that the
     individual is currently occupying, or the sexual assault occurred on the premises during
     the 90-day period preceding the date of the request for transfer.

     Domestic violence, which is defined in 24 CFR 5.2003 includes felony or misdemeanor
     crimes of violence committed by:

         1)   Accurrent or former spouse or intimate partner of the victim (the term “spouse
              or intimate partner of the victim” includes a person who is or has been in a
              social relationship of a romantic or intimate nature with the victim, as
              determined by the length of the relationship, the type of the relationship, and
              the frequency of interaction between the persons involved in the relationship);
        2)    A person with whom the victim shares a child in common;
        3)    A person who is cohabitating with or has cohabitated with the victim as a
              spouse or intimate partner;
        4)    A person similarly situated to a spouse of the victim under the domestic or
              family violence laws of the jurisdiction receiving HOME-ARP funds; or
        5)    Any other person against an adult or youth victim who is protected from that
              person's acts under the domestic or family violence laws of the jurisdiction.

     Dating violence which is defined in 24 CFR 5.2003 means violence committed by a
     person:

         1)   Whois or has been in a social relationship of a romantic or intimate nature
              with the victim; and
        2)    Where the existence of such a relationship shall be determined based
              on a consideration of the following factors:
              a. The length of the relationship;
              b. The type of relationship; and
              c. The frequency of interaction between the persons involved in the
                  relationship.
          Sexual assault which is defined in 24 CFR 5.2003 means any nonconsensual
          sexual act proscribed by Federal, Tribal, or State law, including when the victim
          lacks capacity to consent.

          Stalking which is defined in 24 CFR 5.2003 means engaging in a course of conduct
          directed at a specific person that would cause a reasonable person to:

              1)   Fear for the person’s individual safety or the safety of others; or
              2)   Suffer substantial emotional distress.

          Human Trafficking includes both sex and labor trafficking, as outlined in the
          Trafficking Victims Protection Act of 2000 (TVPA), as amended (22 U.S.C. 7102).
          These are defined as:

              1)   Sex trafficking means the recruitment, harboring, transportation, provision,
                   obtaining, patronizing, or soliciting of a person for the purpose of a commercial
                   sex act, in which the commercial sex act is induced by force, fraud, or coercion,
                   or in which the person induced to perform such act has not attained 18 years of
                   age; or

              2)   Labor trafficking means the recruitment, harboring, transportation, provision, or
                   obtaining of a person for labor or services, through the use of force, fraud, or
                   coercion for the purpose of subjection to involuntary servitude, peonage, debt
                   bondage, or slavery.

    4.    Other Populations where providing supportive services or assistance under section
          212(a) of NAHA     (42 U.S.C. 12742(a)) would prevent the family’s homelessness or
          would serve those with the greatest risk of housing instability. HUD defines these
          populations as individuals and households who do not qualify under any of the
          populations above but meet one of the following criteria:

         (1) Other Families Requiring Services or Housing Assistance to Prevent
            Homelessness is defined as households (i.e., individuals and families) who have
            previously been qualified as “homeless” as defined in 24 CFR 91.5, are currently
            housed due to temporary or emergency assistance, including financial assistance,
            services, temporary rental assistance or some type of other assistance to allow the
            household to be housed, and who need additional housing assistance or supportive
            services to avoid a return to homelessness.

         (2) At Greatest Risk of Housing Instability is defined as household who meets either
paragraph (1) or (11) below:

         (i) has annual income that is less than or equal to 30% of the area median income, as
            determined by HUD and is experiencing severe cost burden (1.e., is paying more than
            50% of monthly household income toward housing costs);
       (ii) has annual income that is less than or equal to 50% of the area median income, as
          determined by HUD, AND meets one of the following conditions from paragraph (iii)
          of the “At risk of homelessness” definition established at 24 CFR 91.5:

          (A) Has moved because of economic reasons two or more times during the 60 days
              immediately preceding the application for homelessness prevention assistance;
          (B) Is living in the home of another because of economic hardship;

          (C) Has been notified in writing that their right to occupy their current housing or
              living situation will be terminated within 21 days after the date of application for
              assistance;

          (D) Lives in a hotel or motel and the cost of the hotel or motel stay is not paid by
              charitable organizations or by Federal, State, or local government programs for
              low-income individuals;
          (E) Lives in a single-room occupancy or efficiency apartment unit in which there
              reside more than two persons or lives in a larger housing unit in which there reside
              more than 1.5 persons reside per room, as defined by the U.S. Census Bureau;
          (F) Is exiting a publicly funded institution, or system of care (such as a health-care
              facility,   a mental health facility, foster care or other youth facility, or correction
              program or institution); or
          (G) Otherwise lives in housing that has characteristics associated with instability and
              an increased risk of homelessness, as identified in the recipient's approved
              consolidated plan

Veterans and Families that include a Veteran Family Member that meet the criteria for one
of the qualifying populations described above are eligible to receive HOME-ARP assistance.


B. Use of Funds to Benefit Qualifying Populations
ARP states that funds must be used to primarily benefit the qualifying populations through the
four eligible activities: (1) TBRA, (2) development and support of affordable housing, (3)
provision of supportive services; and (4) acquisition and development of non-congregate shelter
(NCS) units. Recognizing the urgent needs of individuals and families in qualifying
populations, HUD is requiring that:

   e    100% of HOME-ARP funds used by a PJ for TBRA, supportive services, and
        acquisition and development of non-congregate shelter units must benefit individuals
        and families in qualifying populations. Individuals and families in qualifying
        populations may be assisted by one or more of the HOME-ARP eligible activities,
        consistent with the requirements in this Notice.
   e    Not less than 70 percent of affordable rental housing units acquired, rehabilitated, or
        constructed with HOME-ARP funds by a PJ must be occupied by households in the
        qualifying populations. Units that are not restricted to occupancy by qualifying
        populations are subject to income targeting and rent requirements established under the
                                                      8
        HOME-ARP Rental Program rules and are only permitted in projects with rental units
        restricted for occupancy by qualifying populations.

HUD recognizes that, because many households in the qualifying populations are unable to pay
rents sufficient to cover unit operating costs, PJs and project owners should attempt to obtain
Federal or state project-based rental subsidies, if available. Since project-based rental subsidies
can be difficult to secure, additional flexibility may be necessary to structure and underwrite
projects so that they remain both affordable and financially viable. HUD is providing PJs with
additional flexibilities in Section VL.B. to structure and underwrite HOME-ARP rental projects
so they remain financially viable during the minimum compliance period. One of these
flexibilities is permitting up to 30 percent of HOME-ARP rental housing units funded by a PJ to
be occupied by low-income households. PJs are encouraged to use this flexibility only when it
is required to facilitate development of a HOME-ARP rental project.
PJs must determine and document that households meet the definition of a qualifying
population or, for the portion of HOME-ARP rental units not restricted to these populations,
that households are low-income.

C. Preferences Among Qualifying Populations, Referral Methods, and
   Subpopulations

1.   Preferences


ARP establishes the qualifying populations that are eligible for assistance with HOME-ARP
funds. A PJ may establish reasonable preferences among the qualifying populations to
prioritize applicants for HOME-ARP projects or activities based on the PJ’s needs and
priorities, as described in its HOME-ARP allocation plan. For example, a PJ may set a
preference among qualifying individuals and families fora HOME-ARP non-congregate shelter
for individuals and families who are homeless; fleeing or attempting to flee domestic violence,
dating violence, sexual assault, stalking, or human trafficking; and veterans and families with a
veteran family member that meet the criteria of one of these prior qualifying populations,
consistent with its HOME-ARP allocation plan.

The PJ must comply with all applicable fair housing, civil rights, and nondiscrimination
requirements, including but not limited to those requirements listed in 24 CFR 5.105(a) when
applying preferences through its referral methods. Persons who are eligible for a preference
must have the opportunity to participate in all HOME-ARP activities of the PJ in which they are
eligible under this Notice, including activities that are not separate or different, and cannot be
excluded because of any protected characteristics or preferential status.

Targeted assistance: If HOME-ARP funds are used for TBRA, the PJ may establish a
preference for individuals with special needs or persons with disabilities among the HOME-
ARP qualifying populations. Within the qualifying populations, participation may be limited to
persons with a specific disability only, if necessary, to provide effective housing, aid, benefit, or
services that would be as effective as those provided to others in accordance with 24 CFR
8.4(b)()Gv). The PJ may also provide a preference for a specific category of individuals with
disabilities (e.g., persons with HIV/AIDS or chronic mental illness) within the qualifying
                                                  9
populations only if the specific category is identified in the PJ’s HOME-ARP allocation plan as
having unmet need and the preference is needed to narrow the gap in benefits and services
received by such persons.

2.   Referral Methods for Projects or Activities

A PJ may use the referral methods described below to administer HOME-ARP assistance to
qualifying individuals and families. Regardless of the referral method used by the PJ, HUD
holds the PJ responsible for determining and documenting that beneficiaries meet the definition
of a qualifying population or, for the portion of HOME-ARP rental units not restricted to
qualifying populations, that beneficiaries are low-income.
A PJ may use the coordinated entry or coordinated entry process (CE) of a continuum of care
(CoC) for referrals for projects and activities as described below. Under 24 CFR 578.3, a CE is
a centralized or coordinated process designed to coordinate program participant intake
assessment and provision of referrals within a defined area. HUD requires each CoC to establish
and operate a CE with the goal of increasing the efficiency of local crisis response systems and
improving fairness and ease of access to resources, including mainstream resources. A PJ may
permit a CoC CE to collect information and documentation required to determine whether an
individual or family meets the criteria of a HOME-ARP qualifying population at any point in
the coordinated entry process, (i.e., after or concurrently with the assessment and intake
processes) as long as that information is not used to rank a person for HOME-ARP assistance
other than as specified by the preferences or method of prioritization established by the PJ, in
accordance with HOME-ARP requirements. If the PJ uses CE, the PJ cannot require HOME-
ARP victim service providers to use the CE but may permit them to do so.
The PJ must comply with all applicable nondiscrimination and equal opportunity laws and
requirements listed in 24 CFR 5.105(a) and any other applicable fair housing and civil rights
laws and requirements when using the following referral methods:
     i.   Use of Expanded CE in HOME-ARP

     Under this referral method, a PJ may use a CE established by a CoC operating within its
     boundaries for one or more projects or activities if the CE accepts all HOME-ARP
     qualifying populations eligible for those activities or projects, in accordance with the
     preferences and prioritization, if any, established or approved by the PJ in its HOME-ARP
     allocation plan and imposed through the PJ’s written agreements.

     Before using a CoC’s CE, PJs should consider whether the CE covers the same service area
     as the HOME-ARP project or activity that would use that CE. At a minimum, the PJ must
     establish policies and procedures that describe the relationship of the geographic area(s)
     served by the project or activity to the geographic area(s) covered by the CoC CE and
     address how the CE will provide access and implement uniform referral processes in
     situations where a project’s geographic area(s) is broader than the geographic area(s)
     covered by the CE.




                                                10
      The PJ must require a project or activity to use CE along with other referral methods (as
      provided in section 11 below) or to use only a project/activity waiting list (as provided in
      section 111 below) if:

            1.   the CE does not have a sufficient number of qualifying individuals and families to
                 refer to the PJ for the project or activity;
            2.   the CE does not include all HOME-ARP qualifying populations; or,
            3.   the CE fails to provide access and implement uniform referral processes in situations
                 where a project’s geographic area(s) is broader than the geographic area(s) covered
                 by the CE.

      li.   Use of CE with Other Referral Methods

      The PJ may use a CoC CE with additional referrals from outside organizations or project-
      specific waiting lists consistent with HOME-ARP requirements. If using this referral
      method, the PJ must establish or approve any preferences or prioritization criteria applied by
      a CoC CE or other referral sources. The PJ may also use a waiting list to receive referrals
      from a CoC CE and other referral agencies for a project or activity, where a CoC CE or
      referral agency refers an applicant that is placed on the waiting list for that project or
      activity in chronological order.

      If applicable, a PJ must establish policies and procedures for applying a PJ’s established
      preferences and method of prioritization, if any, when accepting direct referrals from a CoC
      CE and other referral agencies and must document that such the policies and procedures
      were followed for each applicant served.

     ili.   Use of a Project/Activity Waiting List

     The PJ may establish a waiting list for each HOME-ARP project or activity. All qualifying
     individuals or families must have access to apply for placement on the waiting list for an
     activity or project. Qualifying individuals or families on a waiting list must be accepted in
     accordance with the PJ’s preferences, if any, consistent with this Notice or, if the PJ did not
     establish preferences, in chronological order, insofar as practicable.

3.    Limiting Eligibility to Subpopulations

PJs must follow all applicable fair housing, civil rights, and nondiscrimination requirements,
including but not limited to those requirements listed in 24 CFR 5.105(a). This includes, but is
not limited to, the Fair Housing Act, Title VI of the Civil Rights Act, section 504 of
Rehabilitation Act, HUD’s Equal Access Rule, and the Americans with Disabilities Act, as
applicable.

HOME-ARP rental housing or NCS may be limited to a specific subpopulation of a qualifying
population identified in Section IV.A. of this Notice, so long as admission does not discriminate
against any protected class under federal nondiscrimination laws in 24 CFR 5.105 (e.g., the
housing may be limited to homeless households and at risk of homelessness households,

                                                     11
veterans and their families, victims of domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault,
stalking or human trafficking and their families).

Recipients may limit admission to or provide a preference for HOME-ARP rental housing or
NCS to households who need the specialized supportive services that are provided (e.g.,
domestic violence services).   However, no otherwise eligible individuals with disabilities or
families including an individual with a disability who may benefit from the services provided
may be excluded on the grounds that they do not have a particular disability.

Consistent with the statutory authority under ARP, HOME-ARP NCS may be converted to
permanent housing under the CoC program or used as shelters under the ESG program, when all
program and fair housing and nondiscrimination requirements are met. As such, HOME-ARP
NCS may need to limit eligibility to households that are homeless and/or at risk of
homelessness if the shelter will be converted to permanent housing under the CoC program or
used as an emergency shelter in the ESG program.

V.       HOME-ARP ALLOCATION PLAN
PJs develop annual action plans as part of their application for HOME funding. To receive its
HOME-ARP funds, a PJ must engage in consultation and public participation processes and
develop a HOME-ARP allocation plan that meets the requirements established in this section of
the Notice and submit it to HUD as a substantial amendment to its Fiscal Year 2021 annual
action plan. HUD is using the waiver and alternative requirement authority provided by ARP to
establish requirements for the HOME-ARP allocation plan in this Notice. The HOME-ARP
allocation plan must describe how the PJ intends to distribute HOME-ARP funds, including
how it will use these funds to address the needs of HOME-ARP qualifying populations. A PJ’s
HOME-ARP allocation plan must include:

     e   Asummary of the consultation process and results of upfront consultation;
     e   A summary of comments received through the public participation process and a
         summary of any comments or recommendations not accepted and the reasons why;
     e   A description of HOME-ARP qualifying populations within the jurisdiction;
     e   An assessment of unmet needs of each qualifying population;
     e   An assessment of gaps in housing and shelter inventory, homeless assistance and
         services, and homelessness prevention service delivery system;
     e   Asummary of the planned use of HOME-ARP funds for eligible activities based on the
         unmet needs of the qualifying populations;
     e   An estimate of the number of housing units for qualifying populations the PJ will
         produce or preserve with its HOME-ARP allocation; and
     e   A description of any preferences for individuals and families in a particular qualifying
         population or a segment of a qualifying population.

All the above required elements of the HOME-ARP allocation plan shall be part of the FY 2021
annual action plan for purposes of the HOME-ARP program. Consequently, PJs are not
required to amend their consolidated plans.


                                                 12
A. Consultation

Before developing its HOME-ARP allocation plan, a PJ must consult with agencies and service
providers whose clientele include the HOME-ARP qualifying populations to identify unmet
needs and gaps in housing or service delivery systems. In addition, a PJ should use consultation
to determine the HOME-ARP eligible activities currently taking place within its jurisdiction and
potential collaborations for administering HOME-ARP. This consultation will provide a basis
for the PJ’s strategy for distributing HOME-ARP funds for eligible activities to best meet the
needs of qualifying populations. At a minimum, a PJ must consult with the CoC(s) serving the
jurisdiction’s geographic area, homeless and domestic violence service providers, veterans’
groups, public housing agencies (PHAs), public agencies that address the needs of the
qualifying populations, and public or private organizations that address fair housing, civil rights,
and the needs of persons with disabilities. State PJs are not required to consult with every PHA
or CoC within the state’s boundaries; however, local PJs must consult with all PHAs (including
statewide or regional PHAs) and CoCs serving the jurisdiction. In its plan, a PJ must describe
its consultation process, list the organizations consulted, and summarize the feedback received
from these entities.

B. Public Participation

PJs must provide for and encourage citizen participation in the development of the HOME-ARP
allocation plan. Before submitting the HOME-ARP allocation plan to HUD, PJs must provide
residents with reasonable notice and an opportunity to comment on the proposed HOME-ARP
allocation plan of no less than 15 calendar days. The PJ must follow its adopted requirements
for “reasonable notice and an opportunity to comment” for plan amendments in its current
citizen participation plan. In addition, PJs must hold at least one public hearing during the
development of the HOME-ARP allocation plan prior to submitting the plan to HUD.

For the purposes of HOME-ARP, PJs are required to make the following information available
to the public:
     e The amount of HOME-ARP funds the PJ will receive.
     e The range of activities the PJ may undertake.

A PJ must consider any comments or views of residents received in writing, or orally at a public
hearing, when preparing the HOME-ARP allocation plan. In its plan, a PJ must describe its
public participation process, including any efforts made to broaden public participation. In its
plan, the PJ must also include a summary of comments and recommendations received through
the public participation process and any comments or recommendations not accepted and the
reasons why.

Throughout the HOME-ARP allocation plan public participation process, the PJ must follow its
applicable fair housing and civil rights requirements and procedures for effective
communication, accessibility and reasonable accommodation for persons with disabilities and
providing meaningful access to participation by limited English proficient (LEP) residents that
are in its current citizen participation plan as required by 24 CFR 91.105 and 91.115.

                                                 13
C. HOME-ARP           Allocation Plan Requirements

The HOME-ARP allocation plan must describe the distribution of HOME-ARP funds and the
process for soliciting applications and/or selecting eligible projects. The plan must also identify
any preferences being established for eligible activities or projects. However, PJs are not
required to identify specific projects that will be funded in the HOME-ARP allocation plan.

1.   Needs Assessment and Gaps Analysis: A PJ must evaluate the size and demographic
     composition of qualifying populations within its boundaries and assess the unmet needs of
     those populations. In addition, a PJ must identify any gaps within its current shelter and
     housing inventory as well as the service delivery system. A PJ should use current data,
     including point in time count, housing inventory count, or other data available through
     CoCs, and consultations with service providers to quantify the individuals and families in
     the qualifying populations and their need for additional housing, shelter, or services. A PJ
     should identify and consider the current resources available to assist qualifying populations,
     including congregate and non-congregate shelter units, supportive services, TBRA, and
     affordable and permanent supportive rental housing. A PJ must consider the housing and
     service needs of qualifying populations, including but not limited to:
             Sheltered and unsheltered homeless populations;
             Those currently housed populations at risk of homelessness;
             Other families requiring services or housing assistance to prevent homelessness; and
             Those at greatest risk of housing instability or in unstable housing situations.

     A PJ should include data in its HOME-ARP allocation plan that describes the qualifying
     populations.

     In addition, a PJ must include a narrative description that:
         e   Identifies the characteristics of housing associated with instability and an increased
             risk of homelessness if the PJ will include such conditions under HUD’s definition
             of “other populations” as established in Section IV.A.4.2.11.G. of this Notice.
         e   Identifies the PJ’s priority needs for qualifying populations; and,
         e   Explains how the PJ determined the level of need and gaps in its shelter and housing
             inventory and service delivery systems.

2.   HOME-ARP Activities: The HOME-ARP allocation plan must describe how a PJ will
     distribute HOME-ARP funds in accordance with its priority needs. The plan must describe
     the PJ’s method for soliciting applications for funding and/or selecting developers, service
     providers, subrecipients and/or contractors and whether the PJ will administer eligible
     activities directly. If the PJ will provide any portion of its HOME-ARP administrative
     funds to a subrecipient or contractor prior to HUD’s acceptance of the PJ’s HOME-ARP
     allocation plan because the subrecipient or contractor is responsible for the administration of
     the PJ’s entire HOME-ARP grant, the plan must identify the subrecipient or contractor and
     describe its role and responsibilities in administering all of the PJ’s HOME-ARP program.

     PJs must indicate in the HOME-ARP allocation plan the amount of HOME-ARP funding
     that is planned for each eligible HOME-ARP activity type, including administrative and
                                                  14
    planning activities. In addition, a PJ must demonstrate that any planned funding for
    nonprofit organization operating assistance, as described in Section VI.F, nonprofit capacity
    building, and administrative costs is within HOME-ARP limits. PJs must also include a
    narrative description about how the characteristics of its shelter and housing inventory,
    service delivery system, and the needs identified in the PJ’s gap analysis provided a
    rationale for its plan to fund eligible activities.

. HOME-ARP Production Housing Goals: The HOME-ARP allocation plan must estimate
  the number of affordable rental housing units for qualifying populations that a PJ will
  produce or support with its HOME-ARP allocation. The plan must also include a narrative
  about the specific affordable rental housing production goal that the PJ hopes to achieve and
  describe how it will address the PJ’s priority needs.

. Preferences: The HOME-ARP allocation plan must identify whether the PJ intends to give
  preference to one or more qualifying populations or a subpopulation within one or more
  qualifying populations for any eligible activity or project. For example, PJs may include a
  preference for:
      e homeless individuals and families as defined in the ESG and CoC programs;
      e individuals with special needs or persons with disabilities among qualifying
          individuals and families;
      e aspecific category of qualifying individuals and families (e.g., chronically homeless
          as defined in 24 CFR 91.5).
    PJs are not required to describe specific projects to which the preferences will apply in the
    HOME-ARP allocation plan. However, a PJ must explain how the use of a preference or
    method of prioritization will address the unmet need or gap in benefits and services received
    by individuals and families in the qualifying population or category of qualifying
    population, consistent with the PJ’s needs assessment and gap analysis. The PJ must also
    describe how it will still address the unmet needs or gaps in benefits and services of the
    other qualifying populations that are not included in a preference through the use of HOME-
    ARP funds.

    Preferences cannot violate any applicable fair housing, civil rights, and nondiscrimination
    requirements, including but not limited to those requirements listed in 24 CFR 5.105(a).
    The PJ must comply with all applicable nondiscrimination and equal opportunity laws and
    requirements listed in 24 CFR 5.105(a) and any other applicable fair housing and civil rights
    laws and requirements when establishing preferences or methods of prioritization.

.   HOME-ARP      Refinancing Guidelines:     Ifa PJ intends to use HOME-ARP      funds to
    refinance existing debt secured by multifamily rental housing that is being rehabilitated with
    HOME-ARP funds, it must state its refinancing guidelines in accordance with 24 CFR
    92.206(b)(2). The guidelines must describe the conditions under with the PJ will refinance
    existing debt fora HOME-ARP rental project. At a minimum, the guidelines must:

       e   Establish a minimum level of rehabilitation per unit or a required ratio between
           rehabilitation and refinancing to demonstrate that rehabilitation of HOME-ARP
           rental housing is the primary eligible activity.
                                                15
            e   Require a review of management practices to demonstrate that disinvestment in the
                property has not occurred; that the long-term needs of the project can be met; and
                that the feasibility of serving qualified populations for the minimum compliance
                period can be demonstrated.
            e   State whether the new investment is being made to maintain current affordable units,
                create additional affordable units, or both.
            e   Specify whether the required compliance period is the minimum 15 years or longer.
            e   State that HOME-ARP funds cannot be used to refinance multifamily loans made or
                insured by any federal program, including CDBG.

6.    Substantial Amendments to the HOME-ARP Allocation Plan: PJs must make a
      substantial amendment to the HOME-ARP allocation plan for changes in the method of
      distributing funds; to carry out an activity not previously described in the plan; or, to change
      the purpose, scope, location, or beneficiaries of an activity, including new preferences not
      previously described in the plan. In addition, the requirements for substantial amendments
      at 24 CFR 92.63 apply to the HOME-ARP allocation plan for insular areas. PJs are not
      required to make a substantial amendment to describe individual projects selected for
      funding if the eligible activity is included in the PJ’s plan. PJs must make the proposed
      substantial amendment public and provide for a 15-day public comment period prior to
      submission. Upon completion of the public comment period, PJs must submit substantial
      amendments to HUD in accordance with the process for submitting the HOME-ARP
      allocation plan as described in Section V.D.

7.    Certifications and SF-424: PJs must submit the required certifications in accordance with
      the requirements in this Notice, including the following:

            Affirmatively Further Fair Housing;
     of




            Uniform Relocation Assistance and Real Property Acquisition Policies Act and Anti-
            displacement and Relocation Assistance Plan;
            Anti-Lobbying;
            Authority of Jurisdiction;
     moan




            Section 3; and,
            HOME-ARP specific certification that a PJ will only use HOME-ARP funds consistent
            with ARP and the HOME-ARP Notice for eligible activities and eligible costs.

      PJs must also submit the SF-424, SF-424B, and SF-424D with the HOME-ARP             allocation
      plan.

D. Submission and Review Process

1.    HOME-ARP Submission and the eCon Planning Suite: Upon completion of the HOME-
      ARP allocation plan, a PJ must submit the HOME-ARP allocation plan to HUD. To submit
      the HOME-ARP allocation plan, PJs must follow the process in IDIS to make an
      amendment to the Fiscal Year (FY) 2021 annual action plan.       Once the FY 2021 annual
      action plan is reopened, a PJ must upload a Microsoft Word or PDF version of the plan as
      an attachment next to the “HOME-ARP allocation plan” option on the AD-26 screen (for
                                                      16
    PJs whose FY. 2021 annual action plan is a Year 2-5 annual action plan) or the AD-25
    screen (for PJs whose FY 2021 annual action plan is a Year 1 annual action plan that is part
    of the 2021 consolidated plan), unless instructed by HUD to follow a different submission
    procedure. PJs are not required to make any other edits to the FY 2021 annual action plan
    or applicable consolidated plan screens in the eCon Planning Suite. For more information
    on how to upload an attachment in the eCon Planning Suite, PJs can refer to the eCon
    Planning Suite Desk Guide.

.   HUD   Review of the HOME-ARP        Allocation Plan:   The PJ must submit its HOME-ARP
    allocation plan to HUD for review in accordance with 24 CFR 91.500, as revised by this
    Notice. Unless instructed otherwise by HUD, the HOME-ARP allocation plan is received
    by HUD when the SF-424 is submitted electronically, which means that it is uploaded in the
    eCon Planning Suite as an attachment on AD-25 or AD-26 screen, as applicable, and the
    action plan status is changed to “Submitted for Review.” HUD will review a PJ’s HOME-
    ARP allocation plan to determine that it is:
        e Substantially complete, and
        e Consistent with the purposes of ARP.

    HUD may disapprove a PJ’s HOME-ARP allocation plan in accordance with 24 CFR
    91.500(b). HUD may also disapprove a HOME-ARP allocation plan or a portion of a plan
    if HUD determines that the plan is inconsistent with the purposes of ARP or substantially
    incomplete. A PJ’s plan is inconsistent with ARP if it allocates HOME-ARP funds for uses
    other than a HOME-ARP eligible activity, as described in this Notice. A PJ’s HOME-ARP
    allocation plan is substantially incomplete if:
        e The PJ does not complete the required public participation or consultation or fails to
            describe those efforts in the plan;
        e The PJ fails to include the required elements outlined in this Notice, including the
            amount of HOME-ARP funds for each eligible HOME-ARP activity type;
        e The PJ fails to identify and describe the responsibilities of the subrecipient or
            contractor administering all of its HOME-ARP award, if applicable; or,
        e HUD rejects the PJ’s HOME-ARP certification as inaccurate.

    In accordance with section 105(c) of NAHA (42 U.S.C. 12705(c)) and 24 CFR 91.500(a), if
    the PJ’s HOME-ARP allocation plan is not disapproved within 45 days, then the plan is
    deemed approved 45 days after HUD receives the plan, and HUD shall notify the PJ that the
    plan is accepted.

    If HUD determines that the plan is substantially incomplete or that the plan is inconsistent
    with ARP, HUD will notify the PJ in writing with the reasons for disapproval, in accordance
    with 24 CFR 91.500(c). Ifa PJ’s plan is disapproved, the PJ may revise or resubmit the
    plan for HUD review within 45 days after the first notification of disapproval. HUD will
    respond to accept or disapprove the resubmitted plan within 30 days of receiving the
    revisions or resubmission.

    Once HUD notifies a PJ that the plan is accepted, the PJ must make the final HOME-ARP
    allocation plan available to the public in accordance with the same requirements in the PJ’s
                                                17
      current citizen participation plan that are followed to make the PJ’s adopted consolidated
      plan and substantial amendments available to the public, including the availability of
      materials in a form accessible to persons with disabilities, and translated materials in
      different languages to accommodate LEP persons, upon request.

3.    HUD Review of the HOME-ARP Allocation Plan for Insular Areas: In addition to the
      standards for review described in Section V.D.2, HUD will review an insular area’s HOME-
      ARP allocation plan in accordance with 24 CFR 92.62. If HUD cannot make a
      determination based on the information submitted that the HOME-ARP allocation plan
      complies with HOME-ARP allocation plan requirements, or if the eligible activities
      described in the plan are not within the insular area’s management capability as
      demonstrated by past performance in housing and community development programs, HUD
      will notify the insular area within 30 days of receipt of the HOME-ARP allocation plan that
      supporting documentation is needed. The insular area will have a mutually agreed upon
      period to submit the necessary supporting information or to revise the eligible activities in
      its HOME-ARP allocation plan.

VI.        ELIGIBLE ACTIVITIES

A. Administration and Planning

The PJ may expend, for payment of reasonable administrative and planning costs, up to 15
percent of its HOME-ARP allocation. Reasonable administrative and planning costs for the
HOME-ARP program include:
1.    Reasonable costs of overall HOME-ARP program management, coordination, monitoring,
      and evaluation. Such HOME-ARP costs include, but are not limited to, necessary
      expenditures for the following:

      a.   Salaries, wages, and related costs of the PJ’s staff. Ifa PJ charges costs to this category,
           the PJ may either include the entire salary and related costs allocable to the HOME-ARP
           program of each person whose primary responsibilities with regard to the HOME-ARP
           program involves program administration assignments, or the prorated share of the
           salary, wages, and related costs of each person whose job includes any program
           administrative assignments. A PJ may only use one of these two methods. Program
           administration includes:
              i.    Developing systems and schedules for complying with HOME-ARP program
                    requirements, including systems to prevent a duplication of benefits among
                   beneficiaries of HOME-ARP      activities;
             ii.   Developing interagency agreements and agreements with entities receiving
                   HOME-ARP      funds;
            ii.    Monitoring HOME-ARP activities for progress and compliance with HOME-
                   ARP program requirements;
            iv.    Preparing HOME-ARP reports and other documents related to the HOME-ARP
                   program for submission to HUD;


                                                     18
           v.    Coordinating the resolution of audit and monitoring findings on HOME-ARP
                 activities;
          vi.    Evaluating HOME-ARP program results against stated objectives in the HOME-
                 ARP allocation plan, and
          vil.   Managing or supervising persons whose primary responsibilities with regard to
                 the HOME-ARP program include such assignments as those described above.

    b.   Travel costs incurred for official business in carrying out the HOME-ARP program.

    c.   Administrative services performed under third party contracts or agreements, including
         such services as general legal services, accounting services, and audit services.

    d.   Other costs for goods and services required for administering the HOME-ARP program,
         such as: rental or purchase of equipment, insurance, information systems necessary to
         track and implement beneficiaries of HOME-ARP activities in accordance with the
         requirements of this Notice, utilities, office supplies, and rental and maintenance (but
         not purchase) of office space.

    e.   Costs of administering HOME-ARP TBRA and HOME-ARP supportive services
         programs.

    Staff and overhead costs of the PJ directly related to carrying outa HOME-ARP project, in
    accordance with 24 CFR 92.207(b).

. The provision of information and other resources to residents and citizen organizations
  participating in the planning, implementation, or assessment of projects being assisted with
  HOME-ARP funds.

.   Activities to affirmatively further fair housing (AFFH) in accordance with 24 CFR 5.151
    and the PJ’s certification as required under this Notice and 24 CFR 5.152. The AFFH
    definition in HUD’s Interim Final Rule entitled, “Restoring Affirmatively Furthering Fair
    Housing Definitions and Certifications” (86 FR 30779, June 10, 2021), as amended, at 24
    CFR 5.151, and the AFFH certification requirement, at 24 CFR 5.152, available at
    https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/202 1/06/10/2021-12114/restoring-affirmatively-
    furthering-fair-housing-definitions-and-certifications.

. Indirect costs may be charged to the HOME-ARP program under a cost allocation plan
  prepared in accordance with 2 CFR part 200, subpart E, as amended.

. Preparation of the HOME-ARP allocation plan as required in this Notice.         Preparation
    includes the costs of public hearing, consultations, and publications.

    Costs of complying with the applicable Federal requirements in 24 CFR part 92, subpart H.
    Project-specific environmental review costs may be charged as administrative or project
    costs in accordance with 24 CFR 92.206(d)(8) and is at the discretion of the PJ.


                                                  19
Funds available under the HOME-ARP appropriation for administration and planning may not
be used to pay costs attributable to the regular HOME Program.

PJs may provide all or a portion of its HOME-ARP administrative funds to subrecipients and
contractors that are administering activities on behalf of the PJ (e.g., CoC entity, other non-
Federal entity), in accordance with the requirements in this Notice. However, from the
obligation date of the HOME-ARP funds in the HOME-ARP Grant Agreement and prior to
HUD’s acceptance of the PJ’s HOME-ARP allocation plan, a subrecipient or contractor to the
PJ may only incur and expend HOME-ARP funds for eligible administrative and planning costs
if the subrecipient or contractor is responsible for the use of the PJ’s entire HOME-ARP award
and has executed a HOME-ARP written agreement that complies with 24 CFR 92.504 and this
Notice. The PJ must also identify the subrecipient or contractor administering the PJ’s entire
HOME-ARP award and describe the subrecipient or contractor’s responsibilities in the PJ’s
HOME-ARP allocation plan.

All costs must comply with the Cost Principles contained in subpart E of the Uniform
Administrative Requirements, Cost Principles, and Audit Requirements for Federal Awards at 2
CFR part 200, as amended (Uniform Administrative Requirements).

Once HUD obligates the HOME-ARP funds, as described in Section VII.C.2 of this Notice, the
PJ may incur and expend up to 5 percent of its HOME-ARP allocation on eligible
administrative and planning costs, as described in this section and 24 CFR 92.207. Before
HUD’s acceptance of the PJ’s HOME-ARP allocation plan, the PJ is only permitted to incur and
expend HOME-ARP funds on eligible administrative and planning costs.

If the PJ does not submit   a HOME-ARP allocation plan or if the PJ’s plan is not accepted within
a reasonable period of time, as determined by HUD, all HOME-ARP          administrative and
planning costs incurred by the PJ will be ineligible costs and any HOME-ARP funds expended
by the PJ must be repaid to the PJ’s HOME Investment Trust Fund Treasury account, in
accordance with guidance issued by HUD. Moreover, if the PJ’s HOME-ARP allocation plan
does not identify or include a description of the responsibilities of the subrecipient or contractor
that is responsible for the PJ’s entire HOME-ARP award, if applicable, the administrative and
planning costs incurred or expended by the subrecipient or contractor will also be ineligible and
any HOME-ARP funds expended by the PJ’s subrecipient or contractor must be repaid to the
PJ’s HOME Investment Trust Fund Treasury account, in accordance with guidance from HUD.

B. HOME-ARP Rental Housing

HOME-ARP      funds may be used to acquire, rehabilitate, or construct affordable rental housing
primarily for occupancy by households of individuals and families that meet the definition of
one or more of the qualifying populations described in Section IV.A of this Notice (“qualifying
households’’). Unlike the regular HOME Program, which targets HOME-assisted rental units
based on tenant income, 70 percent of all HOME-ARP        units will admit households based only
upon their status as qualifying households. This complicates the underwriting and operation of
projects that include HOME-ARP units. As a result, the requirements for HOME-ARP rental
housing provide significant flexibilities to enable HOME-ARP rental projects to remain

                                                 20
financially viable and affordable for the qualifying populations throughout the minimum
compliance period.

Eligible HOME-ARP rental housing includes “housing” as defined at 24 CFR 92.2, including
but not limited to manufactured housing, single room occupancy (SRO) units, and permanent
supportive housing. Emergency shelters, hotels, and motels (including those currently operating
as non-congregate shelter), facilities such as nursing homes, residential treatment facilities,
correctional facilities, halfway houses, and housing for students or dormitories do not constitute
housing in the HOME-ARP program. However, HOME-ARP funds may be used to acquire and
rehabilitate such structures into HOME-ARP rental housing.

Developing financially feasible rental housing for qualifying households is challenging in the
absence of project-based rental assistance. Most HOME-assisted rental projects rely on tenant
rents to cover all or a portion of the debt service and project operating costs. Most HOME-ARP
qualifying households will be unable to pay a rent that covers allocated debt service or
operating costs, requiring PJs to use other techniques to determine that HOME-ARP units are
affordable and that projects containing HOME-ARP units are sustainable throughout the
minimum compliance period. PJs are encouraged to work with local PHAs and other state or
local agencies to obtain project-based rental assistance for units funded with HOME-ARP. In
the absence of such project-based rental assistance, the HOME-ARP units for qualifying
households may require substantial capital investment through HOME-ARP and other Federal,
state, local, or private sources to eliminate debt service on the units. ARP suspended the
maximum per-unit subsidy limit for HOME-ARP units, enabling HOME-ARP funds to pay the
entire cost to acquire, rehabilitate and/or construct the HOME-ARP    rental units, eliminating the
need for the HOME-ARP units to support debt. In mixed-income developments, revenue from
market rate or higher income-restricted units may also provide an internal subsidy to cover a
portion of the operating costs of HOME-ARP units.

To address these challenges and maintain affordability, HUD is using its HOME-ARP statutory
authority to:

   e   Establish alternative rent requirements to 24 CFR 92.252(b) and extend an owner’s
       ability to charge the maximum rent permissible under a rental assistance program (to
       units occupied by recipients of tenant-based rental assistance (e.g., Housing Choice
       Vouchers, HOME TBRA, HOME-ARP TBRA).
   e   Establish a minimum compliance period of 15 years for all HOME-ARP rental units
       irrespective of the amount of subsidy per unit or whether the units are acquired,
       rehabilitated, and/or newly constructed.
   e   Permit the use of HOME-ARP funds to provide ongoing operating cost assistance or
       capitalize a project operating cost assistance reserve to address operating deficits of the
       HOME-ARP units restricted for qualifying households during the compliance period.
   e   Allow not more than 30 percent of the total number of rental units assisted with HOME-
       ARP funds by the PJ to be restricted to households that are low-income as defined in 24
       CFR 92.2 (“low-income households’). These units may only be located in projects
       containing HOME-ARP units restricted for qualifying households. The HOME-ARP
       rental units occupied by low-income households must operate under the regulations
       applicable to HOME rental units at 24 CFR 92.252 (i.e., be occupied by low-income
                                                 21
          households and bearing a rent not greater than the lesser of a. the Fair Market Rent for
          existing housing for comparable units in the area, as established by HUD, or b. a rent
          equal to 30 percent of the adjusted income of a family with annual income at 65 percent
          of median income for the area, as determined by HUD, with adjustments for the number
           of bedrooms in the unit).

1.   Targeting and Occupancy Requirements: ARP requires HOME-ARP activities to
     primarily benefit households in the qualifying populations. To improve the feasibility and
     maintain the long-term viability of projects with HOME-ARP rental units for qualifying
     households, a PJ may invest HOME-ARP funds in units that are not restricted for occupancy
     solely for qualifying populations as described in this section. Specifically, participating
     jurisdictions must comply with the following requirements:

     a.    Targeting: HOME-ARP         funds can only be invested in units restricted for qualifying
          households or low-income households as follows:

          i.     Not less than 70 percent of the total number of rental units assisted with HOME-
                 ARP funds by the PJ must be restricted for occupancy by households that are
                 qualifying households at the time of the household’s initial occupancy; and,

          ii.   Not more than 30 percent of the total number of rental units assisted with HOME-
                ARP funds by the PJ may be restricted to low-income households. These rental
                units do not have to be restricted for occupancy by qualifying households, however
                rental units restricted to low-income households are only permitted in projects that
                include HOME-ARP units for qualifying households.

     b.    Occupancy Requirements:


          i.    Qualifying Households. Units restricted for occupancy by qualifying households
                must be occupied by households that meet the definition of a qualifying population
                at the time of admission to the HOME-ARP unit. A qualifying household after
                admission retains its eligibility to occupy a HOME-ARP rental unit restricted for
                qualifying populations, irrespective of the qualifying household’s changes in income
                or whether the household continues to meet the definition of a qualifying population.
                As such, a unit restricted for a qualifying household remains in compliance with the
                HOME-ARP unit restriction as long as the unit is occupied by a qualifying
                household that met the definition of a qualifying population at the time of admission.

          ii.   Low-Income Households.        At initial occupancy, units restricted for low-income
                households must be occupied by households that meet the definition of low-income
                in 24 CFR 92.2. If a tenant’s income increases above the applicable low-income
                limit during the compliance period, the unit will be considered temporarily out of
                compliance. Noncompliance requires the PJ to take action in accordance with the
                rent and unit mix requirements in Sections VI.B.15 and VI.B.17 of this Notice,
                respectively.



                                                      22
2.   Eligible Activities:   A PJ may use HOME-ARP       funds for acquisition, construction, and
     rehabilitation, including reconstruction as defined in 24 CFR 92.2, of affordable rental
     housing for qualifying and low-income households. Acquisition of vacant land or
     demolition must be undertaken only with respect to a particular housing project intended to
     provide HOME-ARP rental housing within the timeframes provided in Section VI.B. of this
     Notice. A HOME-ARP rental project must meet the definition of project in 24 CFR 92.2.

     HOME-ARP funds may be used to assist one or more units in a project. Only the eligible
     development costs of the HOME-ARP units may be charged to the HOME-ARP program.
     Cost allocation in accordance with 24 CFR 92.205(d)(1) is required if the assisted and non-
     assisted units are not comparable. After project completion, the number of HOME-ARP
     units in a project cannot be reduced. During the HOME-ARP minimum compliance period
     and prior to the end of the HOME-ARP budget period, a PJ may invest additional HOME-
     ARP funds to provide operating cost assistance but is prohibited from investing additional
     HOME-ARP funds for capital costs except within the 12 months after project completion.
     A qualifying household admitted to a HOME-ARP rental unit may still recetve HOME-ARP
     supportive services or TBRA in accordance with the requirements in this Notice.

3.   Forms of Assistance: The PJ may invest HOME-ARP funds in accordance with the
     eligible forms of assistance described in 24 CFR 92.205(b). Each PJ has the right to
     establish the terms of assistance, subject to the HOME-ARP requirements described in this
     Notice.

4.   Minimum Amount of Assistance: The minimum amount of HOME-ARP funds that must
     be invested in a rental housing project is $1,000 times the number of HOME-ARP-assisted
     units in the project as established in 24 CFR 92.205(c).

5.   Eligible Costs:   HOME-ARP funds may be used to pay for up to 100% of the following
     eligible costs associated with the acquisition, development, and operation of HOME-ARP
     rental units:

     a.   Development hard costs — defined in 24 CFR 92.206(a).

     b.   Refinancing — the cost to refinance existing debt secured by a rental project that is being
          rehabilitated with HOME-ARP funds in accordance with 24 CFR 92.206(b)(2) and the
          PJ’s HOME-ARP refinancing guidelines, as stated in their HOME-ARP Allocation Plan.

     c.   Acquisition — the costs of acquiring improved or unimproved real property.

     d.   Related soft costs — defined in 24 CFR 92.206(d).

     e.   Relocation costs — as defined in 24 CFR 92.206(f), 24 CFR 92.353, and described in this
          Notice.

     f.   Costs relating to payment of loans — If the HOME-ARP funds are not used to directly
          pay acost specified in this HOME-ARP rental housing section, but are used to pay off a

                                                  23
construction loan, bridge financing loan, or guaranteed loan, the payment of principal
and interest for such loan is an eligible cost only if: (1) the loan was used for eligible
costs specified in this HOME-ARP      rental housing section, and (2) the HOME-ARP
funds are part of the original financing for the project and the project meets the
requirements of this Notice.

Operating Cost Assistance — A PJ may pay ongoing operating cost assistance or
capitalize an operating cost assistance reserve for HOME-ARP.-assisted units restricted
for occupancy by qualifying populations in a project where the PJ determines in its
underwriting that the reserve is necessary to maintain the HOME-ARP units’ long-term
operational feasibility.   However, HOME-ARP      funds cannot be used for both a
capitalized operating cost assistance reserve and ongoing payments for operating cost
assistance during the minimum compliance period. The allowable amount of the reserve
shall not exceed the amount determined by the PJ to be necessary to provide operating
cost assistance for HOME-ARP units restricted for occupancy by qualifying populations
for the 15-year HOME-ARP minimum compliance period.

The operating cost assistance reserve for HOME-ARP units for qualifying households
must be held by the project owner in a separate interest-bearing account and sized, based
on an analysis of projected deficits remaining after the expected payments toward rent
by qualifying households are applied to the units’ share of operating costs. Funds in a
capitalized operating cost assistance reserve can only be drawn to address operating
deficits associated with HOME-ARP units restricted for occupancy by the qualifying
populations. A PJ must use the definition of operating costs in this Notice in its
calculation of operating deficits to determine the amount of HOME-ARP funds needed
for an operating cost assistance reserve or when providing operating cost assistance.
Unexpended operating cost assistance reserve amounts remaining at the end of the
minimum compliance period must be returned in accordance with Section VI.B.24 of
this Notice.

A PJ may provide operating cost assistance to a HOME-ARP rental project to cover an
operating deficit associated with HOME-ARP units restricted for occupancy by
qualifying households except for when an operating cost assistance reserve is already
established for the project. Operating cost assistance committed to a project cannot be
provided beyond the HOME-ARP budget period, as described in Section VIII.C.4 of this
Notice.

Operating costs include costs for administrative expenses, property management fees,
insurance, utilities, property taxes, and maintenance of a unit that is designated as a
HOME-ARP.-assisted unit and required to be occupied by a qualifying household. .
Operating costs must be reasonable and appropriate for the area, size, population(s)
served, and type of project.
Project administrative expenses include payroll costs, which are gross salaries and
wages paid to employees assigned to the property, including payroll taxes, employee
compensation, and employee benefits; employee education, training, and travel;
advertising; and general administrative costs which are costs for goods and services
                                          24
        required for administration of the housing, including rental or purchase of equipment,
        supplies, legal charges, bank charges, utilities, telephone/internet services, insurance,
        and other administrative costs that are reasonable and customary for the general
        administration of a rental unit occupied by qualifying populations. HOME-ARP permits
        the pro-rated staffing costs of a Resident Services Coordinator to be included in the
        operating costs allocated to a HOME-ARP unit for low-income or qualifying households
        if such costs are not already paid by another source. Typically, the role of a Resident
        Services Coordinator is to arrange community activities for residents and link residents
        to outside service agencies as needed.

        A property management fee includes the total fee paid to a management agent by the
        owner for the day-to-day management of a HOME-ARP rental unit restricted for
        occupancy by qualifying populations. A management agent must cover its costs of
        supervising and overseeing operations of a HOME-ARP unit out of the fee they receive.

        A reserve for replacement must be based on the useful life of each major system and
        expected replacement cost in a HOME-ARP project. Scheduled payments to a reserve
        for replacement of major systems included in the operating costs allocated to a HOME-
        ARP unit restricted for a qualifying household may be made from the operating cost
        assistance reserve. A reserve for replacement allocated to the HOME-ARP units may
        also be capitalized in the initial year of the minimum compliance period of the HOME-
        ARP units. HOME-ARP funds cannot be used to both capitalize a reserve for
        replacement and provide payments to the reserve for replacement from a capitalized
        operating reserve during the minimum compliance period.
        Supportive services costs are not eligible operating costs of HOME-ARP units, however,
        qualifying households occupying HOME-ARP rental units may receive supportive
        services through the HOME-ARP supportive services eligible activity.

6.   Prohibited Activities and Fees: HOME-ARP may not be used for any of the prohibited
     activities, costs or fees in 24 CFR 92.214, as revised by the Appendix to this Notice.

7.   HOME-ARP      Funds and Public Housing:       HOME-ARP      funds must be used in accordance
     with the requirements in 24 CFR 92.213(a)-(c).

8.   Commitment: The affordable housing requirements in the definition of Commitment in 24
     CFR 92.2, including the provisions in (2) Commit to a specific local project, apply to rental
     housing units assisted with HOME-ARP funds. This includes but is not limited to the
     requirements that the PJ and project owner have an executed legally binding written
     agreement under which HOME-ARP assistance will be provided to the owner for an
     identifiable project for which all necessary financing has been secured, a budget and
     schedule have been established, and underwriting has been completed and under which
     construction is scheduled to start within 12 months of the agreement date.

9.   Maximum Per-Unit Subsidy and Limitations on Costs: The maximum per-unit subsidy
     established in NAHA does not apply to HOME-ARP units. PJs may pay up to 100 percent
     of the eligible and reasonable HOME-ARP costs allocated to a HOME-ARP unit, including
                                                 25
   operating cost assistance associated with units restricted for occupancy by qualifying
   households. All costs paid by HOME-ARP funds must comply with the requirements of
   this Notice and the Cost Principles at 2 CFR part 200, subpart E_of the Uniform
   Administrative Requirements, as amended.

10. Underwriting, Subsidy Layering: Before the PJ can commit HOME-ARP funds to a
    project, it must evaluate the project to determine the amount of HOME-ARP capital subsidy
    and operating cost assistance necessary to provide quality affordable housing that meets the
    requirements of this Notice and is financially viable throughout the minimum 15-year
    HOME-ARP compliance period. The PJ must evaluate the project in accordance with
    underwriting and subsidy layering guidelines it has developed for HOME-ARP projects.

   The PJ’s project underwriting must include an in-depth review of underlying project
   assumptions, development sources and uses, and projected operating income and expenses,
   and the project’s long-term financial viability to determine the project’s need for HOME-
   ARP assistance while preventing over-subsidization of the project. HUD anticipates that
   project developers will rely on Low-Income Housing Tax Credit (LIHTC) financing,
   HOME funds, Housing Trust Fund grants, project-based vouchers, project-based rental
   assistance, operating cost reserves, state or local sources, or a combination of these and
   other resources to create a feasible HOME-ARP project and maintain compliance with
   HOME-ARP requirements. HOME-ARP units for qualifying households that do not receive
   a commitment of project-based vouchers or project-based rental assistance may require both
   deep capital subsidy and operating cost assistance to remain financially sustainable for the
   minimum    15-year HOME-ARP      compliance period.    However, the PJ, through its
   underwriting, must also determine that the HOME-ARP capital and operating subsidies do
   not result in over-subsidization of the project.

   To secure HOME-ARP rental units for qualifying households, HOME-ARP funds may be
   invested in different types of projects, including permanent supportive housing, mixed-
   finance affordable housing, and market-rate projects. While the viability of the HOME-
   ARP units is the PJ’s primary concern, it must not limit its underwriting analysis to the
   HOME-ARP units. The long-term viability of HOME-ARP units is contingent upon the
   financial health of the entire project. PJs must therefore take a holistic approach to
   underwriting that examines the overall feasibility of the entire project to determine that the
   property will be financially sustainable for the duration of the 15-year HOME-ARP
   compliance period.

   For projects that will receive operating cost assistance through a capitalized operating cost
   assistance reserve or on-going operating cost assistance for a specific period, the on-going
   operating cost assistance or operating cost assistance reserve must be included in the
   underwriting. Unless placed into an operating cost assistance reserve, operating cost
   assistance committed to a project for a specific period cannot be provided beyond the budget
   period, as described in Section VIUI.C.4. of this Notice. HOME-ARP units that have
   commitments for a form of project-based rental assistance must be underwritten with the
   projected rental assistance and not with operating cost assistance. An operating cost
   assistance reserve must be sized based on an analysis of projected operating deficits

                                                26
remaining after the expected payments toward rent by qualifying households are applied to
the HOME-ARP unit's share of operating costs. While a PJ may offer on-going project
operating cost assistance instead of providing an operating cost assistance reserve, it may
find this approach makes it more difficult to develop HOME-ARP units.

a.   Underwriting and Subsidy Layering Guidelines: PJs must develop standardized
     underwriting guidelines for HOME-ARP rental projects. These guidelines must provide
     for underwriting that accommodates and is appropriate for different types of projects.
     For example, a standard market analysis does not provide the necessary data for a
     project where 100% of the units are restricted as permanent supportive housing for
     qualifying populations. In contrast, if a mixed-income property relies on rental income
     from market-rate units to subsidize the operating costs of permanent supportive housing
     units for which little or no tenant-paid rental income is projected, then a market study
     confirming that the proposed market rents are achievable is needed to demonstrate the
     long-term financial viability of the project.

     PJs with existing HOME rental underwriting standards may use these standards as the
     foundation for their HOME-ARP underwriting guidelines, but all PJs are required to
     develop and implement standardized underwriting guidelines for HOME-ARP that
     require the following:
      i.   An examination of the sources and uses of funds for the project and a determination
           that costs are necessary and reasonable. In examining a project’s proposed sources
           and uses, a PJ must determine the amount of HOME-ARP development subsidy
           required to fill the gap between other committed funding sources and the cost to
           develop the project.

           A developer fee is a permitted development cost under the HOME-ARP program,
           but the PJ must review the fee and determine that it is reasonable. A PJ may set
           limits on the developer fee and other fees (e.g., asset management fee, property
           management fee) to be paid by HOME-ARP funds that differ from other funding
           sources (e.g., LIHTC underwriting standards).

     ii.   An assessment of the current market demand for the proposed project.
            (1) For HOME-ARP units for qualifying households, a market assessment is not
                required. Rather, the PJ can demonstrate that there is unmet need among
                qualifying populations for the type of housing proposed through their gap
                analysis, CoC data, public housing and affordable housing waiting lists, point-
                in-time surveys, housing inventory count, or other relevant data on the need for
                permanent housing for the qualifying populations.
            (2) For projects containing units restricted for occupancy by low-income
                households or market-rate households, the PJ must conduct a market
                assessment in accordance with 24 CFR 92.250(b)(2). A third-party market
                assessment completed by the developer or another funder meets this
                requirement, but the PJ must review the assessment and provide a written,
                dated acknowledgement that it accepts the assessment’s findings and
                conclusions. The market assessment and the PJ’s written, dated
                                               27
                 acknowledgement must be retained for recordkeeping purposes.

      ii.   Review of and determination that the developer’s experience and financial capacity
            are satisfactory based on the size and complexity of the project. When assessing the
            developer, the PJ must review, at minimum, prior experience with similar projects
            and the current capacity to develop the proposed project. When determining
            whether the developer has the financial capacity to undertake the project, the PJ
            should examine financial statements and audits to determine the developer’s net
            worth, portfolio risk, pre-development funding, and liquidity.

      iv.   Firm written financial commitments for the project.

       v.   Acareful review of the project’s operating budget, including the basis for
            assumptions, projections of a project’s net operating income, and reasonably
            expected changes in revenue and expenses during the minimum compliance period,
            to determine if any HOME-ARP-funded operating cost assistance is necessary and if
            applicable, an operating cost assistance reserve is sized appropriately. Operating
            income of the project must be sufficient to cover operating expenses throughout the
            minimum compliance period. For HOME-ARP units for qualifying households, the
            proforma or budget projections should include any anticipated ongoing operating
            cost assistance or draws from an operating cost assistance reserve, if applicable, that
            will offset operating deficits associated with those units to demonstrate sufficient
            operating support.
             (1) If project-based vouchers or project-based rental assistance is or will be
                 awarded, this analysis must include that rental assistance revenue because
                 operating cost assistance cannot be used for units for qualifying households with
                 project-based vouchers or project-based rental assistance.
             (2) A PJ’s underwriting standards may permit projects to generate reasonable net
                 operating income throughout the minimum compliance period. However,
                 HOME-ARP operating cost assistance may only be used to offset operating
                 deficits, in accordance with the requirements of this Notice. Net operating
                 income resulting from HOME-ARP operating cost assistance is not permitted
                 and must be prohibited in the written agreement between the participating
                 jurisdiction and the owner.

      vi.   An assessment of the project’s overall viability through the minimum compliance
            period based on the households (.e., qualifying households, low-income households,
            market-rate households) it will serve.

11. Property Standards: HOME-ARP rental units must comply with all property standards
    applicable to rental projects required in 24 CFR 92.251 paragraphs (a) new construction, (b)
   rehabilitation projects, (c)(1) and (2) acquisition of standard housing, (e) manufactured
   housing, and (f) on-going property condition standards.

12. Determining Household Income: The PJ must require all HOME-ARP units to be
    restricted for eligible households (1.e., either qualifying or low-income households)

                                                 28
throughout the minimum compliance period. Qualifying households are eligible for
admission to HOME-ARP rental units solely by meeting the definition of one of the
qualifying populations (i.e, HOME-ARP does not impose income restrictions on units
restricted for qualifying populations). If there is no income requirement in the qualifying
population’s definition, a PJ is not required to perform an initial determination of household
income except as necessary to determine an affordable rental contribution by the qualifying
household or to establish eligibility for another funding source in the unit that imposes
income restrictions (e.g., LUHTC). Each subsequent year during the compliance period,
starting 1 year after initial occupancy, the PJ must use the definition of annual income as
defined in 24 CFR 5.609 to examine the income of qualifying households to determine the
household’s contribution to rent.   For low-income households, the PJ must use the definition
of annual income as defined in 24 CFR 5.609 to examine the household’s income at initial
occupancy and each subsequent year during the compliance period to determine the
household’s ongoing income eligibility and applicable rental contribution.

a.   Qualifying populations: For purposes of establishing the qualifying household’s rental
     contribution after initial occupancy, a PJ must examine a HOME-ARP qualifying
     household’s income using 24 CFR 92.203(a)(1)@) or ii), starting 1 year after initial
     occupancy. Each year during the minimum compliance period, the owner must examine
     the household’s annual income in accordance with any one of the options in 24 CFR
     92.203(a)(1) specified by the PJ. A project owner who re-examines household income
     through a statement and certification in accordance with 24 CFR 92.203(a)U)Gi), must
     examine the income of each household, tn accordance with 24 CFR 92.203(a)(1)(i),
     every sixth year of the compliance period. Otherwise, an owner who accepts the
     household’s statement and certification in accordance with 24 CFR 92.203(a)C)(i) is
     not required to examine the household’s income unless there is evidence that the
     household’s written statement failed to completely and accurately state information
     about the household’s size or income.

b.   Low-income Households: In accordance with 24 CFR 92.252(h), the income of each
     low-income household must be determined initially in accordance with 24 CFR
     92.203(a)(1)G), and each year following the initial determination during the minimum
     compliance period in accordance with any one of the options in 24 CFR 92.203(a)(.)
     specified by the PJ. An owner who re-examines household income through a statement
     and certification in accordance with 24 CFR 92.203(a)U)Gi), must examine the income
     of each household, in accordance with 24 CFR 92.203(a)(1)G), every sixth year of the
     minimum compliance period. Otherwise, an owner who accepts the household’s
     statement and certification in accordance with 24 CFR 92.203(a)(1)Gi) is not required to
     examine the household’s income unless there is evidence that the household’s written
     statement failed to completely and accurately state information about the household’s
     size or income.

c.   Households Assisted by Other Programs:       Notwithstanding paragraphs (a) and (b), if a
     family is applying for or living in a HOME-ARP.-assisted rental unit, and the unit is
     assisted by a Federal or State project based rental subsidy then a PJ must accept a public
     housing agency, section 8 project owner, or CoC recipient or subrecipient’s

                                             29
        determination of the family’s annual income and adjusted income under that program’s
        rules and does not need to obtain source documentation in accordance with 24 CFR
        92.203(a)C.) or calculate the annual income of the family. If a family is applying for or
        living ina HOME-ARP rental unit, and the family is assisted by a Federal tenant-based
        rental assistance program (e.g. housing choice vouchers) then a PJ may choose to accept
        the rental assistance provider’s determination of the family’s annual and adjusted
        income under that program’s rules without need for review under 24 CFR 92.203(a)(1).

13. Rent limitations:   This Notice establishes rent limits for HOME-ARP       units restricted for
   qualifying populations and for units that may be restricted for low-income households.

   a.   Units Restricted for Occupancy by Qualifying Households: In no case can the HOME-
        ARP rents exceed 30% of the adjusted income of a household whose annual income is
        equal to or less than 50% of the median income for the area, as determined by HUD,
        with adjustments for number of bedrooms in the unit. HUD will publish the HOME-
        ARP rent limits on an annual basis.

        Notwithstanding the foregoing, a unit that receives a Federal or state project-based rental
        subsidy and is occupied by a qualifying household that pays as a contribution to rent no
        more than 30 percent of the household’s adjusted income, may charge the rent allowable
        under the Federal or state project-based rental subsidy program (i.e., the tenant rental
        contribution plus the rental subsidy allowable under that program). If a household
        receives tenant-based rental assistance, the rent is the rent permissible under the
        applicable rental assistance program (1.e., the tenant rental contribution plus the rental
        subsidy allowable under that rental assistance program).

        The rent limits for HOME-ARP units for qualifying households include the rent plus the
        utility allowance established pursuant to Section VI.B.13.d of this Notice.

        Rent limitations — low-income households: HOME-ARP rental units occupied by low-
        income households must comply with the rent limitations in 24 CFR 92.252(a) (Le., the
        lesser of the Fair Market Rent for existing housing for comparable units in the area, as
        established by HUD, or a rent equal to 30 percent of the income of a family at 65
        percent of median income for the area, as determined by HUD, with adjustments for
        number of bedrooms in the unit). Notwithstanding the foregoing, when a household
        receives a form of Federal tenant-based rental assistance (e.g., housing choice vouchers),
        the rent is the rent permissible under the applicable rental assistance program (i.e., the
        tenant rental contribution plus the rent subsidy allowable under the rental assistance
        program). The rent limits for low-income households apply to the rent plus the utility
        allowance established pursuant to Section VI.B.13.d of this Notice.

        Rent limitations — Single Room Occupancy (SRO) Units: A HOME-ARP rental project
        may consist of SRO units. For the purposes of HOME-ARP rental, a SRO unit is
        defined as a unit that is the primary residence of the occupant(s) and must at least
        contain sanitary facilities but may also contain food preparation facilities. A project’s


                                                 30
        designation as a SRO cannot be inconsistent with the building’s zoning and building
        code classification.

        If the SRO units have both sanitary and food preparation facilities, the maximum
        HOME-ARP rent is based on the zero-bedroom fair market rent. If the SRO unit has
        only sanitary facilities, the maximum HOME-ARYFP rent is based on 75 percent of the
        zero-bedroom fair market rent. The rent limits for SRO units must also include the
        utility allowance established pursuant to Section VI.B.13.d of this Notice.

   d.   Initial Rent Schedule and Utility Allowance: The PJ must establish maximum
        allowances for utilities and services and update the allowances annually. The PJ may
        adopt the utility allowance schedule of the PHA.

        The PJ must review and approve the HOME-ARP rents proposed by the owner, subject
        to the HOME-ARP rent limitations. For HOME-ARP units where the tenant is paying
        utilities and services (e.g., trash collection), the PJ must determine that the rent for the
        unit does not exceed the maximum rent minus the monthly allowance for utilities and
        services.

14. Tenant Contribution to Rent — Qualifying Households: The PJ must determine that the
    qualifying household’s contribution to rent is affordable to the qualifying household based
    on a determination of the household’s income. If the household is receiving project-based
   or tenant-based rental assistance, the household cannot be required to contribute more
   towards rent than the amount permitted by the requirements of the applicable rental
   assistance program (See Section VI.B.13.a of this Notice). If a qualifying household is not
   receiving project-based or tenant-based rental assistance and cannot contribute any income
   toward rent, or the contribution is insufficient to cover the unit rent, the project owner may
   draw from the project’s operating cost assistance reserve if projected rental revenue minus
   the operating costs of the unit results in a deficit. If an operating cost assistance reserve was
   not capitalized at project completion:
         e The PJ may provide ongoing HOME-ARP operating cost assistance to cover the
           operating deficits associated with units occupied by qualifying households, subject
           to the requirements in this Notice.
         e The qualifying household may receive HOME-ARP TBRA to remain housed in the
           HOME-ARP rental unit or the PJ may offer, in conjunction with a qualifying
            household’s admittance into     a HOME-ARP     rental unit, a simultaneous award of
            supportive services to the qualifying household in accordance with Section VI.D of
            this Notice. Any provision of supportive services must comply with all requirements
            of Section VI.D. of the Notice and the PJ’s policies and procedures.
          e Operating cost assistance, HOME-ARP TBRA, and supportive services funds
            committed to a project cannot be provided beyond the budget period for the HOME-
            ARP funds, as described in Section VIII.C.4 of this Notice.

15. Changes in Income and Over-income Households:
    A household that met the definition of one of the HOME-ARP qualifying populations at
    initial occupancy and whose annual income at the time of income re-certification is above

                                                  31
   50 percent of median income for the area but at or below 80 percent of the median income
   for the area must pay the rent specified in 24 CFR 92.252(a),

   HOME-ARP.-assisted units restricted for low-income households continue to qualify as
   HOME-ARP rental housing despite a temporary noncompliance caused by increases in the
   incomes of existing households if actions satisfactory to HUD are taken so that all vacancies
   are filled in accordance with HOME-ARP      requirements until the noncompliance is
   corrected.

   A qualifying or low-income household that is not low-income at the time of income re-
   certification (1.e., whose income is above 80 percent of the median income for the area)
   must pay rent that complies with the over income regulatory requirements at 24 CFR
   92.252(i)(2), which includes requirements applicable to HOME units that also have LIHTC
   restrictions.

16. Unit Designation: The PJ must determine the number of HOME-ARP units in the project
    restricted for qualifying households and low-income households, respectively, and whether
    the units are fixed or floating units at the time of project commitment. The total number of
    HOME-ARP rental units restricted for occupancy by qualifying households and the total
    number of HOME-ARP rental units restricted for low-income households must be identified
    as separate totals in the written agreement. In a project containing HOME-ARP and other
    units, the PJ must designate fixed or floating HOME-ARP units in accordance with 24 CFR
    92.252(j). The PJ must maintain this unit mix throughout the compliance period.

17. Maintaining Unit Mix: At the time of admission to a HOME-ARFP rental unit, a household
    must meet the definition for at least one qualifying population or be determined to be a low-
    income household, depending on the applicable HOME-ARP restriction on the rental unit to
    which it is being admitted and in accordance with the written agreement.

   For HOME-ARP rental units restricted for occupancy by qualifying populations, a
   household that meets the definition of a qualifying population at the time of admission
   retains its eligibility to occupy a HOME-ARP rental unit restricted for occupancy by
   qualifying populations, irrespective of changes in income or whether the household
   continues to meet the definition of a qualifying population after initial occupancy. As an
   example, a household that qualifies as “Homeless” at admission does not meet the Homeless
   definition once the household occupies a HOME-ARP unit but remains a qualifying
   household and is eligible to remain in a HOME-ARP rental unit restricted for qualifying
   populations. Income determinations for qualifying households are therefore only for
   purposes of establishing a qualifying household’s rental contribution as described in Section
   V1B.15 of this Notice and not for maintaining continued eligibility in the HOME-ARP
   program. In a project with floating units, PJs are encouraged but not required to shift the
   HOME-ARP qualifying population designation to another unit to serve another qualifying
   household if the household’s income subsequently is certified to be at or above 80 percent
   AMI and the household no longer meets the definition of any qualifying population.



                                               32
   For HOME-ARP rental units restricted for occupancy by low-income households, units will
   be considered temporarily out of compliance if the household’s income increases above 80
   percent of area median income. The requirements for correcting any noncompliance using
   vacancies or redesignation of units depends on whether the HOME-ARP rental units are
   fixed or floating and whether other funding sources (e.g., LIHTC) impose income or other
   restrictions on the units.   Please note, in accordance with the requirements in 24 CFR 92.253
   and in Section VI.B.19.c, an increase in a tenant’s income does not constitute good cause to
   evict or refuse to renew a tenant’s lease, regardless of program requirements associated with
   other funding sources such as LIHTC. In addition, compliance with unit restrictions for
   low-income households requires adjustment of rents as described in Section VI.B.15 of this
   Notice.

18. Minimum Compliance Period: HOME-ARP-assisted units must comply with the
    requirements of this Notice for a minimum period of 15 years, irrespective of the amount of
    HOME-ARP funds invested in the project or the activity being undertaken. A PJ may
    impose a longer compliance period but should plan for the project’s financial feasibility for
    the longer period without HOME-ARP funds. The PJ may not use HOME-ARP funds to
    provide operating cost assistance, including a capitalized operating cost assistance reserve,
    to cover deficits during a PJ’s extended compliance period.

   If a project-based rental assistance Housing Assistance Payments (HAP) contract is awarded
   to a HOME-ARP rental project, a PJ must impose a minimum compliance period that is the
   greater of 15 years or the term of the HAP contract. PJs are also encouraged to extend
   restrictions for occupancy of the HOME-ARP units in accordance with the requirements in
   this section to match the term of eligible HAP contract renewals.

   The provisions at 24 CFR 92.252(e)(1)-(4) apply, including the requirement that the PJ must
   impose the HOME-ARP rental requirements through a deed restriction, covenant running
   with the land, legally binding agreement restricting the use of the property and recorded on
   the property in accordance with State recordation laws, or other mechanisms approved by
   HUD. The chart providing minimum affordability periods based on rental housing activity
   that is contained in 24 CFR 92.252(e) does not apply. The enforceable restriction must
   provide that units assisted with HOME-ARP comply with the requirements of this Notice
   throughout the minimum 15-year compliance period, including:

   a.   Units restricted for qualifying populations must be occupied by households that met the
        definition of a qualifying population at the time of initial occupancy. The household’s
        contribution toward rent during this period must be affordable in accordance with
        Section VI.B.14 of this Notice. The rents for these units must comply with the rent
        limitations established in this Notice, including the rent provisions specified in 24 CFR
        92.252(i)(2) for households whose income increases above 80 percent of area median
        income and whose contribution to rent complies with the requirements in Section
        VIB.15.

   b.   Units available for low-income households must be continuously occupied by
        households who are income eligible. The rents for these units must comply with the rent

                                                 33
        limitations established in this Notice, including the rent provisions specified in 24 CFR
        92.252(i)(2) for households whose income increases above 80 percent of area median
        income.

   c.   The units must comply with the ongoing property condition standards of 24 CFR
        92.251(f) throughout the compliance period as demonstrated by an on-site inspection
        within 12 months of project completion and an on-site inspection at least once every
        three years thereafter as required by 24 CFR 92.504.

   d.   Each household that occupies a HOME-ARP unit has an executed lease that complies
        with the tenant protections required in Section VI.B.19 of this Notice.

19. Tenant Protections: PJs must verify that each household that occupies a HOME-ARP
    assisted unit has an executed lease that complies with the tenant protection requirements of
    this Notice. The lease must be either be between the project owner and the household or
    between the project owner and a HOME-ARP sponsor with a sublease between the
    qualifying household and HOME-ARP sponsor. A HOME-ARP sponsor is a nonprofit
    organization that provides housing or supportive services to qualifying households and
    facilitates the leasing of a HOME-ARP rental unit to a qualifying household or the use and
    maintenance of HOME-ARP TBRA by a qualifying household. PJs may permit a HOME-
    ARP sponsor to lease a HOME-ARP unit from an owner or execute a master lease with the
    owner of a HOME-ARP project for HOME-ARP units restricted for occupancy by
    qualifying households. The HOME-ARP sponsor may then sublease the HOME-ARP rental
    unit to the qualifying household. The sublease between the HOME-ARP sponsor and the
    qualifying household must comply with the rent limitations and tenant protection
    requirements of this Notice.

   a.   Lease Requirement: There must be a lease between the qualifying household or the low-
        income household and the owner of the HOME-ARP.-assisted project in accordance with
        24 CFR 92.253(a), except that a sublease is permitted if a HOME-ARP sponsor has
        executed a master lease or lease with the project owner for the leasing of the units
        restricted for occupancy by qualifying households.

   b.   Prohibited Lease Terms: The lease between the low-income household, qualifying
        household, or HOME-ARP sponsor and the HOME-ARP project owner or the sublease
        between the HOME-ARP sponsor and a qualifying household may not contain any of
        the prohibited lease terms specified in 24 CFR 92.253(b).

   c.   Termination of tenancy: An owner may not terminate the tenancy or refuse to renew the
        lease of a tenant of a HOME-ARP unit or of a HOME-ARP sponsor with a sublease with
        a qualifying household except for serious or repeated violation of the terms and
        conditions of the lease; for violation of applicable Federal, State, or local laws; or for
        other good cause. Similarly, a HOME-ARP sponsor may not refuse to renew a sublease
        with a qualifying household except for serious or repeated violation of the terms and
        conditions of the sublease; for violation of applicable Federal, State, or local laws; or for


                                                  34
       other good cause. An increase in the tenant’s or sublessee’s income does not constitute
       good cause.

       In addition, if HOME-ARP funds were or are used to capitalize an operating cost
       assistance reserve or there is a current contract for the PJ to provide operating cost
       assistance to the project, an owner may not terminate the tenancy or refuse to renew the
       lease of a qualifying household because of the household’s inability to pay rent during
       the minimum compliance period. A qualifying household’s inability to pay rent shall
       mean that the qualifying household cannot pay more than 30 percent of the qualifying
       household’s income toward rent, based on an income determination made by the PJ in
       the last 30 days.

       Where there is no capitalized operating reserve or other operating cost assistance to
       cover the operating deficit fora HOME-ARP unit occupied by a qualifying household,
       the PJ may assist the qualifying household with HOME-ARP TBRA or supportive
       services in accordance with the requirements of this Notice.

       The above tenant protections are necessary as HOME-ARP requires the PJ to perform
       underwriting that reviews the operating feasibility of units occupied by qualifying
       households for the 15-year compliance period to determine how HOME-ARP funds may
       address the potential for qualifying households to have little to no income to contribute
       toward rent.

       To terminate or refuse to renew tenancy for any household occupying a HOME-ARP
       unit, the owner must serve written notice upon the tenant (and the HOME-ARP sponsor
       if the lease is between an owner and HOME-ARP sponsor) at least 30 days before
       termination of tenancy, specifying the grounds for the action. In the case of a sublease,
       to terminate or refuse to renew tenancy of a qualifying household, the HOME-ARP
       sponsor, in accordance with the policy established by the PJ, must notify the PJ in
       advance of serving written notice to the qualifying household and must serve written
       notice upon the qualifying household at least 30 days before termination of tenancy,
       specifying the grounds for the action.
20. Coordinated Entry and Project-Specific Waitlists: In accordance with Section IV.C of
    this Notice, PJs must determine whether an owner may use a CoC’s CE, a CoC’s CE and
    other referral sources, or a project-specific waitlist, to select qualifying households for
    HOME-ARP units restricted for occupancy by qualifying populations. PJs will make this
    determination on a project-by-project basis. Regardless of which method is selected, in all
    cases, the PJ must use a project-specific waitlist when selecting households to occupy units
    restricted for occupancy by low-income households. Any preferences among qualifying
    households must be disclosed in the HOME-ARP allocation plan through the PJ’s public
    participation process in accordance with Section V.C. of this Notice. The written agreement
    between the PJ and the project owner must specify the method the owner must use for
    selecting qualifying households for admission to HOME-ARP units.

       a.   The owner of a HOME-ARP rental project must adopt and follow written tenant
            selection policies and criteria for HOME-ARP units that:

                                               35
             i.   Limits eligibility to households that meet one of the HOME-ARP qualifying
                  populations definitions or low-income households in accordance with HOME-
                  ARP requirements; Preferences for households in one or more of the HOME-
                  ARP qualifying populations must comply with the PJ’s preferences and the PJ’s
                  policies and procedures for applying those preferences, if any, and must not
                  violate nondiscrimination requirements in 24 CFR 92.350.
            ii.   Do not exclude an applicant with a voucher under the section 8 Housing Choice
                  Voucher Program (24 CFR 982), or an applicant participating in HOME,
                  HOME-ARP          or other Federal, state or local tenant-based rental assistance
                  program because of the status of the prospective tenant as a holder of such a
                  certificate, voucher, or comparable tenant-based assistance document;
           ii.    Limits eligibility or gives a preference to a particular qualifying population or
                  segment of the qualifying population if permitted in its written agreement with
                  the participating jurisdiction (and only if the limitation or preference is described
                  in the participating jurisdiction's HOME-ARP allocation plan). A preference for
                  households in one or more of the HOME-ARP qualifying populations must
                  comply with the PJ’s determined preference(s) and the PJ’s policies and
                  procedures for applying the preference(s), if any;
           iv.    Any limitation or preference must not violate nondiscrimination requirements in
                  24 CFR 92.350. If the PJ requires the use of a project-specific waitlist to select
                  qualifying households and/or low-income households for occupancy of HOME-
                  ARP units, provide for the selection of households from a written waiting list in
                  the chronological order of their application, insofar as is practicable;
            v.    Gives prompt written notification to any rejected applicant of the grounds for any
                  rejection; and,
           vi.    Complies with the VAWA requirements as described in 24 CFR 92.359,

      b.      Project-Specific Waitlist — Low-Income Households: A project owner must use a
              project-specific waitlist to select households to occupy units restricted for occupancy
              by low-income households in accordance with the tenant selection requirements of
              24 CFR 92.253(d).

21. Project Completion and Occupancy: HOME-ARP rental projects must meet the
    definition of project completion at 24 CFR 92.2. If the PJ fails to complete a project within
    4 years of project commitment, it must comply with the terminated project requirements at
    24 CFR 92.205(e)(2). If the HOME-ARP units are not occupied by eligible qualifying
    households or low-income households within six months following project completion, the
    PJ, as applicable, must submit to HUD information on its efforts to coordinate with a CoC,
   homeless service providers, social service, and other public agencies to fill units for
   qualifying households or must submit marketing information and, if appropriate, a
   marketing plan to fill units for low-income households. The PJ must repay any HOME-
   ARP funds invested in units that are not rented to eligible qualifying or low-income
   households within 12 months of project completion.

22. Penalties for Noncompliance: The PJ must repay HOME-ARP funds invested in rental
    housing that is terminated before completion or otherwise does not comply with initial or
    ongoing requirements of this Notice during the compliance period, as follows:
                                                       36
   a.   Ifthe noncompliance or termination occurs within the first 10 years of the compliance
        period, the PJ must repay the entire amount of HOME-ARP funds invested in the
        project.

   b.   Ifthe noncompliance or termination occurs in years 11 through 15, the repayment
        amount will be reduced by 20 percent for each year beyond the initial 10-years during
        which time the project was compliant.

   Repayment of the HOME-ARP funds is not required if the project owner sells or transfers,
   either voluntarily or involuntarily, the HOME-ARP project during the compliance period if
   (1) the HOME-ARP      restrictions remain, (2) the project and new project owner continues to
   comply with all HOME-ARP requirements, and (3) any HOME-ARP funds remaining in a
   project’s operating cost assistance reserve or reserve for replacement remain with the project
   and convey upon sale or transfer of the project as a restricted operating cost assistance
   reserve or reserve for replacement subject to HOME-ARP Notice requirements.

23. Operating Cost Assistance Reserve - Management and Oversight: The PJ must require
    that any HOME-ARP funds expended for project operating cost assistance reserves are held
    by the project owner in a separate interest-bearing account. The PJ must require the project
    owner to request written approval from the PJ prior to disbursing funds from the project
    operating cost assistance reserve. The PJ must review each requested distribution from the
    operating cost assistance reserve, including supporting documentation, to determine that the
    distribution is reasonable and necessary to cover the operating deficit associated with
    HOME-ARP units occupied by qualifying households. The PJ must, no less than annually,
    review the operating cost assistance reserve account to determine that the account is
    appropriately sized based on the projected operating deficits of HOME-ARP units restricted
    for occupancy by qualifying households. The PJ may require the project owner to enter into
    a deposit account control agreement for the operating cost assistance reserve where the PJ
    must approve disbursements from the account.

24. End of Compliance Period and Return of Operating Cost Assistance Reserve: Any
    unexpended operating cost assistance reserve remaining at the end of the compliance period
    must be returned as follows:

   a.   Ifthe HOME-ARP rental project will continue to operate in accordance with the
        HOME-ARP requirements and serve qualifying households beyond the HOME-ARP 15-
        year compliance period as demonstrated by enforceable restrictions imposed by the PJ,
        the project can retain the operating cost assistance reserve amount to address any
        operating deficits associated with the HOME-ARP units occupied by qualifying
        households.

   b.   If the HOME-ARP project will not continue to operate in accordance with the HOME-
        ARP requirements and serve qualifying households beyond the 15-year HOME-ARP
        compliance period and the HOME-ARP grant has expired or is closed out, the remaining
        operating cost assistance reserve funds must be deposited in the PJ’s local HOME


                                               37
          account and recorded as HOME program income receipt in the Integrated Disbursement
          and Information System (IDIS) and used for eligible costs under 24 CFR part 92.

C. Tenant-Based Rental Assistance (TBRA)

HOME-ARP funds may be used to provide tenant-based rental assistance to qualifying
households (““HOME-ARP TBRA”). In HOME-ARP TBRA, the PJ assists a qualifying
household with payments to cover the entire or insufficient amounts that the qualifying
household cannot pay for housing and housing-related costs, such as rental assistance, security
deposits, and utility deposits. HOME-ARP TBRA assisted households may choose to rent a
unit ina HOME-ARP rental project or any other eligible rental unit. HOME-ARP TBRA is a
form of rental assistance that is attached to the household and not a particular rental unit.
Therefore, the HOME-ARP TBRA assisted household may choose to move to another unit with
continued HOME-ARP TBRA as long as the new unit meets the applicable property standards
of this Notice.   If a HOME-ARP    TBRA assisted household chooses to move, the rental
assistance contract terminates and a new rental assistance contract for the new unit will be
executed according to HOME-ARP TBRA requirements. The HOME-ARP TBRA assisted
household must notify the PJ before moving in order to receive continued HOME-ARP TBRA.

1.    Tenant Selection: Only individuals and families in the qualifying populations are eligible
     to receive HOME-ARP TBRA assistance. PJs must perform tenant selection in accordance
     with Section IV.C of this Notice. The PJ must select qualifying households for HOME-
     ARP TBRA in accordance with written tenant selection policies and criteria that are based
     on local housing needs established in the HOME-ARP allocation plan. The PJ must follow
     written tenant selection policies and criteria that:
     a. Limit eligibility to households that meet one of the HOME-ARP qualifying populations
         definitions in accordance with HOME-ARP requirements. Preferences for households
         in one or more of the HOME-ARP qualifying populations, if any, must comply with the
         preferences and/or method of prioritization in the PJ’s HOME-ARP allocation plan and
         the PJ’s policies and procedures for applying such preferences, if any, and must not
         violate nondiscrimination requirements in 24 CFR 92.350.
     b. Ifthe PJ selects HOME-ARP TBRA applicants off a waiting list, it must provide for the
         selection of qualifying households from a written waiting list in accordance with the
         PJ’s preferences or method of prioritization in the chronological order of their
         application, insofar as is practicable.
     c. Give prompt written notification to any rejected applicant of the grounds for any
          rejection, and
     d.   Comply with the VAWA requirements as described in 24 CFR 92.359.

     Finally, the PJ may offer, in conjunction with HOME-ARP TBRA assistance, a
     simultaneous award of services in accordance with Section VI.D of this Notice, and also
     provide particular types of other nonmandatory services that may be most appropriate for
     persons with a special need or a particular disability. Any provision of supportive services
     must comply with all requirements of Section VI.D of the Notice and the PJ’s policies and
     procedures.


                                                 38
. Tenant Protections: PJs must require and verify that there is an executed lease between the
  qualifying household that receives HOME-ARP TBRA and the owner of the rental unit or
  between the owner of the rental unit and a HOME-ARP sponsor with a sublease between the
  qualifying households and the HOME-ARP sponsor, in accordance with 24 CFR 92.253(a).
  A HOME-ARP sponsor is a nonprofit organization that provides housing or supportive
  services to qualifying households and facilitates the leasing of a rental unit to a qualifying
  household or the use and maintenance of HOME-ARP TBRA by a qualifying household.
  PJs may permit a HOME-ARP sponsor, as defined in Section VI.B.19, to execute a lease or
  master lease with a project owner. The HOME-ARP sponsor must then sublease a unit to a
  qualifying household. The lease between the qualifying household and the rental unit owner
  or the sublease between the HOME-ARP sponsor and the qualifying household cannot
  contain any of the prohibited lease terms specified in 24 CFR 92.253(b).

.   Eligible Costs:   Eligible costs under HOME-ARP      TBRA include rental assistance, security
    deposit payments, and utility deposit assistance to qualifying households. HOME-ARP
    funds may be used to pay for up to 100% of these eligible costs. A PJ may use HOME-ARP
    TBRA funds to provide loans or grants to qualifying households for security deposits for
    rental units regardless of whether the PJ provides any other HOME-ARP TBRA assistance.
    The amount of funds that may be provided for a security deposit may not exceed the
    equivalent of two months’ rent for the unit. Utility deposit assistance is an eligible cost only
    if rental assistance or a security deposit payment is provided. Costs of inspecting the
    housing are also eligible as costs of HOME-ARP TBRA. Administration of HOME-ARP
    TBRA is an eligible cost only if executed in accordance with general management oversight
    and coordination at 24 CFR 92.207(a), except that the costs of inspecting the housing and
    determining the income eligibility of the family are eligible project costs under HOME-ARP
    TBRA.

. Ineligible Costs; HOME-ARP TBRA may not be used to pay for the homebuyer program
  as defined at 24 CFR 92.209(c)(2)(v).

. Portability of Assistance: A PJ may require the HOME-ARP TBRA assisted household to
  use HOME-ARP TBRA within the PJ's boundaries or may permit the household to use the
  assistance outside its boundaries pursuant to 24 CFR 92.209(d).

. Term of Rental Assistance Contract: The requirements at 24 CFR 92.209(e) defining the
  term of the rental assistance contract for providing assistance with HOME funds are waived
  for HOME-ARP TBRA. The PJ must determine the maximum term of the rental assistance
  contract. The rental assistance contract continues until the end of the rental assistance
    contract term, as determined by the PJ, or until the lease or sublease is terminated,
    whichever occurs first. The term of the rental assistance contract may be renewed, subject to
    the availability of HOME-ARP funds. The term of the rental assistance contract must begin
    on the first day of the term of the lease or sublease. HOME-ARP TBRA funds cannot be
    used after the end of the budget period.

. Maximum Subsidy: The PJ must establish policies for the allowable maximum subsidy,
  which may differ from the maximum subsidy requirements at 24 CFR 92.209(h). PJs may

                                                 39
   provide up to 100 percent subsidy for rent, security deposit payments, and utility bills. The
   PJ must also establish policies for determining any household contribution to rent based on a
   determination of the qualifying household’s income.

   Rent Standard: Consistent with 24 CFR 92.209(h)(3), PJs must also establish a rent
   standard for HOME-ARP TBRA by unit size that is based upon local market conditions or
   the section 8 Housing Choice Voucher program under 24 CFR part 982. The PJ must
   determine whether the rent fora HOME-ARP TBRA household complies with the rent
   standard established by the PJ for the HOME-ARP program and must disapprove a lease if
   the rent does not meet the PJ’s rent standard for HOME-ARP TBRA.

   Housing Quality Standards: Housing occupied by a household receiving HOME-ARP
   TBRA must comply with all housing quality standards required in 24 CFR 982.401 (or
   successor inspection standards issued by HUD) unless the tenant is residing in a HOME or
   HOME-ARP unit, in which case the PJ may defer to initial and ongoing inspection
   standards.

10. Program Operation: The PJ may operate HOME-ARP TBRA itself or may contract with a
    PHA or other entity with the capacity to operate a rental assistance program. In either case,
    the PJ or entity operating the program must approve the lease. HOME-ARP TBRA may be
    provided through an assistance contract with (1) an owner that leases a unit to a qualifying
   household; (2) the qualifying household, or (3) an owner and the qualifying household in a
   tri-party contract. In the case of HOME-ARP TBRA provided in coordination with a
   HOME-ARP sponsor, as described below, the PJ may require that payments be made
   directly to the HOME-ARP sponsor that will make rental payments to the owner on behalf
   of the qualifying household or require payments directly to the owner of the unit.

11. HOME-ARP TBRA with           a HOME-ARP Sponsor:          HOME-ARP TBRA may be provided
   in coordination with   a HOME-ARP      sponsor.    As defined in Section VI.B.19,   a HOME-ARP
   sponsor is a nonprofit organization that provides housing or supportive services to
   qualifying households and facilitates the leasing of a HOME-ARP rental unit to a qualifying
   household or the use and maintenance of HOME-ARP TBRA by a qualifying household. A
   HOME-ARP sponsor may make rental subsidy payments and a security deposit payment on
   behalf of a qualifying household. Under HOME-ARP TBRA, a qualifying household may
   reside in housing leased by a HOME-ARP sponsor if there is a sublease that complies with
   HOME-ARP lease requirements between the HOME-ARP sponsor and the qualifying
   household.

   a.   Rental Assistance Contract: There must be a rental assistance contract between the PJ
        and at least one of the following:
        e HOME-ARP sponsor;
        e Qualifying household; or
        e Owner of the housing.

        Rental subsidy payments are made on behalf of the HOME-ARP TBRA household
        pursuant to a rental assistance contract. The rental assistance contract continues until the

                                                 40
        lease is terminated or the term of the rental assistance contract expires (and is not
        renewed). Regardless of the role of the HOME-ARP sponsor, the HOME-ARP TBRA
        household has the right to continued HOME-ARP TBRA assistance if the household
        chooses to move from the unit. HOME-ARP TBRA funds cannot be used beyond the
        end of the HOME-ARP budget period.

        The HOME-ARP sponsor may only receive the TBRA subsidy directly from the PJ on
        behalf of the qualifying household if the rental assistance contract is between the
        HOME-ARP sponsor and the PJ or the HOME-ARP sponsor and the PJ have entered
        into a written agreement as outlined below. The HOME-ARP sponsor must make rental
        subsidy payments to the owner on behalf of the qualifying household per the terms and
        conditions of the HOME-ARP TBRA contract or written agreement with the PJ. When
        the HOME-ARP     TBRA assisted household moves to a new unit, the HOME-ARP
        sponsor is not required to continue its sponsor relationship with the HOME-ARP TBRA
        assisted household for the new rental unit but may do so with the consent of the HOME-
        ARP TBRA household.

        The PJ must establish policies and procedures regarding termination of HOME-ARP
        TBRA assistance for qualifying households who are absent from the rental unit for a
        minimum of 60 days and where a HOME-ARP sponsor is leasing the rental unit and
        subleasing to the qualifying household or providing HOME-ARP TBRA rental subsidy
        payments on behalf of the household.

   b.   Lease and Sublease: PJs must require and verify that each household that receives
        HOME-ARP TBRA assistance has an executed lease that complies with the tenant
        protection requirements of this Notice. The lease agreement may be between the project
        owner and the HOME-ARP TBRA household, or PJs may permit a HOME-ARP
        sponsor to execute a lease with an owner for an individual unit or a master lease for
        more than one unit restricted for occupancy by HOME-ARP TBRA households. If the
        lease agreement is between the HOME-ARP sponsor and owner, the HOME-ARP
        sponsor must execute a sublease agreement with a HOME-ARP TBRA household. The
        sublease between the HOME-ARP sponsor and the HOME-ARP TBRA household must
        meet the tenant protection requirements of this Notice.

   c.   Written Agreement with     HOME-ARP Sponsor: The PJ must enter into a written
        agreement with the HOME-ARP sponsor if the HOME-ARP TBRA rental assistance
        contract is not with the HOME-ARP sponsor and the HOME-ARP sponsor will receive
        the HOME-ARP TBRA subsidy directly from the PJ. The written agreement must
        specify the requirements for the HOME-ARP sponsor receiving the HOME-ARP TBRA
        subsidy on behalf of the qualifying household and the HOME-ARP sponsor’s obligation
        to provide the HOME-ARP TBRA payment to the owner for the unit’s required rent.

12. Project Completion: Project completion fora HOME-ARP TBRA project means the final
    drawdown has been disbursed for the project.



                                               41
D. Supportive Services

HOME-ARP funds may be used to provide a broad range of supportive services to qualifying
individuals or families as a separate activity or in combination with other HOME-ARP
activities.   Supportive services include: a) services listed in section 401(29) of the McKinney-
Vento Homeless Assistance Act (“McKinney-Vento Supportive Services”)! (42 U.S.C.
11360(29)); b) homelessness prevention services , as described in Section VI.D.3. and D.4
below; and c) housing counseling services.

1.   Eligible Program Participants: Supportive services may be provided to individuals and
     families who meet the definition of a qualifying population under Section IV.A of this
     Notice and who are not already receiving these services through another program. Program
     participants in other HOME-ARP activities are eligible for supportive services under this
     Notice in accordance with policies and procedures developed by the PJ. These policies and
     procedures should identify the length of time that program participants may be served by
     HOME-ARP TBRA and/or HOME ARP rental housing before they will no longer be
     eligible as a qualifying population for purposes of this section.

2.   Client Selection: HOME-ARP funds may only be used to provide supportive services to
     individuals or families that meet the definition of a qualifying population in Section IV.A of
     this Notice. PJs must develop policies and procedures for the selection of program
     participants for services under this section of the Notice that comply with Section IV.C and
     this section of this Notice.

3.   Eligible Supportive Services under HOME-ARP:                 There are three categories specifically
     included as supportive services under HOME-ARP:

     a.   McKinney-Vento Supportive Services:         McKinney-Vento Supportive Services under
          HOME-ARP      are adapted from the services listed in section 401(29) of McKinney-
          Vento.

     b.   Homelessness Prevention Services. HOME-ARP Homelessness Prevention Services are
          adapted from eligible homelessness prevention services under the regulations at 24 CFR
          576.102, 24 CFR 576.103, 24 CFR 576.105, and 24 CFR 576.106, and are revised,
          supplemented, and streamlined in Section VI.D.4.c.i below.

     c.   Housing Counseling Services: Housing counseling services under HOME-ARP are
          those consistent with the definition of housing counseling and housing counseling
          services defined at 24 CFR 5.100 and 5.111, respectively, except where otherwise noted.
          The requirements at 24 CFR 5.111 state that any housing counseling, as defined in 24
          CFR 5.100, required under or provided in connection with any program administered by
          HUD shall be provided only by organizations and counselors certified by the Secretary
          under 24 CFR part 214 to provide housing counseling, consistent with 12 U.S.C. 1701x.


' The Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021 (P.L. 116-260) enacted changes that renumbered section 401(27) to
(29) of McKinney-Vento.
                                                      42
   HUD-approved Housing Counseling Agencies can be found on HUD’s website at:
   http://portal.hud.gov/hudportal/HUD?src=/program_offices/housing/sth/hcc.

Program requirements and administration under 24 CFR part 214 apply to the provision of
HOME-ARP Housing Counseling supportive services except those provisions related to
current homeowners do not apply. Eligible HOME-ARP topics under Housing Counseling
include but are not limited to the following examples:

Rental Housing                Pre-Purchase Homebuying          Homeless Services Topics
Counseling Topics             Topics                           (24 CFR 214.300(e)(5))
(24 CFR 214.300(e)(4))        (24 CFR 214.300(e)(1))
   HUD rental and rent         Advice regarding readiness       Homeless assistance
   subsidy programs            and preparation                  information regarding
                                                                emergency shelter

 Other federal, state, or     Federal Housing                   Other emergency services
 local assistance             Administration insured
                              financing
 Fair housing                 Housing selection and             Transitional housing
                              mobility
 Rental search assistance     Housing search assistance         Referral to local, state, and
                                                                federal resources (24 CFR
                                                                214.300(b)(2))

 Landlord tenant laws         Fair housing and predatory
                              lending
 Lease terms                  Budgeting and credit

 Rent delinquency             Loan product comparison

 Referrals to local, state,   Purchase procedures and
 and federal resources        closing costs
                              Referrals to local, state, and
                              federal resources


Housing Counseling surrounding the following topics are ineligible under HOME-ARP:

   e   Resolving or preventing mortgage delinquency, including, but not limited to default
       and foreclosure, loss mitigation, budgeting, and credit;
   e   Home maintenance and financial management for homeowners, including, but not
       limited to: Escrow funds, budgeting, refinancing, home equity, home improvement,
       utility costs, energy efficiency, rights and responsibilities of homeowners, and
       reverse mortgages.

In accordance with 24 CFR 214.300(a)(2), housing counselors must establish an action plan
for each participating qualifying individual or family. Additionally, as per 24 CFR

                                              43
214.300(c), housing counselors must also make reasonable efforts to have follow-up
communications with participating qualifying individuals, when possible, to assure that the
individual or family is progressing toward the housing goal established in the plan, to
modify or terminate housing counseling, and to learn and report outcomes.


Eligible Costs of Supportive Services for Qualifying Individuals and Families: HOME-
ARP funds may be used to pay eligible costs associated with the HOME-ARP supportive
services activity in accordance with the requirements in this Notice. Eligible costs that may
be paid using HOME-ARP funds are limited to only those identified in Section VI.D.4.c
below. Any ineligible costs paid using HOME-ARP funds must be repaid in accordance
with the requirements of this Notice.

HUD has used its discretion in ARP to include eligible costs for supportive services that are
necessary to assist the qualifying populations, prevent homelessness, or to enable qualifying
households to obtain and maintain housing. The list of eligible costs associated with
McKinney-Vento Supportive Services and Homelessness Prevention Services is in Section
VI.D.4.c.i of this Notice.

While all qualifying households are eligible to receive supportive services under this
activity, the PJ must establish requirements for documenting eligible costs for an individual
or family in a qualifying population (as defined in Section IV.A of this Notice) as
McKinney-Vento supportive services, homelessness prevention services, or Housing
Counseling.

If a person is homeless, then the person is eligible to be provided the supportive services as
McKinney-Vento supportive services for the costs allowable in Section VI.D.4.c below. Ifa
person is housed and the supportive services are intended to help the program participant
regain stability in the program participant’s current permanent housing or move into other
permanent housing to achieve stability in that housing then the person is eligible for
homelessness prevention services for the costs allowable in Section VI.D.4.c.i below.
Housing Counseling services may be provided regardless of whether a person is homeless or
currently housed.

PJs must document in their files which types of supportive services they wish to offer
program participants. If PJs are using a supportive services provider, PJs must document in
their written agreements with supportive service providers whether they are authorizing
McKinney-Vento supportive services, homelessness prevention services, Housing
Counseling services or some combination of the three. Only the supportive services that are
authorized in the written agreement with the supportive service provider may be provided to
program participants by that supportive service provider and only program participants that
are eligible for those supportive services may be served. As such, supportive services
providers must demonstrate through their documentation that the individuals served were
eligible to receive the supportive services that were authorized under the written agreement
in order for those costs to be eligible.



                                            44
Consistent with the requirements in this section, the PJ may set a maximum dollar amount
that a program participant may receive for each type of service described in Section
VI.D.4.c. below and may also set a maximum period for which a program participant may
receive any of the types of assistance or services.

a.   Oversight of Eligible Costs: All supportive service costs paid for by HOME-ARP must
     comply with the requirements of this Notice, including requirements in 2 CFR part 200,
     subpart E, Cost Principles that require costs be necessary and reasonable. If a qualifying
     household is already receiving the same eligible supportive service or has been approved
     to receive the same service through another program or provider, the program participant
     does not have a need for the HOME-ARP service and the costs related to the service do
     not comply with the Cost Principles. The PJ is responsible for establishing requirements
     that allow a program participant to receive only the HOME-ARP services needed so
     there is no duplication of services or assistance in the use of HOME-ARP funds for
     supportive services. This may include the use of systems such as Homeless
     Management Information Systems in coordination with local supportive service
     providers, CoCs, and other nonprofit organizations.

b.   Direct provision of services: PJs contracting with service providers engaged directly in
     the provision of services under the HOME-ARP eligible supportive services categories,
     shall have written agreements or contracts that comply with the requirements of this
     Notice and, to the extent practicable, enter into agreements or contracts in amounts that
      cover the actual total program costs and administrative overhead to provide the services
      contracted.

     If the services outlined in paragraph c. below are being directly delivered by the PJ or a
     subrecipient, the following costs are eligible project delivery costs for those services:

      e   the costs of labor or supplies and materials incurred by the PJ or subrecipient in
          directly providing supportive services to program participants.
      e   the salary and benefit packages of the PJ and subrecipient staff who directly deliver
          the services.

     These project delivery costs must be attributable to the identifiable objective of the
     service delivered, otherwise they are administrative costs of the PJ or subrecipient.
c.   Eligible Costs:

     1.   Eligible Costs for McKinney Vento Supportive Services and Homelessness
          Prevention Services: Eligible costs for supportive services under either of these two
          categories include costs associated with the following services:

          (A)   Child care: The costs of child care for program participants, including
                providing meals and snacks, and comprehensive and coordinated
                developmental activities, are eligible. The child care center must be licensed
                by the jurisdiction in which it operates in order for its costs to be eligible. The
                following conditions also apply:

                                                45
      e      Children must be under the age of 13 unless the children have a disability.
      e      Children with a disability must be under the age of 18.

(B)   Education services: The costs of improving knowledge and basic educational
      skills are eligible costs including:

      e     Instruction or training in consumer education, health education, substance
            abuse prevention, literacy, English as a Second Language, and General
            Educational Development (GED).
      e      Screening, assessment, and testing; individual or group instruction;
            tutoring; provision of books, supplies, and instructional material;
             counseling; and referral to community resources.

(C)   Employment assistance and job training: The costs of establishing and/or
      operating employment assistance and job training programs are eligible,
      including classroom, online and/or computer instruction, on-the-job
      instruction, services that assist individuals in securing employment, acquiring
      learning skills, and/or increasing earning potential. The cost of providing
      reasonable stipends to program participants in employment assistance and job
      training programs is also an eligible cost.
      e Learning skills include those skills that can be used to secure and retain a
          job, including the acquisition of vocational licenses and/or certificates.
      e Services that assist individuals in securing employment consist of:
             =    Employment screening, assessment, or testing;
             #    Structured job skills and job-seeking skills;
             #    Special training and tutoring, including literacy training and pre-
                  vocational training;
             ="   Books and instructional material;
             =" Counseling or job coaching; and
             " Referral to community resources.

(D)       Food: The cost of providing meals or groceries to program participants is
          eligible.

(E)       Housing search and counseling services: Costs of assisting eligible program
          participants to locate, obtain, and retain suitable housing are eligible. Services
          are:
                Development of an action plan for locating housing;
                Housing search;
                  Tenant counseling;
                  Securing utilities;
                  Making moving arrangements;
                  Outreach to and negotiation with owners;
                  Assistance submitting rental applications and understanding leases;
                  Assessment of housing for compliance with HOME-ARP requirements
                  for TBRA assistance in Section VI.C of this Notice and financial
                                         46
          assistance for short-term and medium-term rental payments provided
          under Section VI.D.4.c.i.(R) below;
          Assistance obtaining utilities; and
          Tenant counseling;
          Mediation with property owners and landlords on behalf of eligible
          program participants;
          Credit counseling, accessing a free personal credit report, and resolving
          personal credit issues; and
          Payment of rental application fees;
          Other Housing counseling costs, as defined in 24 CFR 5.100, funded
          with or provided in connection with grant funds must be carried out in
          accordance with 24 CFR 5.111.

       Please Note: When PJs or subrecipients provide housing services to eligible
       persons that are incidental to a larger set of holistic case management
       services, these services do not meet the definition of Housing counseling,
       as defined in 24 CFR 5.100, and therefore are not required to be carried out
       in accordance with the certification requirements of 24 CFR 5.111.

(F)   Legal services: Eligible costs are the fees charged by licensed attorneys and
      by person(s) under the supervision of licensed attorneys, for advice and
      representation in matters that interfere with a qualifying individual or
      family's ability to obtain and retain housing.
           Eligible subject matters are child support; guardianship; paternity;
           emancipation; legal separation; orders of protection and other legal
          remedies for victims of domestic violence, dating violence, sexual
          assault, human trafficking, and stalking; appeal of veterans and public
          benefit claim denials; landlord-tenant disputes; and the resolution of
          outstanding criminal warrants; landlord/tenant matters, provided that the
          services must be necessary to resolve a legal problem that prohibits the
          program participant from obtaining permanent housing or will likely
          result in the program participant losing the permanent housing in which
          the program participant currently resides.
          Legal services for immigration and citizenship matters and for issues
          related to mortgages and homeownership are ineligible. Retainer fee
          arrangements and contingency fee arrangements are prohibited.
          Services may include client intake, receiving and preparing cases for
          trial, provision of legal advice, representation at hearings, and
          counseling.
          Fees based on the actual service performed (i.e., fee for service) are also
          eligible, but only if the cost would be less than the cost of hourly fees.
          Filing fees and other necessary court costs are also eligible. If the
          subrecipient is a legal services provider and performs the services itself,
          the eligible costs are the subrecipient’s employees’ salaries and other
          costs necessary to perform the services.

                                  47
(G)   Life skills training: The costs of teaching critical life management skills that
      may never have been learned or have been lost during the course of physical
      or mental illness, domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, stalking,
      human trafficking, substance abuse, and homelessness are eligible. These
      services must be necessary to assist the program participant to function
      independently in the community. Life skills training includes:
      e the budgeting of resources and money management, household
          management, conflict management, shopping for food and other needed
          items, nutrition, the use of public transportation, and parent training.

(H)   Mental health services: Eligible costs are the direct outpatient treatment of
      mental health conditions that are provided by licensed professionals.
      e Mental health services are the application of therapeutic processes to
          personal, family, situational, or occupational problems in order to bring
          about positive resolution of the problem or improved individual or family
          functioning or circumstances. Problem areas may include family and
          marital relationships, parent-child problems, or symptom management.
       e   Services are crisis interventions; counseling; individual, family, or group
           therapy sessions; the prescription of psychotropic medications or
           explanations about the use and management of medications; and
           combinations of therapeutic approaches to address multiple problems.

(1)   Outpatient health services: Eligible costs are the direct outpatient treatment of
      medical conditions when provided by licensed medical professionals
      including:
       e Providing an analysis or assessment of a program participant’s health
           problems and the development of a treatment plan;
       e Assisting program participants to understand their health needs;
       e Providing directly or assisting program participants to obtain and utilize
           appropriate medical treatment;
       e   Preventive medical care and health maintenance services, including in-
           home health services and emergency medical services;
       e   Provision of appropriate medication;
       e   Providing follow-up services; and
       e   Preventive and non-cosmetic dental care.

(J)   Outreach services: The costs of activities to engage qualified populations for
      the purpose of providing immediate support and intervention, as well as
      identifying potential program participants, are eligible.
      e Eligible costs include the outreach worker's transportation costs and a cell
          phone to be used by the individual performing the outreach.
      e Costs associated with the following services are eligible: initial
          assessment; crisis counseling; addressing urgent physical needs, such as
           providing meals, blankets, clothes, or toiletries; actively connecting and
           providing people with information and referrals to homeless and

                                    48
          mainstream programs; and publicizing the availability of the housing
          and/or services provided within the PJ’s geographic area.

(K)   Substance abuse treatment services: Eligible substance abuse treatment
      services are designed to prevent, reduce, eliminate, or deter relapse of
      substance abuse or addictive behaviors and are provided by licensed or
      certified professionals. The costs include:
      e Program participant intake and assessment;
          Outpatient treatment;
          Group and individual counseling
          Drug testing;
          Inpatient detoxification and other inpatient drug or alcohol treatment are
          ineligible.

(L)   Transportation:     Eligible costs are:
      e   The costs of program participant's travel on public transportation or in a
          vehicle provided by the PJ or subrecipient to and from medical care,
          employment, childcare, or other services eligible under this Notice;
      e   Mileage allowance for service workers to visit program participants and
          to carry out housing inspections;
      e   The cost of purchasing or leasing a vehicle in which staff transports
          program participants and/or staff serving program participants;
      e   The cost of gas, insurance, taxes, and maintenance for the vehicle;
      e   The costs of PJ or subrecipient staff to accompany or assist program
          participants to utilize public transportation; and
      e   If public transportation options are not sufficient within the area, the PJ
          may make a one-time payment on behalf of a program participant
          needing car repairs or maintenance required to operate a personal vehicle,
          subject to the following:
          =»    Payments for car repairs or maintenance on behalf of the program
                participant may not exceed 10 percent of the Blue Book value of the
                vehicle (Blue Book refers to the guidebook that compiles and quotes
                prices for new and used automobiles and other vehicles of all makes,
               models, and types);
          =»   Payments for car repairs or maintenance must be paid by the PJ or
               subrecipient directly to the third party that repairs or maintains the
               car; and
          »   PJs or subrecipients may require program participants to share in the
              cost of car repairs or maintenance as a condition of receiving
              assistance with car repairs or maintenance.
      e   The PJ must establish policies and procedures surrounding payments for
          the cost of gas, insurance, taxes, the one-time payment for car repairs or
          maintenance described above, and maintenance for vehicles of program
          participants. Such costs must be limited to program participants with the
          inability to pay for such costs and who, without such assistance, would
          not be able to participate in eligible services under this Section VI.D.4.c.i.
                                       49
(M)   Case management: The costs of assessing, arranging, coordinating, and
      monitoring the delivery of individualized services to meet the needs of the
      program participant(s) are eligible costs. PJs and subrecipients providing these
      supportive services must have written standards for providing the assistance.
      Eligible costs are those associated with the following services and activities:
          e Conducting the initial evaluation, including verifying and documenting
              eligibility, for individuals and families applying for supportive services;
          e Counseling;
          e Developing, securing, and coordinating services;
              Using a centralized or coordinated assessment system that complies with
              the requirements of Section IV.C of the Notice;
              Obtaining federal, State, and local benefits;
              Monitoring and evaluating program participant progress;
              Providing information and referrals to other providers;
              Providing ongoing risk assessment and safety planning with victims of
              domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, stalking, and human
              trafficking;
          e   Developing an individualized housing and service plan, including
              planning a path to permanent housing stability; and
          e   Conducting re-evaluations of the program participant's eligibility and the
              types and amounts of assistance the program participant needs.

(N)   Mediation: HOME-ARP funds may pay for mediation between the program
      participant and the owner or person(s) with whom the program participant is
      living, provided that the mediation is necessary to prevent the program
      participant from losing permanent housing in which the program participant
      currently resides.

(O)   Credit repair: HOME-ARP funds may pay for credit counseling and other
      services necessary to assist program participants with critical skills related to
      household budgeting, managing money, accessing a free personal credit report,
      and resolving personal credit problems. This assistance does not include the
      payment or modification of a debt.

(P)   Landlord/Tenant Liaison: Costs of liaison services between property
      managers/owners and program participants are eligible HOME-ARP costs and
      may include:
          e   landlord outreach;
          e   Physical inspections and rent reasonable studies as needed to secure
              units;
          e   Rental application fees and security deposits for clients, in accordance
              with the financial assistance costs requirements in (R);
          e   Mediation services in (N) for housing issues that may arise between
              owner, property manager, or other residents and clients;

                                        50
         e   Coordination or assistance with the provision of other HOME-ARP
             eligible services to assist clients to maintain permanent housing.

(Q)   Services for special populations: HOME-ARP funds may be used to provide
      services for special populations, such as victim services, so long as the costs of
      providing these services are eligible under this section. The term victim services
      means services that assist program participants who are victims of domestic
      violence, dating violence, sexual assault, stalking, or human trafficking including
      services offered by rape crisis centers and domestic violence shelters, and other
      organizations with a documented history of effective work concerning domestic
      violence, dating violence, sexual assault, stalking, or human trafficking.

(R)   Financial assistance costs: HOME-ARP funds may be used to pay housing
      owners, utility companies, and other third parties for the following costs, as
      applicable:

         e   Rental application fees: Rental housing application fee that is charged by
             the owner to all applicants.
         e   Security deposits: A security deposit that is equal to no more than 2
             months’ rent. This assistance is separate and distinct from the provision
             of financial assistance for First and Last Month’s rent provided under this
             section and cannot be used to duplicate those costs.
         e   Utility deposits: HOME-ARP funds may pay for a standard utility
             deposit or initiation fee required by the utility company or owner (if
             owner-paid utilities are provided) for all program participants for the
             following utilities:
             e   Gas
             e   Electric
             e   Water
             e   Sewer
         e   Utility payments: HOME-ARP funds may pay for up to 24 months of
             utility payments per program participant, per service, including up to 6
             months of utility payments in arrears, per service. A partial payment of a
             utility bill counts as one month. This assistance may only be provided if
             the program participant or a member of the same household has an
             account in his or her name with a utility company or proof of
             responsibility to make utility payments. Eligible utility services are gas,
             electric, water, and sewage. No program participant shall receive more
             than 24 months of utility assistance within any 3-year period.
         e   Moving costs; HOME-ARP funds may pay for moving costs, such as
             truck rental or hiring a moving company. This assistance may include
             payment of temporary storage fees for up to 3 months, provided that the
             fees are accrued after the date the program participant begins receiving
             assistance under this section of the Notice and before the program
             participant moves into permanent housing. Payment of temporary
             storage fees in arrears is not eligible.
                                       51
             First and Last month's rent: If necessary to obtain housing for a program
             participant, HOME-ARP funds may be used to make a pre-payment of
             the first and last month's rent under a new lease to the owner at the time
             the owner is paid the security deposit for the program participant’s
             tenancy in the housing. This assistance must not exceed two month's rent
             and must be tracked for purposes of determining the total short- and
             medium-term financial assistance for rent that the program participant
             may receive. This assistance is separate and distinct from financial
             assistance for Security Deposits provided under this section and cannot
             be used to duplicate those costs.
             Payment of rental arrears: HOME-ARP funds may be used for a one-
             time payment for up to 6 months of rent in arrears, including any late fees
             or charges on those arrears, if necessary for the household to maintain
             their existing housing or, for those without housing, if necessary to
             remove a demonstrated barrier to obtaining housing.

(S)   Short-term and medium-term financial assistance for rent: Subject to the
      following conditions, a PJ may provide a program participant with short-term or
      medium-term financial assistance for rent, provided that the total financial
      assistance provided, including any pre-payment of first and last month’s rent as
      described above, does not exceed 24 months of rental payments over any 3-year
      period.
              Short-term means up to 3 months.
              Medium-term means more than 3 months but not more than 24 months.
              The PJ may make rental payments only to an owner with whom the PJ
              has entered into a financial assistance agreement for rental payment. The
              financial assistance agreement must set forth the terms under which rental
              payments will be provided, including the requirements that apply under
              this Notice. The financial assistance agreement must provide that, during
              the term of the agreement, the owner must give the PJ a copy of any
              notice to the program participant to vacate the housing unit or any
              complaint used under State or local law to commence an eviction action
              against the program participant. The owner must serve written notice
              upon the program participant at least 30 days before termination of
              tenancy specifying the grounds for the action. Each financial assistance
              agreement that is executed or renewed must comply with the
              requirements in 24 CFR 92.359.
              The PJ must make timely payments to each owner in accordance with the
              financial assistance agreement. The financial assistance agreement must
              contain the same payment due date, grace period, and late payment
              penalty requirements as the program participant's lease. The PJ is solely
              responsible for paying late payment penalties that it incurs with non-
              HOME-ARP funds.
              e Rental payments cannot be provided unless the rent does not exceed
                   the Fair Market Rent established by HUD, as provided under 24 CFR
                                       52
                  part 888, and complies with HUD's standard of rent reasonableness,
                  as established under 24 CFR 982.507.
              e   Each program participant receiving financial assistance for rental
                  payments must have a legally binding, written lease for the rental
                  unit, unless the assistance is solely for rental arrears. The lease must
                  be between the owner and the program participant. Where the
                  financial assistance is solely for rental arrears, an oral agreement may
                  be accepted in place of a written lease, if the agreement gives the
                  program participant an enforceable leasehold interest under state law
                  and the agreement and rent owed are sufficiently documented by the
                  owner's financial records, rent ledgers, or canceled checks.   New
                  leases must have an initial term of 1 year unless a shorter period is
                  agreed upon by the program participant and owner. The lease
                  requirements in 24 CFR 92.359 apply to this financial assistance.
              e   PJs must establish requirements to prevent the provision of short- or
                  medium-term financial assistance for rent for the same period for
                  which a program participant is receiving rental assistance or living in
                  housing provided with ongoing assistance (such as project-based
                  rental assistance or operating subsidies).
              e   Ifa program participant receiving financial assistance for short- or
                  medium-term rental payments under this section meets the conditions
                  for an emergency transfer under 24 CFR 5.2005(e), HOME-ARP
                  funds may be used to pay amounts owed for breaking a lease to
                  effectuate an emergency transfer. These costs are not subject to the
                  24-month limit on rental payments.

      Ineligible costs - Financial assistance cannot be provided to a program
      participant who is receiving the same type of assistance through other public
      sources. Financial assistance also cannot be provided to a program participant
      who has been provided with replacement housing payments under the Uniform
      Relocation Assistance and Real Property Acquisition Policies Act of 1970, as
      amended (42 USC 4601 et seq.) and its implementing regulations at 49 CFR part
      24, or Section 104(d) of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974
      (42 USC 5304(d) and its implementing regulations at 24 CFR part 42, during the
      period of time covered by the replacement housing payments.

il.   Eligible Costs Associated with Housing Counseling under 24 CFR 5.100 and
      5.J11: Costs associated with housing counseling services as defined at 24 CFR
      5.100 and 5.111 are eligible under HOME-ARP.        As homeowner assistance and
      related services are not eligible HOME-ARP activities, costs for the provision of
      services related to mortgages and homeownership to existing homeowners are
      also not eligible under HOME-ARP. If a program participant is a candidate for
      homeownership, costs associated with pre-purchase homebuying counseling,
      education and outreach are eligible under HOME-ARP. Eligible costs are those
      costs associated with the services listed in 24 CFR part 214 and include, but are
      not limited to:

                                       53
                 (A)   Staff salaries and overhead costs of HUD-certified housing counseling
                       agencies related to directly providing eligible housing counseling services
                       to HOME-ARP program participants;
                 (B)   Development of a housing counseling workplan;
                 (C)   Marketing and outreach;
                 (D)   Intake;
                 (E)   Financial and housing affordability analysis;
                 (F)   Action plans that outline what the housing counseling agency and the client
                       will do to meet the client's housing goals and that address the client's
                       housing problem(s);
                 (G)   Follow-up communication with program participants.

5.   Termination of assistance to program participants:

     a.   Termination of assistance: The PJ may terminate assistance to a program participant
          who violates program requirements or conditions of occupancy or no longer needs the
          services as determined by the PJ. Termination under this section does not bar the PJ
          from providing further assistance at a later date to the same individual or family under
          this Notice.

     b.   Due process: The PJ must establish policies and procedures for termination of
          assistance to program participants. In terminating assistance to a program participant,
          the PJ must provide a formal process that recognizes the rights of individuals receiving
          assistance under the due process of law. This process, at a minimum, must consist of:
              i. Providing the program participant with a written copy of the program rules and
                  the termination process before the participant begins to receive assistance;
              ii. Written notice to the program participant containing a clear statement of the
                 reasons for termination;
             ii. A review of the decision, in which the program participant is given the
                 opportunity to present written or oral objections before a person other than the
                 person (or a subordinate of that person) who made or approved the termination
                 decision; and
             iv. Prompt written notice of the final decision to the program participant.

     During this process, the PJ must provide effective communication and accessibility for
     individuals with disabilities, including the provision of reasonable accommodations.
     Similarly, the PJ must provide meaningful access to persons with LEP.

6.   Commitment: For supportive services, commitment means that before disbursing any
     HOME-ARP funds to any entity, the PJ executed a legally binding written agreement that
     complies with HOME-ARP requirements with the contractor or subrecipient providing the
     supportive service (that includes the date of the signature of each person signing the
     agreement).

7.   Policies and Procedures: PJs must establish the following policies and procedures in
     compliance with this notice:

                                                  54
          Tenant selection procedures in accordance with Section IV.C.2 and this section;

          Eligibility of program participants in other HOME-ARP activities for supportive
          services under Section VI.D.4.c.i above including the length of time that program
          participants may be served by HOME-ARP TBRA and/or HOME ARP rental housing
          before they will no longer be eligible as a qualifying population for purposes of this
          section;

          If the PJ chooses to set maximum amounts and/or maximum periods for assistance or
          services, the maximum dollar amount that a program participant may receive for each
          type of service described in Section VI.D.4.c.1 above and/or maximum periods for
          which a program participant may receive any of the types of assistance or services
          under this section;

          Documentation of eligible costs;

          Requirements that allow a program participant to receive only the HOME-ARP services
          needed so there is no duplication of services or assistance in the use of HOME-ARP
          funds for supportive services;

          Payments for the cost of gas, insurance, taxes, the one-time payment for car repairs or
          maintenance described above, and maintenance for vehicles of program participants;

          Financial assistance for short-term and medium-term rental payments under this Notice,
          including requirements to prevent a duplication of rental or financial assistance
          provided to a program participant;

     h.   Housing stability case management; and

     1.   Termination of assistance to program participants.

8.   Project Completion: Project completion for a HOME-ARP Supportive Services project
     means the final drawdown has been disbursed for the project.

E. Acquisition and Development of Non-Congregate Shelter

A non-congregate shelter (NCS) is one or more buildings that provide private units or rooms as
temporary shelter to individuals and families and does not require occupants to sign a lease or
occupancy agreement. HOME-ARP funds may be used to acquire and develop HOME-ARP
NCS for individuals and families in qualifying populations. This activity may include but is not
limited to the acquisition of land and construction of HOME-ARP NCS or acquisition and/or
rehabilitation of existing structures such as motels, hotels, or other facilities to be used for
HOME-ARP NCS. HOME-ARP funds may not be used to pay the operating costs of HOME-
ARP NCS. Consequently, PJs must consider the availability of ongoing operating funds for the
HOME-ARP NCS so that the HOME-ARP NCS can remain viable through the restricted use
period specified in this Notice.


                                                  55
During the restricted use period, HOME-ARP         NCS may:

     e   Remain as HOME-ARP NCS in compliance with the requirements of this Notice.
     e   Be used as a non-congregate emergency shelter under the Emergency Solutions Grants
         (ESG) program (Subtitle B of title [V of the McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act)
         (42 USC 11371 et seq.), in which case the non-congregate shelter must be operated in
         compliance with all requirements at 24 CFR part 576 that apply when ESG funds are
         provided for operating costs or essential services in the shelter. During any period for
         which ESG funds are provided, the applicable ESG requirements shall govern in the
         event of any conflict with HOME-ARP requirements.
     e   Be converted to permanent affordable housing according to the requirements established
         in Section VLE.11 of this Notice.
     e   Be converted to permanent housing as defined in Subtitle C of title IV of the McKinney-
         Vento Homeless Assistance Act (42 USC 11381 et seq.) according to requirements of
         this Notice and 24 CFR part 578.

1.   Admission and Occupancy: HOME-ARP NCS units may only be occupied by individuals
     or families that meet the criteria for one or more of the qualifying populations as defined in
     Section IV.A. of this Notice. Where applicable, occupancy of NCS units by qualifying
     populations must be in accordance with the requirements in Section IV.C of this Notice.
     The PJ must not allow qualifying populations to be charged occupancy fees or other charges
     to occupy a HOME-ARP NCS unit unless the PJ determines such fees and charges to be
     customary and reasonable and the charges comply with 24 CFR 578.77(b).

     To ensure that access to HOME-ARP NCS by qualifying populations is effectively
     integrated with other assistance and services, PJs are encouraged to incorporate each
     HOME-ARP NCS into the CE established by the CoC(s) for the area the NCS is funded to
     serve, provided that the CE is used in accordance with Section IV.C of this Notice. Whether
     or not packaged with NCS funding, HOME-ARP supportive services may also be provided
     as needed to qualifying individuals and families served by the HOME-ARP NCS in
     accordance with the requirements contained in Section VI.D of this Notice.
     No individual or family may be denied admission to or removed from a HOME-ARP NCS
     unit on the basis or as a direct result of the fact that the individual or family is or has been a
     victim of domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, stalking, or human trafficking if
     the individual or family meets the criteria of one of the qualifying populations.

2.   Eligible Activities: HOME-ARP funds may be used to acquire and/or rehabilitate or
     construct HOME-ARP NCS units to serve qualifying populations. Acquisition of vacant
     land or demolition of existing structures may be undertaken only as part of a HOME-ARP
     NCS project. HOME-ARP NCS units acquired and/or developed with HOME-ARP funds
     must meet the requirements of this Notice, i.e., be used as HOME-ARP         NCS or used as
     emergency shelter under ESG for the restricted use period established in Section VLE.9 of
     this Notice.

3.   Eligible Costs: HOME-ARP funds may be used for actual costs of acquiring NCS or
     developing HOME-ARP NCS as follows:
                                                   56
     a.   Acquisition Costs: Costs to acquire improved or unimproved real property.

     b.   Demolition Costs: Costs of demolishing existing structures for the purpose of
          developing HOME-ARP NCS.

     c.   Development Hard Costs: Costs identified in 24 CFR 92.206(a) to rehabilitate or
          construct HOME-ARP NCS units, except costs must be for meeting the physical
          standards established in Section VI.E.7 of this Notice.

     d.   Site Improvements:    Costs to make improvements to the project site, including
          installation of utilities or utility connections, and the construction or rehabilitation of
          laundry, community facilities, on-site management, or supportive service offices.

     e.   Related Soft Costs: Reasonable and necessary costs incurred by the PJ and owner
          associated with the financing, acquisition, and development of HOME-ARP           NCS
          projects, including costs identified in 24 CFR 92.206(d) with the following exceptions:

             i.   Costs to provide information services such as affirmative marketing to
                  prospective homeowners and tenants are not eligible.

            ii.   Costs of funding an initial operating deficit reserve are not eligible.

           ii.    Costs of project-specific assistance to community housing development
                  organizations, including technical assistance and site control loans or seed
                  money loans as specified in 24 CFR 92.301 are not eligible.

     f.   Replacement Reserve: Costs to capitalize a replacement reserve to pay the reasonable
          and necessary costs of replacing major systems and their components whose useful life
          will end during the restricted use period. Major systems include structural support,
          roofing, cladding, and weatherproofing, plumbing, electrical and HVAC. The costs of
          replacing major systems must be determined through a Capital Needs Assessment or
          documented in writing after an inspection by the PJ or PJ-selected contractor to assess
          the remaining useful life of major systems expected upon completion of the HOME-
          ARP NCS project. The costs of a replacement reserve must be included in the project
          budget in the written agreement along with a list of major systems to be replaced with
          the reserve and projected replacement schedule during the restricted use period (.e.,
          reserve for replacement analysis). Rehabilitation planned to be completed with HOME-
          ARP NCS reserve funds at a later date must be included in IDIS as a rehabilitation
          activity at initial commitment.

4.   Prohibited Costs:     HOME-ARP       funds may not be used to:

     a.   Pay any operating costs of a HOME-ARP NCS project.

     b.   Provide additional HOME-ARP investment in a HOME-ARP NCS project during the
          restricted use period, except that additional HOME-ARP funds can be invested in the
          project up to one year after project completion in IDIS for eligible costs.

                                                    57
  c.   Pay costs of a conversion of HOME-ARP NCS as described in Section VI.E.11 of this
       Notice.

  d.   Provide non-Federal matching contributions required under any other Federal program.

  e.   Provide assistance for uses authorized under section 9 of the U.S. Housing Act of 1937
       (42 U.S.C. 1437g) (Public Housing Capital and Operating Funds).

  f.   Provide assistance to eligible low-income housing under 24 CFR part 248 (Prepayment
       of Low-Income Housing Mortgages).

  g.   Pay for the acquisition of property owned by the PJ, except for property acquired by the
       PJ with HOME-ARP NCS funds, or property acquired in anticipation of carrying out a
       HOME-ARP NCS project.

  h.   Pay delinquent taxes, fees, or charges on properties to be assisted with HOME-ARP
       NCS funds.

  i.   Pay for any cost that is not eligible under this Notice.

- Commitment: PJs must commit HOME-ARP funds before disbursing funds for a HOME-
  ARP NCS project. HOME-ARP funds are committed to a HOME-ARP NCS project when
  the PJ executes a legally binding written agreement that meets the requirements in this
  Notice.

  If the project is an acquisition-only activity, the PJ may commit HOME-ARP funds if it
  reasonably expects the project will be operated as HOME-ARP NCS within 6 months of the
  date of acquisition. Acquisition-only HOME-ARP NCS projects may be performed when
  the PJ reasonably determines that the units acquired will not require rehabilitation to meet
  the property standards in Section VLE.7 of this Notice. If the project is not in active use as
  HOME-ARP NCS within 6 months of the acquisition, HUD may require the PJ to submit a
  schedule for placing the project into operation within a period determined by HUD or may
  require the PJ to repay the funds to its HOME-ARP Treasury Account.

  For projects that will involve rehabilitation or new construction with or without acquisition,
  the PJ may commit HOME-ARP funds if it reasonably expects development to begin within
  12 months of the date of commitment.

. Project Development Due Diligence: HOME-ARP NCS projects must meet the
  requirements of this Notice for the restricted use period. Consequently, before awarding
  HOME-ARP funds to a HOME-ARP NCS project, PJs must determine that acquisition
  and/or development is financially feasible. The PJ is responsible for maintaining continued
  operation of the NCS in accordance with this Notice throughout the restricted use period.
  Therefore, the PJ must consider whether the HOME-ARP NCS project has secured or has a
  high likelihood of securing operating funding because operating costs cannot be paid with
  HOME-ARP.


                                                 58
  PJs must assess HOME-ARP       NCS projects, including a review of information from the
  owner and/or developer that demonstrates the project’s financial feasibility throughout the
  restricted use period. Before awarding funds for HOME-ARP NCS, the PJ must:

      e   Require that the developer submit evidence of appropriate skills and experience
          related to the development of shelters or similar facilities.
      e   Require the owner to submit evidence of prior experience with operating shelters.
      e   Require an acquisition or development budget, timeline, and sources and uses
          statement for the acquisition and/or development of the project be submitted for
          review.
      e   Require the owner to submit a proposed operating budget, including secured sources
          for operating costs and any operating gap that will require additional assistance. If
          there is a gap in the operating budget, the PJ should require the owner to submit a
          plan for securing additional private, local, state, or Federal funding sufficient for
          successful operation of the project.

  Before committing funds, PJs should also determine whether the owner intends to continue
  operating the project as HOME-ARP NCS or emergency shelter NCS under ESG for the
  entire full restricted use period or plans to convert the HOME-ARP NCS to permanent
  affordable housing or CoC permanent housing during the restricted use period, once the
  minimum use period for HOME-ARP NCS established in this section is completed. Ifa
  HOME-ARP NCS project owner intends to convert the project to CoC permanent housing
  or permanent supportive housing during the restricted use period, the PJ is encouraged to
  pursue partnership and leveraging opportunities with the CoC early in the planning stage of
  a HOME-ARP NCS project. In such instances, the PJ should consider the physical design
  needs of an eventual conversion in its evaluation of the HOME-ARP NCS project.

. Property and Habitability Standards: HOME-ARP NCS projects must meet the
  minimum HOME-ARP property standards prior to occupancy and the HOME-ARP NCS
  ongoing property standards throughout the restricted use period as described in this Notice.
  An “acquisition only” project must meet the HOME-ARP NCS minimum property
  standards described in paragraph a. below at the time of acquisition. If the project requires
  rehabilitation or repair to meet the minimum property standards, the project is considered
  acquisition and rehabilitation irrespective of the source of funds used for the rehabilitation
  or repair and must meet the NCS rehabilitation standards in paragraph b. below. In addition,
  PJs must meet the standards required in this Notice for rehabilitation or new construction, as
  applicable. The PJ must determine that construction contracts and documents describe the
  work to be completed in adequate detail to establish a basis for inspection to determine that
  all work was completed to contracted specifications and that the project met the HOME-
  ARP NCS property standards. Project classification as rehabilitation or new construction is
  determined by the PJs local code requirements based on specific work to be completed. PJs
  may also choose to adopt a standard that exceeds the minimum standards described here.
  The written agreement must impose the HOME-ARP NCS property standards or the PJ’s
  locally developed standards and require that the PJ or its representatives have access to the
  property to perform inspections during development and throughout the restricted use
  period.

                                                 59
a.   Minimum     HOME-ARP NCS Property Standards: All HOME-ARP NCS units and
     common areas must meet all applicable State and local codes, ordinances, and
     requirements and the applicable provisions of HUD’s Lead Safe Housing Rules at 24
     CFR Part 35. In addition, all HOME-ARP NCS projects must meet the following
     minimum safety, sanitation, accessibility, and privacy standards:
         i.    Must be structurally sound to protect occupants from the elements and not pose
               any threat to health and safety of the occupants.
        il.    Must be accessible in accordance with section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act (29
                U.S.C. 794) and implementing regulations at 24 CFR part 8; the Fair Housing
                Act (42 U.S.C. 3601 et seg.) and implementing regulations at 24 CFR part 100;
                and Title II of the Americans with Disabilities Act (42 U.S.C. 12131 et seg.) and
                implementing regulations at 24 CFR part 35, all as applicable.
      ii.       Must provide each individual or family with an acceptable, individual room to
                sleep which includes adequate space and security for themselves and their
                belongings.
       iv.      Must have a natural or mechanical means of ventilation. The interior air must be
                free of pollutants at a level that might threaten or harm the health of occupants.
        v.    | Must have a water supply free of contamination.
       vi.      Must have in-unit sanitary facilities that are in proper operating condition and are
                adequate for personal cleanliness and the disposal of human waste.
      vii.      Must provide necessary heating/cooling facilities in proper operating condition.
     viii.      Must have adequate natural or artificial ilumination to permit normal indoor
                activities and support health and safety. There must be sufficient electrical
                sources to permit the safe use of electrical appliances.
       ix.      Food preparation areas, if any, must contain suitable space and equipment to
                store, prepare, and serve food in a safe and sanitary manner.
        x.    | Must provide one working smoke detector and one working carbon monoxide
                detector in each unit. All smoke and carbon monoxide detectors and alarm
                systems must be designed for hearing-impaired residents. All public areas of the
                shelter must have at least one working smoke detector and one carbon monoxide
                detector. There must also be a second means of exiting the building in the event
                of fire or other emergency.

     Minimum      HOME-ARP NCS Rehabilitation Standards: HOME-ARP NCS rehabilitation
     projects must meet all applicable State and local codes, ordinances, and requirements ,
     or in the absence of such codes, International Residential Code or the International
     Building Code (as applicable), and must comply with the Lead Safe Housing Rule at 24
     CFR Part 35. Additionally, PJs must consider the remaining useful life of major
     systems. PJs are encouraged to use a Capital Needs Assessment to determine the
     reasonable and necessary investment of HOME-ARP funding in rehabilitation projects
     and expected cost of ongoing replacement needs during the restricted use period. If
     HOME-ARP         funding will capitalize a replacement reserve, the PJ must determine the
     remaining useful life of major systems through a Capital Needs Assessment or other PJ
     inspection documented in writing, in accordance with requirements for capitalized
     replacement reserve costs in VI.E.3.


                                                 60
          Minimum      HOME-ARP NCS New Construction Standards: HOME-ARP NCS projects
          that are newly constructed must meet all applicable State and local codes, ordinances,
          and requirements, or in the absence of such codes, the International Residential Code or
          the International Building Code (as applicable to the type of structure). HOME-ARP
          funds cannot be used to fund a replacement reserve for newly constructed HOME-ARP
          NCS.

     b.   On-going Property Standards and Inspections: PJs must develop ongoing inspection
          procedures to verify that HOME-ARP NCS projects meet the minimum HOME-ARP
          NCS property standards established in this Notice throughout the restricted use period.
          A PJ’s inspection procedures must require annual inspections that are applied
          consistently to all HOME-ARP NCS projects. When deficiencies are identified, a
          follow-up inspection to verify that deficiencies are corrected must occur within 6
          months. The PJ may establish a list of non-hazardous deficiencies for which correction
          can be verified by third party documentation (e.g., paid invoice or work order) rather
          than reinspection.   If life-threatening deficiencies exist, the owner or operator of the
          HOME-ARP NCS must correct such deficiencies immediately. In such instances, the PJ
          must re-inspect to verify the deficiency has been corrected within 14 days.

8.   Project Completion:       Project Completion for HOME-ARP NCS means:

          e   All necessary title transfer requirements and construction work has been performed;
          e   The project complies with the requirements of this Notice, including the HOME-
              ARP NCS property standards as evidenced by a final inspection;
          e   The project is actively operating as a HOME-ARP NCS;
          e   Final drawdown of HOME-ARP funds has been disbursed; and
          e   Project completion information is entered into IDIS.

     All HOME-ARP NCS projects must be completed within 4 years of the date of commitment
     of the HOME-ARP funds based on the date of the last signature on the written agreement.
     If the PJ fails to complete a project within 4 years of project completion, it must comply
     with the terminated project requirements at 24 CFR 92.205(e)(2). HOME-ARP NCS
     rehabilitation and new construction projects must begin operating as active shelters within 6
     months after the date of completion of the construction work. If the HOME-ARP NCS
     project is not in use within 6 months, HUD may require the PJ to submit a schedule for
     placing the project into operation as an active shelter within a period determined by HUD or
     may require the PJ to repay the HOME-ARP funds to its HOME-ARP Treasury Account.

9.   Restricted Use Period: HOME-ARP NCS projects must comply with the requirements of
     this Notice for not less than the restricted use period specified in this Notice. PJs must
     impose the HOME-ARP NCS requirements through a deed restriction, covenant running
     with the land, legally binding agreement restricting the use of the property and recorded on
     the property in accordance with State recordation laws, or other mechanism approved by
     HUD. The use restriction should not identify that the property is prioritized for victims of
     domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, stalking or human trafficking.       This use
     restriction must require that the property is operated as HOME-ARP NCS or non-congregate
     emergency shelter under ESG for the required restricted use period except that HOME-ARP
                                                   61
   NCS projects may be converted to permanent affordable housing or CoC permanent housing
   after being operated as HOME-ARP NCS for the applicable minimum use period prior to
   conversion as described in Section VIE.11.     If the HOME-ARP      NCS is converted, the PJ
   must amend its use restriction to reflect the change in requirements for the remainder of the
   restricted use period.

   The restricted use period begins at project completion as defined in Section VLE.8 of this
   Notice and must be imposed for at least the following periods:

   a.   New Construction: Newly constructed HOME-ARP NCS units must be operated as
        HOME-ARP NCS units for qualifying populations for a restricted use period of 15
        years, regardless of the amount of HOME-ARP funds invested in the project.

   b.   Rehabilitation: HOME-ARP NCS units which receive any amount of HOME-ARP
        funds for rehabilitation but are not designated as new construction by the PJ’s state or
        local building code requirements must be operated as HOME-ARP NCS units for
        qualifying populations for a restricted use period of 10 years.

   c.   Acquisition Only: Units acquired for use as HOME-ARP NCS that do not require
        rehabilitation for occupancy must serve the qualifying populations for a restricted use
        period of 10 years.

   d.   PJs may impose longer restricted use periods but must require the project remain
        financially viable for the extended period.

10. Return of Replacement Reserve: HOME-ARP funds may capitalize a replacement reserve
    for HOME-ARP NCS projects performing rehabilitation as described in Section VI.E.3 of
    this Notice. Any unexpended HOME-ARP funds remaining in a project’s replacement
    reserve at the completion of the restricted use period or upon conversion must be used or
    returned as follows:

   a.   If the HOME-ARP NCS project will continue to operate in accordance with the HOME-
        ARP NCS requirements and serve qualifying households beyond the HOME-ARP NCS
        restricted use period demonstrated by enforceable restrictions imposed by the PJ in
        accordance with Section VLE.9, the project can retain the replacement reserve to pay
        reasonable and necessary costs of replacing major systems and their components.
   b.   If the HOME-ARP NCS project will not continue to operate in accordance with the
        HOME-ARP NCS requirements because the NCS is being converted to either CoC
        permanent housing or permanent affordable housing as described in Section VI.E.11 of
        this Notice and the HOME-ARP grant is still open, the remaining HOME-ARP funds in
        the replacement reserve must be returned to the PJ’s HOME Investment Trust Fund
        Treasury account.

   c.   If the HOME-ARP NCS grant has expired or is closed out, any remaining HOME-ARP
        funds in the replacement reserve must be deposited in the PJ’s local HOME account,

                                                 62
        recorded as a program income receipt in IDIS and used for eligible costs under 24 CFR
        part 92.

11. Conversion of Non-Congregate Shelter to Rental Housing: The ARP authorizes the
    conversion of HOME-ARP NCS units into permanent housing under subtitle C of title IV of
    McKinney-Vento or permanent affordable housing as described in this section, during the
    restricted use period. No HOME-ARP funds may be used for conversion. The written
    agreement between the PJ and the owner of the HOME-ARP NCS project must describe
    conversion as a possible outcome of the HOME-ARP NCS project; specify the conditions
    under which conversion will be permitted; and require that the PJ approve any conversion in
    advance.

   a.    Minimum Use Period: All HOME-ARP NCS projects must be operated as NCS fora
         minimum period of time prior to conversion. The minimum use period prior to
         conversion varies based on the original HOME-ARP NCS eligible activity undertaken
         and the amount of funds invested in the project. If the HOME-ARP NCS project
         involves rehabilitation, the minimum use period prior to conversion is based on the total
         cost of the rehabilitation as a percentage of the total appraised value of the improved
         property. A larger investment for rehabilitation will require operation as HOME-ARP
         NCS for a longer minimum use period prior to conversion.
           i. Acquisition Only: HOME-ARP NCS activities not requiring rehabilitation for
              occupancy must be operated as HOME-ARP NCS for no less than 3 years from
              project completion prior to conversion.
         ii. Moderate Rehabilitation: Occurs when an NCS HOME-ARP project requires
              rehabilitation and the total rehabilitation expenditure from all sources of less than 75
              percent of the total appraised value of the improved property. HOME-ARP NCS
              projects that receive moderate rehabilitation must be operated as HOME-ARP NCS
              for no less than 5 years from project completion prior to conversion.
        i. Substantial Rehabilitation: Occurs when an NCS HOME-ARP project requires
              rehabilitation and the total rehabilitation expenditure from all sources exceeds 75
              percent of the total appraised value of the improved property. HOME-ARP NCS
              projects that receive substantial rehabilitation must be operated as HOME-ARP NCS
              for no less than 10 years from project completion before conversion.
        iv. New Construction: Any HOME-ARP NCS project defined by the PJ’s state or local
              code requirements as new construction must be operated as HOME-ARP NCS for no
              less than 10 years from project completion prior to conversion.
   Requirements for conversions vary depending on the type of conversion, as follows:

   b.   Permanent Affordable Housing: During the HOME-ARP NCS restricted use period but
        only after the HOME-ARP NCS minimum use period, a PJ may provide written
        approval to convert the project from HOME-ARP NCS to permanent affordable housing
        (e.g., affordable multifamily rental housing, transitional housing) in accordance with the
        requirements prescribed in the PJ’s written agreement with the HOME-ARP NCS
        owner.



                                                  63
The converted permanent affordable housing project must meet the following
requirements:

 1.   Additional HOME-ARP Investment: The PJ is prohibited from investing additional
      HOME-ARP funds to pay for the cost of converting the project from HOME-ARP
      NCS to permanent affordable housing or to pay for operating the project as
      permanent affordable housing. However, the PJ must determine that adequate
      financial resources are committed to the project to bring it into compliance with the
      property standards of Section VI.B.11 of this Notice and maintain the financial
      feasibility of the project to be operated as permanent affordable housing for the
      qualifying populations throughout the remaining restricted use period. If permitting
      conversion of HOME-ARP NCS into permanent affordable housing, a PJ must
      develop and evaluate the project in accordance with standardized underwriting
      guidelines for conversion. At minimum, the PJ’s underwriting guidelines for
      conversion must include an examination of the sources and uses of funds for the
      conversion and a careful review of the project’s operating budget, including the
      assumptions, projections, and reasonably expected increases in expenses throughout
      the minimum compliance period defined in the section below, to determine that the
      project will remain financially feasible to serve the qualifying populations for the
      remainder of the restricted use period.

      The PJ may assist households living in affordable rental housing units in converted
      projects by providing HOME-ARP TBRA in accordance with Section VLC of this
      Notice or financial assistance services in accordance with Section VI.D.4.c.i.R.

il.   Minimum Compliance Period: The minimum compliance period for converted
      housing is the period that the housing must continue to comply with the
      requirements of this Notice and is equal to the balance of the HOME-ARP NCS
      restricted use period. A PJ may impose a longer compliance period but should plan
      for the project’s financial feasibility for the longer period. The PJ may not use
      HOME-ARP funds to provide operating assistance, including a capitalized operating
      reserve, to cover deficits during the minimum or an extended compliance period.

      The PJ must amend the use restriction for HOME-ARP NCS to reflect the
      conversion to permanent affordable housing. The provisions for imposing
      affordability requirements at 24 CFR 92.252(e)(1) through (e)(4) apply to the
      amended use restriction.   In addition, the amended use restriction for the permanent
      affordable housing must be enforceable to maintain compliance with the
      requirements of this Notice for the minimum compliance period, including the
      following:

             (1) The same number of units that were operated as HOME-ARP         NCS for
                 qualifying populations must be restricted for and must be occupied by
                 households that meet the definition of a qualifying population at the time
                 of initial occupancy of the permanent affordable housing. The
                 household’s contribution toward rent during this period must be
                 affordable in accordance with Section VI.E.11 of this Notice.
                                           64
              (2) The units must comply with the ongoing property condition standards of
                  24 CFR 92.251(f) throughout the minimum compliance period as
                  demonstrated by an on-site inspection within 12 months of project
                  completion and an on-site inspection at least once every three years
                  thereafter as required by 24 CFR 92.504(d)(ii).
              (3) Each household that occupies     a HOME-ARP     assisted rental unit must
                  have an executed lease that complies with the tenant protections required
                  in Section VI.B.18 of this Notice.

iil.   Property Standards: For the remaining restricted use period, the PJ must require that
       project owners maintain the housing as decent, safe and sanitary housing in good
       repair in accordance with the ongoing property condition standards of 24 CFR
       92.251(f) as demonstrated by an on-site inspection at least once every three years in
       accordance with 24 CFR 92.504(d)(ii).

1V.    Tenant Contribution to Rent: The PJ must confirm that the qualifying household’s
       contribution to rent is affordable to the household based on a determination of the
       household’s income. If the household is receiving project-based or tenant-based
       rental assistance, it cannot contribute towards rent more than is permitted in
       accordance with the requirements of the applicable program.      If a qualifying
       household cannot contribute to rent, or the contribution is insufficient to cover the
       unit rent, the PJ may provide HOME-ARP TBRA or supportive services to assist the
       qualifying household but may not provide operating cost assistance or fund an
       operating cost assistance reserve.

       Tenant Protections: Following conversion, each qualifying household that occupies
       a permanent affordable housing unit must have an executed lease or sublease that
       complies with the tenant protections requirements of this Notice.

           (1) Lease Requirement: There must be a lease between the qualifying household
               and the owner of the permanent affordable housing project or, if there is a
               sublease with a qualifying household, a lease between a HOME-ARP
               sponsor and the owner in accordance with 24 CFR 92.253(a).
           (2) Prohibited Lease Terms: The lease between the qualifying household and
              the owner, lease between HOME-ARP         sponsor and the owner, and sublease
               between a HOME-ARP sponsor and qualifying household may not contain
               any of the prohibited lease terms specified in 24 CFR 92.253(b).
           (3) Termination of tenancy: An owner may not terminate the tenancy or refuse
               to renew the lease of a qualifying household (or of a HOME-ARP sponsor
               with a sublease with a qualifying household) in a permanent affordable
               housing unit except for serious or repeated violation of the terms and
              conditions of the lease; for violation of applicable Federal, State, or local
              laws, or for other good cause. An increase in the qualifying household’s
              income does not constitute good cause.



                                            65
                    To terminate or refuse to renew tenancy, the owner must serve written notice
                    upon the qualifying household and the HOME-ARP sponsor if the lease is
                    between an owner and HOME-ARP sponsor, specifying the grounds for the
                    action at least 30 days before termination of tenancy. In the case of a
                    sublease, to terminate or refuse to renew tenancy of a qualifying household,
                    the HOME-ARP sponsor, in accordance with the policy established by the
                    PJ, must notify the PJ in advance of serving written notice to the qualifying
                    household and must serve written notice upon the qualifying household at
                    least 30 days before termination of tenancy, specifying the grounds for the
                    action.

       vi.   Coordinated Entry and Project-Specific Waitlists: On a project-by-project basis, the
             PJ must use the method of tenant selection in Section VI.B.19 of this Notice to select
             qualifying households for occupancy of permanent affordable housing.

      vii.   Penalties for Noncompliance: The PJ must repay HOME-ARP funds invested in
             HOME-ARP NCS that was converted to permanent affordable housing if the
             permanent affordable housing does not comply with initial or ongoing requirements
             of this Notice during the compliance period.

Cc.     CoC Permanent Housing: During the HOME-ARP NCS restricted use period but only
        after the HOME-ARP NCS minimum use period, a PJ may permit the conversion of a
        HOME-ARP NCS project to permanent housing or permanent supportive housing under
        24 CFR 578.43 (acquisition) and/or 24 CFR 578.45 (rehabilitation) of the CoC program
        regulations. Conversions may only occur in accordance with the requirements
        prescribed in the PJ’s written agreement with the HOME-ARP NCS owner. If
        conversion is approved by the PJ, the HOME-ARP NCS use restrictions must remain in
        place until the project is approved for CoC funding and the required CoC restrictions are
        imposed on the property.

        Conversion to CoC permanent housing or permanent supportive housing may serve the
        following eligible households as defined in 24 CFR 578.3, subject to any further
        eligibility conditions that may apply to the use of CoC Program funds to provide rental
        assistance in the housing or otherwise support the project:

             e   Chronically homeless individuals
             e   Homeless individuals or families

        PJs are prohibited from investing additional HOME-ARP funds to pay for the cost of
        converting the project to CoC permanent housing or permanent supportive housing. The
        CoC designates eligible applicants for grant funds under 24 CFR Part 578, which
        includes nonprofit organizations, States, local governments, and instrumentalities of
        State or local governments. For-profit entities are not eligible to apply for CoC grants or
        to be subrecipients of grant funds. Consequently, if a HOME-ARP NCS project owner
        intends to convert the project to CoC permanent housing or permanent supportive
        housing during the restricted use period, the PJ is encouraged to pursue partnership and
        leveraging opportunities with the CoC early in the planning stage of a HOME-ARP NCS
                                                 66
          project. Additionally, PJs may provide supportive services or HOME-ARP TBRA
          to qualifying households that must move because of the conversion. (See Section
          VI.F.4.b for more information on relocations involving shelter occupants).

F. Nonprofit Operating and Capacity Building Assistance

A PJ may use up to 5 percent of its HOME-ARP allocation to pay operating expenses of
CHD0Os and other nonprofit organizations that will carry out activities with HOME-ARP funds.
A PJ may also use up to an additional 5 percent of its allocation to pay eligible costs related to
developing the capacity of eligible nonprofit organizations to successfully carry out HOME-
ARP eligible activities.

PJs may award operating expense assistance or capacity building assistance to a nonprofit
organization if it reasonably expects to provide HOME-ARP funds to the organization for any
of the eligible HOME-ARP activities within 24 months of the award.

1.   Eligible Costs

     a.   Operating Expense Assistance: Operating expenses are defined as reasonable and
          necessary costs of operating the nonprofit organization. These costs
          include employee salaries, wages and other employee compensation and
          benefits; employee education, training, and travel; rent; utilities; communication costs;
          taxes; insurance; equipment, materials, and supplies.

          HOME-ARP funds used for operating expenses must be used for the “general
          operating costs” of the nonprofit organization. These operating costs must not have a
          particular final cost objective, such as a project or activity, or must not be directly
          assignable to a HOME-ARP activity or project. For example, HOME-ARP funds for
          operating expenses may not be used for staffing costs to provide supportive services or
          develop HOME-ARP-rental housing (as operating costs to develop HOME-ARP rental
          housing are paid for by a developer fee which is a project delivery or soft cost). Because
          ARP does not permit any HOME-ARP funds to be used to operate a shelter, all costs
          related to operating a non-congregate shelter (e.g., allocable overhead and staffing costs,
          insurance, utilities) also cannot be paid with HOME-ARP funds.
          The actual costs of implementing a specific activity or project, including staff costs to
          deliver supportive services or administer HOME-ARP TBRA, are considered HOME-
          ARP project delivery costs or project soft costs and are not eligible costs under
          Nonprofit Operating and Capacity Building Assistance. HOME-ARP project delivery
          costs are those allowable costs incurred for implementing and carrying out eligible
          HOME-ARP projects or activities, such as supportive services. All project delivery costs
          are allocable to a HOME-ARP project, including direct project and related delivery costs
          integral to developing the project or providing the activity. HOME-ARP project delivery
          costs may be paid, if eligible, by HOME-ARP funds provided under a written agreement
          for the activity or project and must not be paid with nonprofit operating expense or
          capacity building assistance.

                                                   67
      b.   Capacity Building Assistance: Capacity building expenses are defined as reasonable and
           necessary general operating costs that will result in expansion or improvement of an
           organization’s ability to successfully carry out eligible HOME-ARP activities. Eligible
           costs include salaries for new hires including wages and other employee compensation
           and benefits; costs related to employee training or other staff development that enhances
           an employee’s skill set and expertise; equipment (e.g., computer software or programs
           that improve organizational processes), upgrades to materials and equipment, and
           supplies; and contracts for technical assistance or for consultants with expertise related
           to the HOME-ARP qualifying populations.

2.    Limitations on Assistance: NAHA and the HOME regulations limit the amount of
      operating expense assistance that an organization can receive annually. ARP extends this
      limitation to the capacity building assistance paid with HOME-ARP funds.

      In any fiscal year, operating assistance provided to a nonprofit organization may not exceed
      the greater of 50 percent of the general operating expenses of the organization, as described
      above, for that fiscal year or $50,000.

      In any fiscal year, capacity building assistance provided to a nonprofit organization may not
      exceed the greater of 50 percent of the general operating expenses of the organization, as
      described above, or $50,000.

      If an organization receives both operating assistance and capacity building assistance in any
      fiscal year, the aggregate total amount of assistance it may receive is the greater of 50
      percent of the organization’s total operating expenses for that fiscal year or $75,000.

      To implement the above limitations on assistance, HUD has established separate fund types
      in IDIS for operating expense assistance and capacity building assistance. This will
      facilitate accurate tracking and ensure that PJs do not exceed the limits established in
      NAHA and ARP.

3.    Commitment of Operating Expense and Capacity Building Assistance: A PJ commits
      operating expense assistance or capacity building assistance when it enters into a legally
      binding agreement with the nonprofit organization to provide the assistance.

VI.         OTHER FEDERAL REQUIREMENTS
HOME-ARP         funds are federal financial assistance and, therefore, are subject to requirements
applicable to such funds.     PJs must comply with the following requirements: 24 CFR part 92,
subpart H, 92.352 — Environmental review; 92.353 — Displacement, relocation, and acquisition;
and 92.355 — Lead-based paint.




                                                   68
A. Other Federal Requirements and Nondiscrimination

The requirements in 24 CFR 92.350 apply to the HOME-ARP program. PJs must comply with
the Federal requirements set forth in 24 CFR part 5, subpart A, including: nondiscrimination
and equal opportunity; disclosure requirements; debarred, suspended or ineligible contractors;
drug-free work; and housing counseling and the nondiscrimination requirements at section 282
of NAHA. The requirements in section 282 of NAHA are waived in connection with the use of
HOME-ARP      funds on lands set aside under the Hawaiian Homes Commission Act, 1920 (42
Stat. 108). PJs must also comply with the Violence Against Women Act (VAWA) requirements
set forth in 24 CFR 92.359.

B. Affirmative Marketing and Minority Outreach

The requirements in 24 CFR 92.351 apply to HOME-ARP activities.

C. National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (NEPA) (42 U.S.C. 4321) and
   Related Laws

The environmental requirements in 24 CFR 92.352 apply to eligible activities under this Notice.
The environmental effects of each activity carried out with HOME-ARP funds must be assessed
in accordance with the provisions of NEPA and the related authorities listed in HUD's
implementing regulations at 24 CFR part 58. The applicability of the provisions of 24 CFR part
58 is based on the HOME-ARP project as a whole (i.e., all individual project activities, such as
acquisition and rehabilitation, aggregated according to the requirements at 24 CFR 58.32), not
on the type of the cost paid with HOME-ARP funds. In accordance with the provisions in 24
CFR part 58, activities undertaken with HOME-ARP funds are subject to environmental review
by a PJ or State recipient. The PJ or State recipient (referred to as the “Responsible Entity” or
“RE”’) must assume responsibility for environmental review, decision making, and action for
each activity that it carries out with HOME-ARP funds, in accordance with the requirements at
24 CFR Part 58. A state PJ must assume responsibility for approval of Requests for Release of
Funds and Certification (RROF/C) submitted by State recipients.

No funds may be committed to a HOME-ARP activity or project before the completion of the
environmental review and approval of the RROF/C, as applicable. Neither a HOME-ARP
recipient nor any participant in the development process, including public or private nonprofit
or for-profit entities, or any of their contractors, may commit HUD assistance on an activity or
project until the environmental review has been completed and HUD or the state has approved
the recipient's RROF/C from the RE as applicable. In addition, until the RROF/C have been
approved, neither a HOME-ARP recipient nor any participant in the development process may
commit non-HUD funds on or undertake a HOME-ARP activity or project if the activity or
project would have an adverse environmental impact or limit the choice of reasonable
alternatives. Therefore, it is important for REs to begin and complete any required
environmental reviews as soon as possible.




                                                69
 1. HOME-ARP       TBRA    and Supportive Services

HOME-ARP TBRA and supportive services as defined at 24 CFR 58.35(b) are categorically
excluded, not subject to the Federal laws and authorities at 24 CFR 58.5 (CENST) or exempt
from review under NEPA. A RE may complete a single CENST review categorized under 24
CFR 58.35(b) for their supportive services program or their HOME-ARP TBRA program where
participants choose their own unit and are not restricted to units within a pre-determined
specific project site or sites. There is no need to complete reviews for every unit selected by
participants.
2. HOME-ARP        Rental Housing

Acquisition of a structure to be used as HOME-ARP rental housing is categorically excluded,
 subject to the Federal laws and authorities referenced at 24 CFR 58.5 (CEST) under 24 CFR
58.35(a)(5) (with the possibility of converting to exempt under 24 CFR 58.34(a)(12)) if the
 structure acquired will be retained for the same use (e.g., residential).   Rehabilitation of
buildings for residential use with one to four units for HOME-ARP rental housing is CEST
under 24 CFR 58.35(a)(3)(), if the density is not increased beyond four units, and the land use
is not changed. Rehabilitation of buildings for use as HOME-ARP multifamily rental housing
is CEST under 24 CFR 58.35(a)(3)(ii) only if:
1.   the unit density is not changed more than 20 percent;
2.   the project does not involve changes in land use from residential to non-residential; and
3.   the estimated cost of rehabilitation is less than 75 percent of the total estimated cost of
     replacement after rehabilitation.
Rehabilitation for HOME-ARP rental housing that does not meet the thresholds for multifamily
residential buildings listed above requires completion of an Environmental Assessment in
accordance with 24 CFR Part 58, Subpart E. An Environmental Assessment is also required for
new construction, demolition, acquisition of vacant land for new construction, and acquisition of
non-residential structures for demolition and new construction.
3.   HOME-ARP NCS

HOME-ARP NCS activities are subject to environmental review by the RE under 24 CFR part
58. Acquisition of a structure to be used as HOME-ARP NCS is CEST under 24 CFR
58.35(a)(5) (with the possibility of converting to exempt under 24 CFR 58.34(a)(12)) if the
 structure acquired will be retained for the same use (e.g., residential). Rehabilitation of a
structure for HOME-ARP NCS is CEST if the project meets the thresholds listed at 24 CFR
58.35(a)(3)G) or Gi). Rehabilitation that does not meet these thresholds requires completion of
an Environmental Assessment pursuant to 24 CFR part 58, subpart E. An Environmental
Assessment is also required for new construction, demolition, acquisition of vacant land for new
construction, and acquisition of non-residential structures for demolition and new construction.
HOME-ARP NCS projects which may convert to emergency shelter or permanent housing
pursuant to Sec. 3204(a)(4)(B) or (C) of the ARP may complete a single environmental review
that covers all proposed HUD funding sources and project activities. Conversion to a program
using project-based rental assistance is CEST and requires completion of an environmental
review. If conversion or other additional HUD funding sources are proposed after the

                                                   70
environmental review has been completed, a CENST review for supplemental assistance under
24 CFR 58.35(b)(7) can be performed if the review is completed by the same RE that conducted
the original review and if re-evaluation is not required by 24 CFR 58.47.

The PJ or subrecipient, or any contractor of the PJ or subrecipient, may not acquire, rehabilitate,
convert, repair, dispose of, demolish, or construct property fora HOME-ARP NCS project, or
commit or expend HUD or non-HUD funds for NCS under HOME-ARP, until the RE has
completed an environmental review under 24 CFR part 58 and received HUD or state approval
of the RROF/C, as applicable.

D. Labor Standards

The requirements in 24 CFR 92.354 apply to HOME-ARP activities.

E. Lead Hazard Control Requirements
The Lead-Based Paint Poisoning Prevention Act (42 U.S.C. 4821-4846), the Residential Lead-
Based Paint Hazard Reduction Act of 1992 (42 U.S.C. 4851-4856), and implementing
regulations at 24 CFR Part 35, subparts A, B, J, K, M, and R apply to HOME-ARP.-assisted
activities.

For HOME-ARP NCS, a project must comply with 24 CFR part 35, Subpart K when the
HOME-ARP activity is acquisition only. HOME-ARP NCS projects that involve rehabilitation
of pre-1978 facilities, whether the rehabilitation is funded with HOME-ARP or other funds,
must comply with the requirements of 24 CFR part 35, Subpart J.

F. Uniform Relocation Assistance and Real Property Acquisition Policies
     Act, Section 104(d), and HOME-ARP                 Displacement, Relocation and
     Acquisition Program Requirements

HOME-ARP funding is subject to the Uniform Relocation Assistance and Real Property
Acquisition Policies Act of 1970 and section 104(d) of the Housing and Community
Development Act of 1974, in addition to the Displacement, Relocation and Acquisition
regulatory requirements of 24 CFR 92.353. This Notice also includes HOME-ARP program
specific relocation requirements applicable to HOME-ARP.-assisted projects. PJs must comply
with all applicable requirements, as described in this section.

1.   Uniform Relocation Assistance and Real Property Acquisition Policies Act of 1970:
     Costs incurred to comply with the Uniform Relocation Assistance and Real Property
     Acquisition Policies Act of 1970, as amended, (42 U.S.C. § 4601 et seg.) (URA) are eligible
     HOME-ARP project costs pursuant to this Notice and 24 CFR 92.206(f). The URA
     establishes minimum requirements for the acquisition of real property and the displacement
     of persons from their homes, businesses, or farms as a direct result of acquisition,
     rehabilitation, or demolition for federally-assisted programs and projects.   The URA
     implementing regulations at 49 CFR part 24 establish:



                                                  71
    e   Requirements for the provision of replacement housing assistance, advisory services,
        and moving costs to persons displaced as a result of a program or project that receives
        federal financial assistance;
    e   Requirements for acquisitions, including the payment of just compensation pursuant to
        49 CFR part 24, subpart B, and provisions for voluntary acquisitions set forth in 49 CFR
        24.101.
    e   Minimum requirements for temporary relocation of persons, businesses, or farms as a
        result of a project or program that receives federal financial assistance.   These
        requirements are found in Appendix A, Section 24.2(a)(9)@i)(D).

    Additional HUD URA policy and guidance is available in HUD Handbook 1378.

.   Section 104(d) of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974:                 HOME-ARP
    is HOME funding and subject to the requirements in section 104(d) of the Housing and
    Community Development Act of 1974, as amended, (42 USC            § 5304(d)), (‘section 104(d)’’)
    unless waived, as described in this section and Appendix. Costs incurred to comply with
    section 104(d) requirements are eligible HOME-ARP project costs under 24 CFR 92.206(f).
    section 104(d) applies to the demolition or conversion, as defined in _24 CFR 42.305, ofa
    lower-income dwelling unit in connection with a HOME or Community Development Block
    Grant Program (CDBG) assisted activity.      section 104(d) includes the following
    requirements:

    e   APJ must have a residential anti-displacement and relocation assistance
        plan (RARAP);
    e   A PJ must provide relocation assistance to displaced lower-income persons; and
    e   A PJ must perform one-for-one replacement of lower-income dwellings demolished or
        converted to a use other than a lower-income dwelling unit. A lower-income dwelling
        unit is defined in_24 CFR 42.305 as a dwelling unit with a market rent (including utility
        costs) that does not exceed the applicable Fair Market Rent (FMR) for existing housing,
        as defined by HUD.

    Section 104(d) implementing federal regulations can be found at 24 CFR part 42 Subpart C.

    HOME-ARP Section 104(d) Waiver / One-for-One Replacement Housing.
    For purposes of , the one-for-one replacement housing requirements of section
    104(d)(2)(A)(i) and (ii) and (d)(3) (42 U.S.C. 5304(d)(2)(A)@) and (41) and 42 U.S.C.
    5304(d)(3)) and 24 CFR 42.375, lower-income dwelling units shall not include single-room
    occupancy (SRO) units or residential hotel or motel units in jurisdictions where those units
    are considered dwelling units under state or local law.   All other section 104(d)
    requirements, including but not limited to the requirement that the PJ have and follow a
    RARAP, remain in effect.     (See 24 CFR 92.353(e) and 24 CER part 42, subpart C).

-   HOME Program Displacement, Relocation and Acquisition Regulations: In addition to
    the URA and section 104(d) requirement described above, the HOME program’s
    Displacement, Relocation and Acquisition regulations at_24 CFR 92.353 also apply
    to projects funded with HOME-ARP funds. Some of these requirements differ from those

                                                 72
    of the URA and section 104(d), including but not limited to the expanded temporary
    relocation protections at 24 CFR 92.353(b) and (c); optional relocation assistance policies in
    24 CFR 92.353(d); and the right to return to a building or complex, if feasible, upon
    completion of a HOME project, in accordance with 24 CFR 92.353(a). PJs must
    follow these program-specific requirements in HOME-ARP assisted projects.

    PJs are encouraged to develop optional relocation policies to address individuals that may
    not be eligible for URA or section 104(d) assistance due to their length of occupancy ina
    unit, ineligibility of their dwelling unit, or other factors beyond their control. Such policies
    must be in writing, applied consistently, and must not violate any other federal law or
    regulation. Costs incurred to comply with 24 CFR 92.353, including optional relocation
    policies, are eligible HOME-ARP project costs under 24 CFR 92.206(f).

.   Additional HOME-ARP           Program Relocation Related Requirements:         The
    following additional HOME-ARP program relocation requirements apply:

    a.   Acquisition and/or rehabilitation of hotels, motels and other non-residential
         property: In states where hotels and motels are not considered dwelling units or
         residential property, the acquisition of non-residential property such as hotels and motels
         for the production of HOME-ARP NCS units or HOME-ARP rental housing will not
         make a person occupying those properties eligible for relocation assistance under the
         URA, section 104(d) or 24 CFR 92.353.       HOME     PJs may provide HOME-ARP
         assistance, as defined by this Notice, including the provision of HOME-ARP supportive
         services, HOME-ARP       TBRA, the ability to stay in HOME-ARP      NCS units, or the
         ability to rent a HOME-ARP rental unit, if the individuals or families can
         demonstrate that—

          i.   they have been in continuous residence at the property for 30 or more calendar
               days, and
         ii.   they are a qualifying household, as defined by this Notice.

         Any assistance provided pursuant to this section may be provided without regard to any
         preferences, project-specific waiting lists, or any other form of prioritization the PJ has
         developed pursuant to this Notice. For purposes of HOME-ARP, costs associated with
         activities under this provision of the Notice may be charged as either project delivery
         costs or relocation costs eligible under 24 CFR 92.206(f).

    b.   Conversion of HOME-ARP NCS: If HOME-ARP NCS units are occupied and converted
         to either permanent housing under CoC or permanent affordable housing as described in
         Section VI.E.11 of this Notice, persons occupying the shelter would not normally be
         eligible for relocation assistance under the URA, section 104(d) or 24 CFR
         92.353 because they are not displaced from a dwelling unit. However, since the
         individuals or families occupying such shelter units are already qualifying households
         under HOME-ARP, HOME PJs may immediately provide such occupants with HOME-
         ARP assistance, as defined by this Notice, including the provision of HOME-ARP
         supportive services, HOME-ARP TBRA, the ability to stay in other HOME-ARP

                                                   73
        NCS units, or the ability to renta HOME-ARP rental unit. Additionally, the PJ may
        provide the occupants with assistance for moving costs or advisory services, as
        appropriate, as HOME-ARP administrative costs or under the HOME-ARP supportive
        services activity in Section VI.D of this Notice. Any assistance provided pursuant to this
        section may be provided without regard to any preferences, project-specific waiting lists,
        or any other form of prioritization the PJ has developed pursuant to this Notice, as
        the persons occupying the NCS units were already determined to be qualifying
        households under the HOME-ARP.

5.   Persons Ineligible for HOME-ARP Assistance and Ineligible for URA, Section
     104(d), or assistance pursuant to 24 CFR 92.353: Ifa person is required to move as a
     direct result of a HOME-ARP project and is determined ineligible for HOME-ARP housing
     assistance under the preceding Section VII.F.4 and also determined ineligible as a displaced
     person under the URA, section 104(d) or HOME program rules, the PJ may provide such
     persons advisory services as an eligible HOME-ARP administrative cost, as
     the PJ determines to be reasonable and necessary.

G. Section 3 Economic Opportunities for Low- and Very Low-Income
     Persons

Section 3 requirements established at 24 CFR Part 75 apply to HOME-ARP.-assisted projects.

H. Conflicts of Interest
HOME-ARP is subject to the following conflicts of interest requirements:

1.   Conflicts of Interest: PJs, State recipients, and subrecipients engaging in any of the
     activities defined this Notice shall be subject to the conflicts of interest provisions at 24
     CFR 92.356, including but not limited to the conflicts of interest exception process defined
     in 24 CFR 92.356(d)-(e). Owners and developers of HOME-ARP NCS and HOME-ARP
     rental housing shall be subject to 24 CFR 92.356(f).

2.   Organizational Conflicts of Interest: The provision of any type or amount of HOME-
     ARP TBRA or supportive services may not be conditioned on an individual’s or family's
     acceptance or occupancy of a shelter or housing unit owned by the PJ; State recipients; the
     subrecipient; or a parent, affiliate, or subsidiary of the subrecipient.   No subrecipient may,
     with respect to individuals or families occupying housing owned by the subrecipient, or any
     parent, affiliate, or subsidiary of the subrecipient, administer financial assistance that
     includes rental payments, utility deposits, security deposits, or first and last month’s rent
     provided pursuant to this Notice. All contractors of the PJ, State recipients, or subrecipient
     must comply with the same requirements that apply to subrecipients under this section.

3.   Written Standards of Conduct:        PJs, State recipients, and subrecipients must maintain
     written standards of conduct covering the conflicts of interest and organizational conflicts of
     interest requirements under this Notice and 2 CFR 200.318. The written standards of
     conduct must also provide for internal controls and procedures to require a fair and open
     selection process for awarding HOME-ARP funds pursuant to this Notice. These standards
                                                    714
     must include provisions on if and how Continuum of Care board members may participate
     in and/or influence discussions or resulting decisions concerning the competition or
     selection of an award or other financial benefits made pursuant to the HOME-ARP Notice,
     including internal controls on when funds may be awarded to the organization that the
     member represents.

4.   Requesting Exceptions to Organizational Conflicts of Interest: Any request for an
     exception to the organizational conflicts of interest provisions in this Notice shall be in
     writing and shall be considered by HUD only after the PJ or State recipient has provided the
     following:

     a.   A written disclosure of the nature of the conflict, accompanied by an assurance that there
          has been public disclosure of the conflict and a description of how the public disclosure
          was made; and
     b.   An opinion of the PJ’s or State recipient's attorney that the interest for which the
          exception is sought would not violate State or local law.

5.   Granting Exceptions to Organizational Conflicts of Interest: HUD shall determine
     whether to grant an exception to the organizational conflicts of interest on a case-by-case
     basis when it determines that the exception will serve to further the purposes of HOME-
     ARP.    HUD      shall consider the following factors, as applicable, in determining whether to
     grant such an exception:

     c.   Whether the exception would provide a significant cost benefit or an essential degree of
          expertise to the program or project which would otherwise not be available
     d.   Whether undue hardship will result to the PJ, State recipient, subrecipient or the person
          affected when weighed against the public interest served by avoiding the prohibited
          conflict;
     e.   Whether conditioning approval on changes to the PJ, State recipient, or subrecipient’s
          policies or procedures can adequately address the organizational conflict of interest; and
     f.   Any other factors relevant to HUD’s determination, including the timing of the
          requested exception.

VII.        PROGRAM ADMINISTRATION
A. PJ Responsibilities
The PJ is responsible for managing the day-to-day operations of its HOME-ARP program,
ensuring that HOME-ARP funds are used in accordance with all program requirements and
written agreements, and taking appropriate action when performance problems arise. The use of
State recipients, subrecipients, or contractors does not relieve the PJ of this responsibility.

B. Written Agreement Requirements

Before disbursing any HOME-ARP funds to any entity, the PJ must enter into a written
agreement with that entity pursuant to 24 CFR 92.504. Similarly, before disbursing any HOME
                                                     75
funds to a State recipient, subrecipient, or contractor which is administering all or a part of the
HOME-ARP program on behalf of the PJ, the PJ must also enter into a written agreement with
that entity that complies with 24 CFR 92.504 and the requirements described below. A written
agreement cannot commit to providing HOME-ARP funds after the end of the HOME-ARP
budget period.

The written agreement must require compliance with the requirements of this Notice. The
content of the written agreement will vary depending upon the role the entity is asked to assume
or the type of project undertaken.

This section details basic requirements by activity and the minimum provisions, in addition to
those at 24 CFR 92.504 that must be included in a written agreement. The written agreement
provisions in 24 CFR 92.504 that reference the requirements of 24 CFR 92.350, 24 CFR 92.351,
and 24 CFR 92.359 are not waived and apply for all HOME-ARP written agreements.

1.   Rental Housing: The PJ must execute a written agreement with the project
     owner/developer prior to the expenditure of HOME-ARP funds. The written agreement
     must comply with 24 CFR 92.504 and contain the following additional provisions:

     a.   Use of HOME-ARP funds for Rental Housing: The agreement between the
          owner/developer must describe the address of the project or legal description of the
          property if a street address has not be assigned to the property, the use of the HOME-
          ARP funds and other funds for the project, including the tasks to be performed for the
          project, a schedule for completing the tasks and the project, and a complete budget,
          including any HOME-ARP funds used to capitalize an operating cost reserve for
          qualified HOME-ARP units. These items must be in sufficient detail to provide a sound
          basis for the PJ to effectively monitor performance under the agreement to achieve
          project completion and compliance with HOME-ARP requirements.

     b.   Operating Cost Assistance: If the PJ will provide HOME-ARP funds for operating cost
          assistance, the agreement must specify whether the PJ will provide assistance through
          periodic payments or capitalize the operating cost assistance reserve based on the
          operating deficit projected for the 15-year compliance period. If the PJ is providing
          ongoing assistance, the amount of assistance must be based on the actual operating
          deficit associated with the HOME-ARP units restricted for occupancy by qualifying
          households. The written agreement must specify the frequency of operating assistance
          payments made to the owner (e.g., monthly, quarterly, etc.) and state that the amount of
          assistance will be equal to the deficit demonstrated and/or incurred. The written
          agreement may only provide for HOME-ARP funds to be used for operating assistance
          payments during the budget period defined in Section VIII.C.4 below. If operating cost
          assistance will be required beyond the budget period, the PJ should capitalize an
          operating reserve before the expiration of the budget period for HOME-ARP funds in
          accordance with Section VI.B.23. If the PJ is capitalizing the operating reserve for the
          15-year HOME-ARP      compliance period, the amount of assistance must be based on the
          project’s underwriting and the total anticipated operating deficit associated with the
          HOME-ARP units restricted for occupancy by qualifying households. The written

                                                   76
agreement must specify the amount of the capitalized reserve and the restrictions on its
use during the minimum compliance period in Section VI.B.18. Net operating income
resulting from HOME-ARP operating cost assistance is not permitted and must be
prohibited in the written agreement between the participating jurisdiction and the owner.

Sublease/Master Lease of HOME-ARP Units: If the PJ will permit a project owner to
execute a sublease or master lease with a nonprofit organization for HOME-ARP units
restricted for occupancy by qualifying households, the agreement must specify the
duration of the sublease or master lease, applicable rents, lease requirements and tenant
protections.

On-going compliance: The agreement must require rental housing assisted with HOME-
ARP funds to comply with the on-going requirements of Section VI.B of this Notice or
require repayment in accordance with Section VI.B.22.

Property Standards:   The agreement must require the housing to meet the property
standards required in 24 CFR 92.251 paragraphs (a) new construction, (b) rehabilitation
projects, (c)(1) and (2) acquisition of standard housing and (f) on-going property
condition standards.

Records and reports: The agreement must specify the particular records that must be
maintained and the information or reports that must be submitted to assist the PJ in
meeting its recordkeeping and reporting requirements. The owner/developer of rental
housing must annually provide the PJ with information on rents and occupancy of
HOME-ARP assisted units to demonstrate compliance with this Notice. If the rental
project has floating HOME-ARP units, the project owner/developer must provide the PJ
with information regarding unit substitution and filling vacancies so that the project
remains in compliance with the HOME-ARP occupancy requirements. The agreement
must specify the reporting requirements, (including copies of financial statements) to
enable the PJ to determine the financial condition and continued financial viability of the
project.

Enforcement of the agreement: The agreement must provide for a means for the PJ to
enforce compliance with HOME-ARP requirements. This means of enforcement may
include liens, deed restrictions, covenants running with the land, use restriction, or other
mechanism approved by HUD under which the PJ has the right to require specific
performance. In addition, the agreement must specify remedies for breach of the
provisions of the agreement.

Request for disbursement of funds: The agreement must specify that the
owner/developer may not request disbursement of funds under the agreement until the
funds are needed for payment of eligible costs. The owner/developer may request
capitalization of a project operating cost assistance reserve for the qualifying units once
all necessary title transfer requirements and construction work have been performed.
The amount of each request must be limited to eligible costs in the amount needed, as
described in Section VI.B.5.¢.

                                         77
           Duration of the agreement: The agreement must be in effect for at least the 15-year
           HOME-ARP minimum compliance period.

           On-site Inspections and Financial Oversight: The PJ must comply with the on-site
           inspections and financial oversight requirements of 24 CFR 92.504(d)(1) and (2). In
           addition, if the PJ will permit the capitalization of a project operating cost assistance
           reserve, the PJ must, no less than annually, oversee the administration of the operating
           cost assistance reserve account to verify that the account is appropriately sized and
           draws from the account are used to cover any deficits associated with units occupied by
           qualifying households.

           Tenant Selection: The written agreement must contain provisions explaining the method
           of tenant selection to be used in accordance with the requirements of Section [V.C and
           VI.B.20 of this Notice. This section must be in sufficient detail to determine which
           method of tenant selection is being used for the qualifying population (1.e., use of CE,
           use of CE with other referral methods, or project-specific waiting list), the method of
           tenant selection for low-income households (See Section VI.B.20.b and 24 CFR
           92.253(d)), and any required policies and procedures around the use of a CE or project-
           specific waiting list. This section must also be in sufficient detail to determine
           compliance with the PJ’s preferences and/or method of prioritization, if any, as well as
           all applicable fair housing, civil rights, and nondiscrimination requirements, including
           but not limited to those requirements listed in 24 CFR 5.105(a).

2.   TBRA (subrecipient or contractor): The requirements at 24 CFR 92.504, apply to the use
     of HOME-ARP funds for TBRA. The written agreement provisions in 24 CFR 92.504 that
     reference the requirements of 24 CFR 92.350, 24 CFR 92.351, and 24 CFR 92.359 are not
     waived and still apply for HOME-ARP written agreements. The written agreement must
     contain the following provisions:

     a.    Use of HOME ARP funds: At a minimum, the written agreement must describe the
           amount and use of the HOME-ARP funds, the tasks to be performed, or services to be
           provided. HOME-ARP funds cannot be provided after the end of the HOME-ARP
           budget period.

           Records and reports: The agreement must specify the particular records that must be
           maintained and the information or reports that must be submitted to assist the PJ in
           meeting its recordkeeping and reporting requirements.

     Cc.   Duration of agreement and disbursement of funds: The agreement must specify the
           duration of the agreement and state that disbursement of funds under the agreement may
           not be requested until the funds are needed.

           Compliance with      HOME-ARP program requirements: The written agreement must
           require compliance with HOME-ARP program requirements for the HOME-ARP TBRA
           activity as outlined in Section VLC of this Notice.



                                                    78
e.   Rental assistance contract:   There must be a rental assistance contract between the PJ
     and either the HOME-ARP       sponsor, the HOME-ARP      TBRA assisted household, or the
     property owner. The PJ must determine the terms of the rental assistance contract. The
     rental assistance contract continues until the lease is terminated. If the rental assistance
     is being provided through a HOME-ARP sponsor, the PJ must determine the term of the
     rental assistance contract between the PJ and HOME-ARP sponsor.

     If HOME-ARP     TBRA is provided in coordination with      a HOME-ARP      sponsor, the PJ
     must enter into a written agreement with the HOME-ARP sponsor if the HOME-ARP
     TBRA rental assistance contract is not with the HOME-ARP sponsor and the HOME-
     ARP sponsor will be receiving the HOME-ARP TBRA subsidy directly from the PJ.
     The written agreement must specify the requirements for the HOME-ARP sponsor
     receiving the TBRA subsidy on behalf of the HOME-ARP TBRA household and the
     HOME-ARP sponsor’s obligation to use the HOME-ARP TBRA payment to pay rent
     for the unit to the property owner or management agent. If HOME-ARP TBRA is
     provided in coordination with a HOME-ARP sponsor, the sponsor must enter into a
     sublease with the HOME-ARP TBRA assisted household that must specify the duration
     of the sublease, applicable rents, lease requirements and tenant protections, all in
     accordance with the requirements of this Notice.

f.   Tenant Selection: The written agreement must require the owner to comply with the
     method of tenant selection determined by the PJ and applicable requirements of Section
     IV.C and VIL.C.1 of this Notice. The written agreement must include a description of the
     required method of tenant selection for the qualifying populations (1.e., use of CE, use of
     CE with other referral methods, project-specific waiting list), the method of tenant
     selection for low-income households (See Section VI.B.20.b and 24 CFR 92.253(d)),
     and any required policies and procedures around the use of a CE or project-specific
     waiting list. This section of the written agreement must be in sufficient detail to
     determine compliance with the PJ’s preferences and/or method of prioritization, if any,
     as well as all applicable fair housing, civil rights, and nondiscrimination requirements,
     including but not limited to those requirements listed in 24 CFR 5.105(a).

Supportive Services (subrecipient or contractor): The requirements at 24 CFR 92.504,
apply to the use of HOME-ARP funds for supportive services. The provisions of the written
agreement will depend on the role the entity is asked to assume. At a minimum, the written
agreement must contain the following provisions:

a.   Use of HOME funds: The written agreement must describe the amount and uses of the
     HOME-ARP funds, the tasks to be performed, the services to be provided, and include a
     budget. The written agreement cannot agree to provide HOME-ARP funds after the end
     of the HOME-ARP budget period.

b.   Records and Reports: The agreement must specify the particular records that must be
     maintained and the information or reports that must be submitted in order to assist the PJ
     in meeting its recordkeeping and reporting requirements as required under Section
     VILE of this Notice.

                                              79
     Cc.   Duration of the agreement and Disbursement of Funds: The agreement must specify the
           duration of the agreement, and state that disbursement of funds under the agreement may
           not be requested until the funds are needed.

           Compliance with     HOME-ARP Program Requirements: The written agreement must also
           require compliance with HOME-ARP program requirements for the HOME-ARP
           supportive services activity as described in Section VI.D of this Notice.

4.   HOME-ARP Non-Congregate Shelter (owner/developer): Written agreements must be
     executed between the PJ and the owner for all HOME-ARP NCS projects. A legally
     binding HOME-ARP NCS written agreement must include the date of the signature of each
     person signing the agreement. PJs are responsible for entering into written agreements
     before disbursing HOME-ARP funding. Contents of written agreements can vary based on
     specific needs of the PJ, the owner, and the project. Agreements for the acquisition,
     development, and rehabilitation of HOME-ARP NCS units must contain the following
     provisions:

     a.    Use of HOME-ARP funds: The agreement between the PJ and owner must include the
           address of the project or legal description of the property if a street address has not been
           assigned to the property, the use of the HOME-ARP NCS funds and other funds for the
           project, including the tasks to be performed for the project, a schedule for completing
           the tasks and the project, and a complete budget. These items must be in sufficient
           detail to provide a sound basis for the PJ to effectively monitor performance under the
           agreement to achieve project completion and compliance with HOME-ARP
           requirements. The written agreement cannot agree to provide HOME-ARP funds after
           the end of the HOME-ARP budget period.

           Habitability and Property Standards: The agreement must require the HOME-ARP
           NCS project to meet the habitability and property standards as described in Section
           VLE.7 of this Notice based on the type of project completed.
           Project Requirements: The agreement must require the HOME-ARP NCS project to
           meet the project requirements as described in this Notice.
           Other program requirements: The agreement must require the PJ and owner to carry out
           the project in compliance with the other Federal requirements of 24 CFR 92 subpart H
           and 24 CFR 92.505.
           Records and reports: The agreement must specify the particular records that must be
           maintained and the information or reports that must be submitted to assist the PJ in
           meeting its recordkeeping and reporting requirements.
           Restricted Use Period: The agreement must require the project to meet the Restricted
           Use Period as described in Section VI.E.9 of this Notice based on project type.
           Enforcement of the agreement: The agreement must provide for a means for the PJ to
           enforce compliance with HOME-ARP requirements. This means of enforcement may
           include liens, deed restrictions, covenants running with the land, use restriction, or other

                                                    80
          mechanism approved by HUD under which the PJ has the right to require specific
          performance. In addition, the agreement must specify remedies for breach of the
          provisions of the agreement.

     h.   Plan of Conversion: PJs that intend to allow conversion of HOME-ARP NCS projects
          to other permanent affordable housing as permitted in this Notice must describe
          conversion as a possible outcome of the HOME-ARP NCS project; specify the
          conditions under which conversion will be permitted; and require that the PJ approve the
          terms and conditions of any conversion before the conversion occurs.

     1.   Additional PJ Conditions and Requirements: PJs may include additional program and
          project requirements as determined necessary.

5.   Non-Profit Operating and Capacity Building: The requirements at 24 CFR 92.504(c)(6),
     apply to the use of HOME-ARP funds for non-profit operating and capacity building
     assistance. The written agreement must describe the amounts and uses of HOME-ARP
     funds for operating expenses or capacity building. If the non-profit organization is not also
     receiving HOME-ARP funds to carry outa HOME-ARP project, the agreement must
     provide that the organization is expected to receive funds for a HOME-ARP project within
     24 months of the date of receiving the funds for operating or capacity building expenses and
     must specify the terms and conditions upon which this expectation is based and the
     consequences of failure to receive funding for a project.

     When a PJ provides both operating assistance and capacity building assistance to an
     organization, it must enter into either one written agreement for both types of assistance or
     separate written agreements for operating expense assistance and capacity building
     assistance. If a PJ chooses to enter into one written agreement, the PJ must separately
     identify the scope of assistance, eligible uses and costs, and a budget for each type of funds.

C. Grants Management

1.   HOME-ARP Grant Agreement:            HUD will make HOME-ARP funds available to the PJ
     pursuant to   a HOME-ARP    Grant Agreement, consistent with Section VII.C.2 below.
     Subject to the provisions of the grant agreement and requirements in this Notice, HUD will
     obligate HOME-ARP funds to the PJ upon execution of the agreement by both parties. In
     the grant agreement, the PJ agrees that funds invested in affordable housing under this
     Notice are repayable if the housing no longer meets the requirements of this Notice during
     the compliance period or the NCS no longer meets the requirements of this Notice during
     the restricted use period. The PJ also agrees to assume all responsibility for environmental
     review, decision making, and actions, as specified and required in regulation at 24 CFR
     92.352 and 24 CFR Part 58. The PJ agrees to comply with 24 CFR 92.505 and applicable
     Uniform Administrative Requirements at 2 CFR part 200, as amended. The PJ agrees to
     comply with requirements established by the Office of Management and Budget (OMB)
     concerning the unique entity identifier and System for Award Management (SAM)
     requirements in Appendix I to 2 CFR part 200, as amended, and the Federal Funding
     Accountability and Transparency Act (FFATA) in Appendix A to 2 CFR part 170. The PJ

                                                  81
  agrees to comply with the federal nondiscrimination and equal opportunity requirements at
  24 CFR 92.350 and affirmative marketing requirements in 24 CFR 92.351 and the VAWA
  requirements set forth in 24 CFR 92.359. The HOME-ARP grant is obligated when the
  HUD Authorized Official signs the memorandum obligating HOME-ARP grants. The
  HOME-ARP Grant Agreement must be signed by the CPD Field Office Director and
  counter-signed by the PJ’s authorized signatory. Once the CPD division in the local field
  office receives the fully executed HOME-ARP Grant Agreement, it will send the agreement
  to HUD’s CFO Accounting Office for processing. As described in Section VIUI.C.2 of this
  Notice, funds will become available to the PJ in IDIS once HUD’s CFO Accounting Office
  processes the grant.

. Access to Administrative Set-aside Funds: Upon issuance of this Notice, HUD will
  obligate all HOME-ARP grants to PJs through the signing of the HOME-ARP obligating
  memorandum, after which each HOME-ARP Grant Agreement must be signed by both
  parties. After obligation, HUD will permit the PJ to use 5 percent of its award for eligible
  administrative and planning costs under Section VI.A of this Notice. The PJ may not
  expend any funds for non-administrative and planning costs before the HOME-ARP
  allocation plan is accepted by HUD as described in Section V.D.2 and 3 of this Notice.
  HUD will make the remaining HOME-ARP grant funds available to the PJ once HUD
  accepts the HOME-ARP allocation plan. If the PJ does not submit a HOME-ARP allocation
  plan or if the PJ’s plan is not accepted within a reasonable period of time, as determined by
  HUD, any costs incurred or HOME-ARP funds expended by the PJ will be considered
  ineligible costs and must be repaid with non-Federal funds in accordance with guidance
  from HUD.

- HOME-ARP Grant Number: The PJ’s HOME-ARP grant number is similar to its HOME
  grant number with the exception of the source type code. All HOME-ARP grants have the
  program identifier “M” and the source year of the grant “21.” The different source type
  codes are identified in the table below.

       Source Type        HOME Source           HOME-ARP
       Description         Type Code         Source Type Code

   HOME Consortium              DC                   DP

   Metropolitan City            MC                   MP

   State                         SG                   SP

   Insular Area                  ST                   IP

   Urban County                 UC                   UP


  The unique grantee identifier portion of the grant number will be the same for HOME-ARP
  grants as itis for HOME grants. See examples of HOME-ARP grant numbers with the
  different source type codes in the table below.
                                              82
        Participating       HOME     Grant           HOME-ARP
        Jurisdiction           Number                Grant Number

      Maryland               M21SG240100               M21SP240100

      Baltimore              M21MC240200              M21MP240200




4.   Budget Period: The budget period for HOME-ARP grants begins on the Federal Award
     Date, which is the date of the HUD Authorized Official’s signature specified on the HOME-
     ARP Grant Agreement. The budget period for HOME-ARP grants ends on September 30,
     2030. The PJ may not expend any HOME-ARP funds after September 30, 2030. After
     September 30, 2030, any HOME-ARP        funds remaining in the PJ’s HOME    Investment Trust
     Fund Treasury account will be cancelled and not available for obligation or expenditure for
     any purpose (per 31 U.S.C. 1552).

5.   Period of Performance: The period of performance for HOME-ARP grants begins on the
     Federal Award Date, which is the date of the HUD Authorized Official’s signature specified
     on the HOME-ARP Grant Agreement. The period of performance for HOME-ARP grants
     ends on September 30, 2030.

6.   Audit: Audits of the PJ, State recipients, and subrecipients must be conducted in
     accordance with 2 CFR part 200, subpart F.

7.   Closeout: HOME-ARP funds will be closed out in accordance with 2 CFR part 200,
     subpart D. The PJ will use HUD’s data system to closeout HOME-ARP grants once all
     HOME-ARP     funds have been expended, all HOME-ARP        activities are completed in
     accordance with the requirements of this Notice, and the proper beneficiary data has been
     entered. In order to closeout its HOME-ARP grants, the PJ must not have any open CPD
     monitoring findings or audits related the HOME-ARP funds. HUD will provide closeout
     guidance and instructions at a later date.

D. Applicability of Uniform Administrative Requirements.

The requirements of 2 CFR part 200, as amended apply to PJs, State recipients, and
subrecipients receiving HOME-ARP funds, except for the following provisions: 2 CFR
200.306, 200.307, 200.308 (not applicable to participating jurisdictions), 200.311 (except as
provided in 24 CFR 92.257), 200.312, 200.329, 200.333, and 200.334. The provisions of 2 CFR
200.305 apply as modified by 24 CFR 92.502(c) and this Notice. If there is a conflict between
definitions in 2 CFR part 200 and 24 CFR part 92, the definitions in 24 CFR part 92, govern.
Moreover, if there is a conflict between the provisions of 2 CFR part 200 and the provisions of
this Notice, the provisions of this Notice govern.

Where regulations in 24 CFR part 92 refer to specific regulations of 2 CFR part 200 that were or
are renumbered or revised by amendments to 2 CFR part 200, the requirements that apply to the

                                                 83
use of HOME-ARP funds are the applicable requirements in 2 CFR part 200, as amended,
notwithstanding the renumbered regulatory reference.

EK. Financial Management

1.   The HOME Investment Trust Fund: HUD will establish a HOME-ARP Investment Trust
     Fund Treasury account (Treasury account) for a PJ’s HOME-ARP funds. The Treasury
     account includes all HOME-ARP funds allocated to the PJ by formula and any HOME-ARP
     funds repaid by the PJ.

     The PJ must establish   a HOME-ARP    Investment Trust Fund local account (local account) as
     described in 24 CFR 92.500. The PJ may use either a separate local account or, a subsidiary
     account within its general fund (or other appropriate fund) as the local account. The PJ may
     not use the same local account for HOME-ARP that it uses for its HOME local account.
     The local account includes deposits of HOME-ARP funds disbursed from the Treasury
     account. The local account must be interest-bearing.

     HUD will reduce or recapture any HOME-ARP funds that are in the Treasury account that
     are not expended (drawn down) by September 30, 2030. Due to end-of-year financial
     system closeouts that begin before this date and prevent electronic access to the payment
     system, requests to draw down the funds must be made at least 7 full business days before
     this date so that the funds still can be drawn from the Treasury account through IDIS.

2.   Program Income: Program Income means gross income received by the PJ generated from
     the use of HOME-ARP funds during the grant period of performance. This includes, but is
     not limited to, principal and interest payments from a loan made with HOME-ARP funds, or
     other income or fees received from project owners in connection with HOME-ARP funds,
     and interest earned by the PJ on program income before its disposition.

     Program income earned as a result of the use of HOME-ARP funds is HOME program
     income and must be used in accordance with the requirements of 24 CFR part 92. All
     program income must be recorded in IDIS. Program income must be deposited in the PJ’s
     HOME-ARP local account (unless the PJ allows a State recipient or subrecipient to retain
     the program income for additional HOME projects pursuant to such terms and conditions in
     the written agreement and this Notice). The PJ must enter HOME-ARP program income
     retained by the State recipient or subrecipient as a HOME program income receipt in IDIS
     and subgrant the program income to the State recipient or subrecipient that retained the
     program income. The PJ is responsible to report on the use of its program income in IDIS,
     including program income it allowed a State recipient or subrecipient to retain.

3.   Repayments: Any HOME-ARP funds used for costs that are not eligible under this Notice,
     funds invested in a project that is terminated before completion, either voluntarily or
     otherwise, or funds invested in HOME-ARP rental housing and NCS that does not meet the
     requirements in this Notice for the applicable period specified in this Notice must be repaid
     by the PJ to its Treasury account. If the funds are repaid after September 30, 2030, they will
     be recaptured by the U.S. Department of Treasury and the PJ will not be able to re-use the

                                                 84
    funds for eligible HOME-ARP activities. HOME-ARP funds may not be repaid to the PJ’s
    local account.

.   Integrated Disbursement and Information System (IDIS):         The PJ will use IDIS to
    administer its HOME-ARP funds. The PJ will request disbursements of HOME-ARP funds
    from its Treasury account and collect and report information on the use of HOME-ARP
    funds through IDIS. (For purposes of reporting in IDIS, a HOME-ARP project is an
    activity.) The PJ must report all program income in IDIS.

    The requirements of 24 CFR 92.502(c)(3) do not apply to HOME-ARP funds.

    In accordance with this Notice, a HOME-ARP written agreement providing HOME-ARP
    funds to a project or the CHDO/nonprofit must be signed and dated by:

    a.   the PJ and project owner for HOME-ARP      rental and HOME-ARP    NCS;

    b.   the PJ and service provider for HOME-ARP supportive services;

    c.   the PJ and landlord, tenant, and/or HOME-ARP sponsor, as applicable, for HOME-ARP
         TBRA; and,

    d.   the PJ and CHDO/nonprofit organization for HOME-ARP Operating Expenses and
         Capacity Building Assistance.

    This must occur before any HOME-ARP funds are disbursed. Federal funds cannot be
    drawn from the Treasury account in advance of the need to pay an eligible cost.
    Consequently, HOME-ARP funds cannot be drawn from the U.S. Treasury and placed in
    escrow or advanced in lump sums to State recipients, subrecipients, project owners, service
    providers, or landlords or tenants, except funds drawn down for   a HOME-ARP    rental
    project for an operating cost assistance reserve or reserve for replacement pursuant to
    Section VI.B.5.g. of this Notice or a HOME-ARP NCS project for a replacement reserve
    pursuant to Section VLE.

    Once funds are drawn from the PJ’s Treasury account, they must be expended for an eligible
    HOME-ARP cost within 15 days. Any interest earned within the 15-day period may be
    retained by the PJ as HOME program income and recorded in IDIS as a program income
    receipt. Any funds that are drawn down and not expended for eligible costs within 15 days
    of the disbursement must be returned to HUD for deposit in the PJ's Treasury account.
    Interest earned after 15 days belongs to the United States and must be remitted to the United
    States as provided in 2 CFR 200.305(b)(9), except interest amounts up to $500 per year may
    be retained for the PJ’s administrative expenses.

    Additional HOME-ARP funds may be committed to a project up to one year after project
    completion.




                                               85
     HUD will govern access to IDIS by other entities participating in the HOME program (e.g.,
     State recipients). Only PJs and State recipients (if permitted by the State) may request
     disbursement.

F. Recordkeeping

Each PJ must establish and maintain sufficient records to enable HUD to determine whether the
PJ has met the requirements of this Notice. At a minimum, the following records are needed:

1.   Program Records:

     a.   Records evidencing that all HOME-ARP funds used by a PJ for TBRA, supportive
          services, and acquisition and development of non-congregate shelter units benefit
          individuals and families in qualifying populations.

          Records evidencing that not less than 70 percent of affordable rental housing units
          acquired, rehabilitated, and/or constructed with HOME      funds by a PJ are restricted for
          occupancy by households in the qualifying populations.

          Records documenting compliance with the 15 percent limitation on administrative and
          planning costs.

          Records documenting compliance with the 5 percent limitation on CHDO and non-profit
          operating and capacity building costs.

          The underwriting and subsidy layering guidelines adopted in accordance with Section
          VI.B.10 of this Notice that support the PJ's HOME-ARP allocation plan certification.

          If existing debt is refinanced for multifamily rehabilitation projects, the HOME-ARP
          refinancing guidelines established in the HOME-ARP in the HOME-ARP Allocation
          Plan.

          If HOME-ARP funds are used for TBRA, records supporting the PJ's written selection
          policies and criteria; supporting documentation for preferences for specific categories of
          qualifying individuals; and records supporting the rent standard and minimum tenant
          contribution established in accordance with Section VI.C.7 and 8 of this Notice.

          Confidentiality.

           i.   The PJ’s written policies and procedures for maintaining confidentiality of
                qualifying households as individuals or families fleeing, or attempting to flee
                domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, stalking, or human trafficking in
                accordance with Section VIILH.

          ii.   The PJ’s written policies and procedures for maintaining confidentiality in
                compliance with the VAWA protections contained in 24 CFR Part 5, Subpart L.



                                                     86
2.   Project Records: PJs are required to retain the following records for HOME-ARP.-assisted
     projects, as specified by activity type.

     a.   A full description of each project assisted with HOME-ARP funds, including the
          location (address of project), form of HOME-ARP      assistance, and the units, families, or
          qualifying households assisted with HOME-ARP funds, subject to confidentiality
          requirements in this Notice.

          The source and application of funds for each project, including supporting
          documentation in accordance with 2 CFR 200.302; and records to document the
          eligibility and permissibility of the project costs, including the documentation of the
          actual HOME-ARP-eligible development costs of each HOME-ARP.-assisted unit as
          defined in this Notice.

          Records (i.e., written agreements) demonstrating compliance with the written agreement
          requirements in Section VII.B of this Notice.

          Records (e.g., inspection reports) demonstrating that each HOME-ARP rental project
          meets the property standards in Section VI.B.11 of this Notice at project completion and
          through the applicable minimum compliance period. In addition, during a HOME-ARP
          rental project’s minimum compliance period, records demonstrating compliance with the
          property standards and financial oversight pursuant to 24 CFR 92.504(d) and the
          operating cost assistance reserve management and oversight required by Section VI.B.23
          of this Notice.

          Records (e.g., inspection reports) demonstrating that each unit occupied by a qualifying
          household receiving HOME-ARP TBRA, meets the housing quality standards of Section
          VI.C.9 of this Notice at initial occupancy and throughout the household’s term of
          assistance.

          Records (e.g., inspection reports) demonstrating that each NCS project meets the
          property and habitability standards of Section VI.E.7 of this Notice at project completion
          and throughout the applicable restricted use period.

          Records demonstrating that each qualifying household is eligible for HOME-ARP
          assistance based on the requirements of the ARP and Section IV of this Notice.

          Records demonstrating that each household qualifying as homeless, records that meet
          the requirements in 24 CFR 576.500(b)(1), (2), (3), or (4), as applicable (except that
          youth aged 24 and under must not be required to provide third-party documentation to
          show they are homeless to receive any shelter, housing, or services for which ESG or
          CoC Program funds may be used to supplement the HOME-ARP assistance).

          Records demonstrating that each household qualifying as “at risk of homelessness,”
          records that meet the requirements in 24 CFR 576.500(c)(1) or (2), as applicable, and
          include the following documentation of annual income:


                                                   87
     i.   Income evaluation form containing the minimum requirements specified by
          HUD and completed by the recipient or subrecipient; and

    ii.   Source documents for the assets held by the household and income received
          over the most recent period for which representative data is available before the
          date of the evaluation (e.g., wage statement, unemployment compensation
          statement, public benefits statement, bank statement);

   ii.    To the extent that source documents are unobtainable, a written statement by the
          relevant third party (e.g., employer, government benefits administrator) or the
          written certification by the recipient's or subrecipient's intake staff of the oral
          verification by the relevant third party of the income the household received over
          the most recent period for which representative data is available; or

   iv.    To the extent that source documents and third-party verification are
          unobtainable, the written certification by the household of the amount of income
          the household received for the most recent period representative of the income
          that the household is reasonably expected to receive over the 3-month period
          following the evaluation.

 Records demonstrating compliance with the household income requirements in
 accordance with Section VI.B.12 of this Notice for each HOME-ARP rental project.

 Records demonstrating that each HOME-ARP rental and NCS project meets the
 minimum compliance period or restricted use period described in Sections VI.B.18 and
 VLE.9 respectively, of this Notice.

 Records demonstrating that for each HOME-ARP rental housing unit or for each
 household receiving HOME-ARP TBRA, compliance with the tenant protection
 requirements of Sections VI.B.19 and VLC.2, respectively, of this Notice. For HOME-
 ARP TBRA or rental projects under a master lease, the PJ must retain records
 demonstrating that a master lease for housing leased by a HOME-ARP sponsor and each
 sublease between a qualifying household and HOME-ARP sponsor complies with the
 tenant and participant protections of 24 CFR 92.253 and this Notice. Records must be
 kept for each household.

. Records demonstrating compliance with the return of the HOME-ARP rental capitalized
  operating cost assistance reserve and/or the NCS replacement reserve at the end of the
  compliance or restricted use period in accordance with Sections VI.B.24 and VI.E.10
  respectively, of this Notice.

 Records demonstrating that each HOME-ARP rental and each NCS project meets the
 underwriting and subsidy layering or due diligence requirements of Section VI.B.10 or
 VLE.6 of this Notice.

 Records demonstrating that each HOME-ARP rental housing project meets the rent
 limitations of Sections VI.B.13 and VI.B.15 of this Notice for the 15-year minimum
 compliance period. Records must be kept for each household assisted.
                                          88
p.   Records demonstrating that each multifamily HOME-ARP rental housing project
     involving rehabilitation with refinancing complies with the refinancing guidelines
     established in accordance with 24 CFR 92.206(b).

q.   Records demonstrating that a site and neighborhood standards review was conducted for
     each HOME-ARP rental housing project involving new construction under Section VI.B
     of this Notice to determine that the site meets the requirements of 24 CFR 983.57(e)(2)
     and (e)(3), in accordance with 24 CFR 92.202.

r.   Records demonstrating that any conversion of HOME-ARP NCS complies with the
     requirements established by Section VIE of this Notice, including that conversion of
     NCS only occurred after the end of the applicable minimum use period defined in Section
     VLE.11.

s.   For all HOME-ARP NCS projects the following documents must be maintained, as
     applicable:

         i.     Purchase contract, closing documents, settlement statement and title work for
                acquisitions.

       ii.      Appraisal or other estimation of value to justify acquisition expenditure.

      ii.       Architectural and engineering contracts and completed designs, plans, and
                specifications for rehabilitation and new construction activities.

       iv.      Invoices, pay requests, and proof of payment for all project expenditures.

        v.    — Proof of insurance.

       vi.      Project and program audits.

t.   For all HOME-ARP Supportive Services projects pursuant to McKinney-Vento or
     Homelessness Prevention Supportive Services:

         i.     Records, where applicable, demonstrating compliance with the termination of
                assistance requirement as described in Section VI.D.5 of this Notice.

       ii.      Records of all solicitations of and agreements with subrecipients and contractors,
                records of all payment requests by and dates of payments made to subrecipients,
                and documentation of all monitoring and sanctions of subrecipients, as
                applicable including any findings and corrective actions required.

      ii.       Records of all procurement contracts and documentation of compliance with the
                procurement requirements in 2 CFR part 200, subpart D, as revised by Section
                VIUL.D of this Notice.

       iv.      Records evidencing the use of the written procedures required under Section
                VL.D.2 and records evidencing compliance with Section IV.C.2 of this Notice.

                                                 89
              v.    — Records of all leases, subleases, and financial assistance agreements for the
                     provision of rental payments, documentation of payments made by the PJ to
                      owners, HOME-ARP      sponsor, or qualifying households for the provision of
                     financial assistance for rental payments, and supporting documentation for these
                     payments, including dates of occupancy by qualifying individuals and families.

             vi.    | Records that document the monthly allowance for utilities (excluding telephone)
                      used to determine compliance with the rent restriction.

            vii.      Records of the types of services provided under the PJ’s program and the
                      amounts spent on these services.

           vill.     Records demonstrating subrecipient compliance with the recordkeeping
                     requirements in Section VIII.F of this Notice.

     u.    For all HOME-ARP Housing Counseling Services projects as defined in 24 CFR part 5,
           each participating housing counseling agency must maintain a recordkeeping and
           reporting system in accordance with 24 CFR 214.315 and 24 CFR 214.317. The system
           must permit HUD to easily access all information needed for a performance review.

     v.    For all HOME-ARP.-assisted nonprofit operating expense and capacity building
           assistance activities:

               i.     Records concerning the use of funds for nonprofit operating expense and
                      capacity building assistance must be maintained to enable HUD to determine
                      whether the PJ has met the requirements of Section VI.F of this Notice.

              ii.    Written agreements between the PJ and the nonprofit organization providing
                     nonprofit operating expense assistance or capacity building assistance must be
                     retained for five years after the agreement terminates.

3.    Financial records:

      a.   Records, in accordance with 2 CFR 200.302, identifying the source and application of
           HOME-ARP         funds. Identification must include, as applicable, the Assistance Listing
           program title and number (formerly Catalogue of Federal Domestic Assistance), Federal
           award identification number and year, name of the Federal agency, and name of the
           pass-through entity, if any.

      b.   Records concerning the HOME-ARP Investment Trust Fund Treasury account and local
           account required to be established and maintained by this Notice, including deposits,
           disbursements, balances, supporting documentation and any other information required
           by IDIS.

      c.   Records identifying the source and application of program income and repayments.

      d.   Records demonstrating adequate budget control and other records required by 2 CFR
           200.302, including evidence of periodic account reconciliations.
                                                       90
4.   Program       administration records:

     a.    Records demonstrating compliance with the written agreements required by Section
           VIUIL.B of this Notice.

           Records demonstrating compliance with the applicable uniform administrative
           requirements required by Section VIII.D of this Notice.

           Records documenting required inspections, monitoring reviews and audits, and the
           resolution of any findings or concerns.

5.   Records concerning other Federal requirements:

     a.    Equal opportunity and fair housing records.

              1.   Data on the extent to which each racial and ethnic group, and single-headed
                   households by gender of household head) have applied for, participated in, or
                   benefited from, any program or activity funded in whole or in part with HOME-
                   ARP funds.

             il.   Documentation that the PJ submitted a certification that it will affirmatively
                   further fair housing consistent with HUD’s Interim Final Rule entitled Restoring
                   Affirmatively Furthering Fair Housing Definitions and Certifications (86 FR
                    30779, June 10, 2021) (codified at 24 CFR 5.151 and 5.152;), available at
                   https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/202 1/06/10/2021-12114/restoring-
                   affirmatively-furthering-fair-housing-definitions-and-certifications.

            iil.   Records demonstrating compliance with the nondiscrimination and equal
                   opportunity requirements of 24 CFR 92, Subpart H.

     b.    Affirmative marketing and MBE/WBE records.

              1.   Records demonstrating compliance with the affirmative marketing procedures
                   and requirements of 24 CFR 92.351 and this Notice.

             il.   Documentation and data on the steps taken to implement the jurisdiction's
                    outreach programs to minority-owned (MBE) and female-owned (WBE)
                   businesses including data indicating the racial/ethnic or gender character of each
                   business entity receiving a contract or subcontract of $25,000 or more paid, or to
                   be paid, with HOME-ARP      funds; the amount of the contract or subcontract, and
                   documentation of participating jurisdiction's affirmative steps to assure that
                   minority business and women's business enterprises have an equal opportunity to
                   obtain or compete for contracts and subcontracts as sources of supplies,
                   equipment, construction, and services.

     Cc.   Records demonstrating compliance with the environmental review requirements of 24
           CFR 92.352, 24 CFR part 58, and this Notice including flood insurance requirements.


                                                   91
d.   Records demonstrating compliance with the requirements of 24 CFR 92.353 and the
     provisions of Section VI.F of this Notice regarding displacement, relocation, and real
     property acquisition, including but not limited to:

        i.     project occupancy lists identifying the name and address of all persons
               occupying the real property on the date described in 24 CFR 92.353(c)(2)G)(A),
               moving into the property on or after the date described in 24 CFR
               92.353(c)(2)G)(A), and occupying the property upon completion of the project;

       ii.     lists of all individuals or families occupying hotels and motels and other
               nonresidential properties acquired, rehabilitated, and/or demolished and newly
               constructed to become HOME-ARP NCS or HOME-ARP rental housing that
               qualify for assistance under this Notice as members of a qualifying population,
               as well as records indicating whether such persons were assisted by the HOME-
               ARP program by the PJ following the closure of the nonresidential properties
               because of HOME-ARP activities

      ii.    —_ lists of all individuals or families occupying HOME-ARP NCS that were
                converted during the required use period that qualify for assistance under this
                Notice, as well as records indicating whether moving costs or advisory services
                were provided as part of HOME-ARP administrative costs or under the HOME-
                ARP supportive services activity in Section VI.D of this Notice, and records
                indicating whether such persons were assisted by the HOME-ARP program by
                the PJ following the conversion of the HOME-ARP NCS units.

      iv.      Documentation that the PJ has and followed      a RARAP   in accordance with 24
               CFR 92.353 and 24 CFR 42.325.

e.   Records demonstrating compliance with the labor requirements of 24 CFR 92.354,
     including contract provisions and payroll records.

f.   Records demonstrating compliance with the lead-based paint requirements of 24 CFR
     part 35, subparts A, B, J, K,   M and R, as applicable.

g.   Records supporting compliance with conflict of interest requirements in 24 CFR 92.356,
     as revised by Section VII.H of this Notice, as well as documentation of any exceptions
     granted by HUD or a state PJ, as applicable, to the conflict of interest provisions in 24
     CFR 92.356, as revised by Section VII.H of this Notice.

h.   Records demonstrating compliance with debarment and suspension requirements in 2
     CFR part 2424.

i.   Records concerning intergovernmental review, as required by 24 CFR 92.357.

j.   Records of emergency transfers requested under 24 CFR 5.2005(e) and 24 CFR 92.359
     pertaining to victims of domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, or stalking,
     including data on the outcomes of those requests.

                                               92
     k.   Documentation of actions undertaken to meet the requirements of 24 CFR part 75 which
          implements section 3 of the Housing Development Act of 1968, as amended (12 U.S.C.
          1701u).

6.   State Recipients and Subrecipients: A PJ that distributes HOME-ARP funds to State
     recipients or subrecipients must require the State recipients or subrecipients to keep the
     records required by paragraphs 1. program records, 2. project records, 3. financial records,
     4. program administration records, and 5. records concerning other federal requirements of
     Section VIIIL.F of this Notice, and such other records as the PJ determines to be necessary to
     enable the PJ to carry out its responsibilities under this Notice. The PJ need not duplicate the
     records kept by the State recipients or subrecipients. The PJ must keep records concerning
     its annual review of the performance and compliance of each State recipient and
     subrecipient as required under 24 CFR 92.504(a).

7.   Period of record retention: All records pertaining to HOME-ARP funds must be retained
     for five years, except as provided below.

     a.   For HOME-ARP rental housing projects, records may be retained for five years after the
          project completion date; except that records of individual tenant income verifications,
          project rents and project inspections must be retained for the most recent five-year
          period, until five years after the affordability period terminates.

     b.   For HOME-ARP TBRA projects, records must be retained for five years after the period
          of rental assistance terminates.

     c.   Written agreements must be retained for five years after the agreement terminates.

     d.   Records covering displacements and acquisition must be retained for five years after the
          date by which all persons displaced from the property and all persons whose property is
          acquired for the project have received the final payment to which they are entitled in
          accordance with 24 CFR 92.353.

     e.   If any litigation, claim, negotiation, audit, monitoring, inspection, or other action has
          been started before the expiration of the required record retention period records must be
          retained until completion of the action and resolution of all issues which arise from it, or
          until the end of the required period, whichever is later.

8.   Access to records: The PJ must provide citizens, public agencies, and other interested
     parties with reasonable access to records, consistent with applicable state and local laws and
     any other applicable grant conditions from other federal grant programs regarding privacy
     and obligations of confidentiality.

     The PJ, subrecipient, contractor, or owner may create a program participant identifier code
     or number that can be used on a file and maintained internally, in such a way that the
     number itself does not inadvertently identify the program participant, (1.e., no use of initials,
     date of birth, or other pieces of information that might suggest the identity of the program
     participant). The “key” or “cypher” for the program participant identifier code would itself
     be confidential and would not leave the provider. In the circumstance of HUD programs, the
                                                   93
     Unique Personal Identification Number which is generated within the comparable database
     could be used with auditors to identify records of services to distinct individuals, subject to
     the below requirement.

     HUD and the Comptroller General of the United States, any of their representatives, have
     the right of access to any pertinent books, documents, papers, or other records of the PJ,
     state recipients, and subrecipients, in order to make audits, examinations, excerpts, and
     transcripts. If a provider of services or operator of an NCS is subject to state or local laws
     or other federal grant programs that require that HUD not be given access to records
     detailing PI of victims, then auditors or evaluators may be given access to representative
     files without any sharing of individual identifying information.

G. Reporting and Performance Reports.

The PJ must submit reports in a format and at such time as prescribed by HUD. In addition,
HUD and Office of the Inspector General (OIG) staff must be given access, upon reasonable
notice, to all information related to the selection, award, and use of HOME-ARP       funds.

Each PJ must enter the required HOME-ARP data elements timely in IDIS.

1.   For HOME-ARP      rental activities under Section VI.B of this Notice, the PJ must enter
     complete project completion information when it completes the activity in IDIS, except the
     assisted units can be marked vacant until they are occupied by eligible households.

2.   For HOME-ARP      NCS activities under Section VI.E of this Notice, the PJ must enter
     complete project completion information when it completes the activity in IDIS. In
     addition, the PJ must report the disposition of any HOME-ARP-assisted NCS activity that is
     converted to another eligible use at the time of conversion.

3.   For HOME-ARP      TBRA activities under Section VI.C of this Notice, the PJ must report
     beneficiary information in IDIS at the time assistance is provided.

4.   For HOME-ARP Supportive Services activities under Section VI.D of this Notice, the PJ
     must report in IDIS quarterly, by the 30" day after the end of each calendar quarter, on the
     number of homeless and not homeless households assisted with supportive services and
     housing counseling, including the race and ethnicity, household size, and household type of
     the households assisted.

HUD will issue guidance about reporting on HOME-ARP activities in the PJ’s consolidated
annual performance and evaluation report (CAPER) required under 24 CFR 91.520, at a later
date.

H. Confidentiality Requirements

1.   All entities assisted by HOME-ARP     funds must develop, implement, and maintain written
     procedures to require that —


                                                  94
      a.   All records containing personally identifying information of any individual or family
           who applies for and/or receives HOME-ARP assistance will be kept secure and
           confidential;

      b.   The address or location of any NCS or HOME-ARP rental housing exclusively for
           individuals fleeing or attempting to flee domestic violence, dating violence, sexual
           assault, stalking, or human trafficking will not be made public, except as necessary
           where making the address or location public does not identify occupancy of the NCS or
           HOME-ARP rental housing, when necessary to record use restrictions or restrictive
           covenants in accordance with Section VI.B or VLE, or with written authorization of the
           person or entity responsible for the operation of the NCS or HOME-ARP rental housing;
           and

      c.   The address or location of any program participant that is a fleeing or attempting to flee
           domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, stalking, or human trafficking will
           not be made public, except as provided under a privacy policy of the PJ consistent with
           state and local laws and any other grant conditions from other federal grant programs
           regarding privacy and obligations of confidentiality.

2.    Documenting status of a qualifying population that is fleeing or attempting to flee domestic
      violence, dating violence, stalking, sexual assault, or human trafficking:

      a.   If an individual or family qualifies because the individual or family is fleeing or
           attempting to flee domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, stalking, or human
           trafficking then acceptable evidence includes an oral or written statement by the
           qualifying individual or head of household seeking assistance that they are fleeing that
           situation. An oral statement may be documented by either —
              i.    a written certification by the individual or head of household; or
            li.    awritten certification by a victim service provider, intake worker, social worker,
                   legal assistance provider, health-care provider, law enforcement agency, legal
                   assistance provider, pastoral counselor, or an intake worker in any other
                   organization from whom the individual or family sought assistance.

           The written documentation need only include the minimum amount of information
           indicating that the individual or family is fleeing or attempting to flee domestic violence,
           dating violence, sexual assault, stalking, or human trafficking and need not include any
           additional details about the conditions that prompted the individual or family to seek
           assistance.

IX.         PERFORMANCE                 REVIEWS
HUD will review the performance of each PJ in carrying out its responsibilities for the use of
HOME-ARP funds and its compliance with the requirements of this Notice. Such reviews may
take the form of remote or on-site monitoring, review of IDIS data or reports, assessment of
documents requested from the PJ, subrecipient, or other entity carrying out HOME-ARP
activities, and inquiries resulting from external audit reports, media reports, citizen complaints,

                                                    95
or other sources of relevant information. HUD may also review a PJ’s timely use of HOME-
ARP funds for eligible activities, including the progress of expenditures for individual projects
or activities, the requirement to place a project in service in accordance with requirements in
this Notice, and compliance of HOME-ARP rental housing and NCS with the 4-year deadline
for completing projects.

If HUD preliminarily determines that a PJ has not met a requirement of this Notice or an
applicable requirement of the HOME regulations at 24 CFR Part 92, HUD will communicate its
determination in writing and provide the PJ with the opportunity to demonstrate, based on
substantial facts, documentation, and data, that it has done so.   HUD may extend any time
period it provided to the PJ to demonstrate its compliance if upon request of the PJ, HUD
determines that is it infeasible for the PJ to provide a full response within the prescribed period.

If the PJ fails to demonstrate to HUD's satisfaction that it has met the requirement, HUD will
take corrective or remedial action in accordance with this section or 24 CFR 92.552.

A. Corrective and Remedial Actions

Corrective or remedial actions for a performance deficiency (e.g., failure to meet a provision of
this Notice or an applicable provision of 24 CFR Part 92) will be designed to prevent a
continuation of the deficiency; mitigate, to the extent possible, its adverse effects or
consequences; and prevent its recurrence. HUD may impose corrective or remedial actions
including but not limited to the following:

1.   HUD may instruct the PJ to submit and comply with proposals for action to correct, mitigate
     and prevent a performance deficiency, including:

     a.   Preparing and following a schedule of actions for carrying out the affected activities,
          consisting of schedules, timetables, and milestones necessary to implement the affected
          activities;

     b.   Establishing and following a management plan that assigns responsibilities for carrying
          out the remedial actions;

     c.   Canceling or revising activities likely to be affected by the performance deficiency,
          before expending HOME-ARP funds for the activities;

     d.   Reprogramming HOME-ARP funds that have not yet been expended from affected
          activities to other eligible activities;

     e.   Reimbursing its HOME-ARP grant in any amount not used in accordance with the
          requirements of this Notice;

     f.   Suspending disbursement of HOME-ARP funds for affected activities; and

     g.   Establishing procedures to ensure compliance with HOME-ARP requirements.


                                                     96
2.   HUD may also:

     a.   Change the method of payment from an advance to a reimbursement basis and may
          require supporting documentation to be submitted for HUD review for each payment
          request before payment is made;

     b.   Determine the PJ to be high risk and impose special conditions or restrictions on the use
           of HOME-ARP    funds in accordance with 2 CFR 200.208; and

     c.   Take other remedies that may be legally available, including remedies under 2 CFR
          200.339 and 200.340.

B. Sanctions

The requirements at 24 CFR 92.552 apply to HOME-ARP funds, except that the provision at 24
CFR 92.552(a)(2)(v) related to failure to comply with matching contribution requirements shall
not apply.

X.        FINDING OF NO SIGNIFICANT IMPACT
A Finding of No Significant Impact (FONSD) with respect to the environment has been made in
accordance with HUD regulations at 24 CFR part 50, which implement section 102(2)(C) of the
National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (42 U.S.C. 4332(2)(C)). The FONSI is available for
inspection at HUD's Funding Opportunities web page at:
https://www.hud.gov/program_offices/spm/gmomemt/grantsinfo/fundingopps.




                                                  97
