                                                                                                OREGON
                                                                                                DEPARTMENT OF
                                                                                i               EDUCATION
                                                                                 Oregon achieves...       together!

                                                                                                            Colt Gill
                                                                            Director of the Department of Education



House Bill 2281 A — District Civil Rights Coordinators
Senate Education Committee
April 27, 2023

Chair Dembrow, Vice-Chair Weber, and members of the committee, | am Nicole Peterson, Legislative
Coordinator for the Oregon Department of Education (ODE). Thank you for the opportunity to provide
testimony in support of House Bill 2281 A.

Public school districts are responsible for the prompt resolution of complaints of discrimination under
both state and federal law. Under Oregon law, a person may file a discrimination complaint first with
the local school district and then with the Oregon Department of Education. A person may also file a
complaint directly with the United States Department of Education’s Office for Civil Rights.

Over the past few years, the number of discrimination complaints in public education have increased
significantly. In 2019, the Oregon Department of Education received 36 complaints alleging
discrimination. In 2020, the Department received 78 complaints alleging discrimination. In 2021, the
Department received 129 complaints alleging discrimination. In 2022, the Department received 163
complaints alleging discrimination. From 2019 to 2022, that is a 450% increase in discrimination
complaints submitted to the Department. A recent article in the New York Times reports that the
United States Department of Education’s Office for Civil Rights is experiencing a similar increase in
discrimination complaints.[1]

Students who are subjected to discrimination in our public schools experience significant adverse
impacts including lowered academic achievement and aspirations, increased anxiety, loss of
self-esteem and confidence, depression, post-traumatic stress, general deterioration in physical health,
feelings of alienation in the school environment, and increased absenteeism from school.

HB 2281 A requires school districts to designate at least one civil rights coordinator for the school
district. The district may also enter into a contract with an education service district to provide the civil
rights coordinator services. The bill sets responsibilities for the coordinator, including coordinating
efforts to prevent civil rights violations, providing guidance on civil rights issues, and monitoring the
district’s compliance with state and federal laws. Finally, the bill requires the Oregon Department of
Education to provide annual training for the civil rights coordinators.

During the summer of 2022, the Department held eight separate listening sessions. A total of 44
invitees attended the listening sessions. Invitees included students, parents or caregivers, advocates,
administrators from nine school districts, members of education organizations, and members of

   255 Capitol St NE, Salem, OR 97310   | Voice:   503-947-5600   | Fax: 503-378-5156   | www.oregon.gov/ode
                                                                                                OREGON
                                                                                                DEPARTMENT OF
                                                                                i               EDUCATION
                                                                                 Oregon achieves...       together!

                                                                                                            Colt Gill
                                                                            Director of the Department of Education



advisory groups. The purpose of the listening session was to gather input from the community
regarding their experiences with the Department’s complaint and appeal process and to elicit
suggestions for improvement. The Department also solicited attendee input regarding the proposal to
require districts to designate a civil rights coordinator.

Community members expressed support for this proposal but noted that training is critical and must be
provided for these positions. District participants expressed concern that the proposal requires
designation of a new coordinator but does not include funding for that position. District participants
also noted that small districts may not have sufficient staff to cover this responsibility and may not have
funds to hire someone with the appropriate training to serve in this role. It was in response to these
concerns raised by districts that the Department revised its initial proposal to include the ability to
contract with an education service district and the requirement for the Department to provide annual
training.

The Department is well prepared to support districts in this work. We currently employ two civil rights
specialists. Their job is to provide leadership in advancing and assuring public school civil rights, equal
opportunity, and safe learning environment activities throughout Oregon. This is accomplished
primarily through consultation, technical assistance and training for school districts. Both of these civil
rights specialists have experience working with a network of Coordinators - districts are currently
required to designate a 504 coordinator and a Title IX coordinator - and we have seen great success
working within this coordinator system. Our civil rights specialists work closely together and are already
planning how to provide training for and support these coordinators in an aligned and proactive way.

Note that the bill language of HB 2281 A was carefully negotiated with the Coalition of Oregon School
Administrators and the Oregon School Boards Association to ensure targeted and appropriate language
for what Civil Rights Coordinators would be responsible for. The Department has committed to an
extensive public engagement process of what if any additional guardrails should be placed around this
responsibility in Rule - for example, the requirement that the civil rights coordinator be an
administrator.

This bill does not create a new body of work for the Department or the districts. Rather it is an effort to
create a more coordinated approach to how districts implement federal and state discrimination laws.
Thank you for this opportunity to provide comments, and we welcome any questions you may have.




   255 Capitol St NE, Salem, OR 97310   | Voice:   503-947-5600   | Fax: 503-378-5156   | www.oregon.gov/ode
         Oregon                                                                              OREGON
                                                                                             DEPARTMENT OF
                                                                              |              EDUCATION
          Tina Kotek,   Governor



                                                                              Oregon achieves. . . together!
                                                                                                          Colt Gill
                                                                          Director of the Department of Education



Respectfully submitted,

Nicole Peterson
Legislative Coordinator




[1] Green, E.L. (2023, January 1). Strife in Schools: Education Dept. Logs Records Number of
Discrimination Complaints. The New York Times.
https://www.nytimes.com/2023/01/01/us/politics/education-discrimination.html.


   255 Capitol St NE, Salem, OR 97310   | Voice: 503-947-5600   | Fax: 503-378-5156   | www.oregon.gov/ode
