Fact Sheet for Public Housing Authorities and Owners
of Section 8 Moderate Rehabilitation (Mod Rehab) or
McKinney Mod Rehab Single Room Occupancy (SRO)
Properties Converting Under the Rental Assistance
Demonstration (RAD)

                                                                                                                          g
                                                                   U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development   Fs l
                                                                                         Office of Recapitalization   %




Release Date: January 2018. Source: www.hudexchange.info/resources/documents/RAD-Fact-Sheet-for-PHAs-and-Owners.
                                                                                                              pdf




Are you an owner looking to modernize and place your Moderate Rehabilitation                            (Mod Rehab) or
 Mod Rehab Single Room Occupancy (SRO) property on stable financial footing? Are you a public
 housing authority (PHA) looking to facilitate the long-term preservation and affordability of
 Mod Rehab and Mod Rehab SRO properties in your portfolio? Learn how the Rental Assistance
 Demonstration (RAD) can help you get started today! This fact sheet is part of an outreach and
 resource initiative for RAD; it is designed to help encourage owners and PHAs to participate in
 RAD, and to further your understanding of the RAD conversion process and its requirements.
 For more information, please see the information in the text box at the end of this document.

 RAD Background
                          RAD is a U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) program that
  NN                      is open to owners of Section 8 Mod Rehab (including the SRO program), Rent
                       Supplement, Section 236 Rental Assistance Payment (RAP), and public housing
                          properties. Owners of properties funded under these programs can convert the unit
                       subsidy funding to long-term Section 8 project-based rental assistance.

                       RAD Enables Owners and PHAs to Successfully Preserve and Recapitalize Properties
                      to:
                      e      Improve and modernize through capital repairs.
                      e      Stabilize by placing them on solid financial footing.
                      e      Safeguard long-term rental assistance for current and future tenants.




Public Housing Authorities and Owners Fact Sheet
                                                                                                                            AMENTO
                                                                                                                     & a                “Ky °

                                                              U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development   @ *                      we
                                                                                                                                                   Zz


                                                                                    Office of Recapitalization   %
                                                                                                                                                   Ll




                                                                                                                     Y                        SS
                                                                                                                         4, San   DEV ray o




The requirements for conversion of Mod Rehab properties under RAD can be found in Section 2 of the
RAD Notice (Housing 2017-03/PIH 2012-32 Rev 3).


RAD Benefits, Impacts, and Your Role
What are the benefits of a RAD conversion for owners?
RAD allows owners to convert Mod Rehab contracts to long-term Section 8 contracts, which provide
improved funding and permit owners to make improvements or redevelop properties, as needed, by
leveraging debt and equity financing sources. Specifically,   a Mod Rehab owner can replace the current
Mod   Rehab HAP Contract (which is currently renewed annually and at restricted rent levels) with either
of the following types of Section 8 contracts: Project-Based Vouchers (PBVs) administered by the PHA
with a term of up to 20 years or Project-Based Rental Assistance (PBRA) administered by HUD witha
term of up to 20 years. Typically, the new contract will provide for higher monthly funding levels. The
new contract ensures that the property remains affordable, allows the owner to better plan for the
future, and expands the owner’s options for financing repairs and improvements.

How can the Public Housing Authority ensure Mod Rehab Owners are aware of RAD benefits?
HUD recommends that each PHA that administers Mod Rehab and/or Mod Rehab SRO HAP contracts
contact each owner and provide them with a copy of this fact sheet to make sure they are aware of the
potential benefits of RAD and the opportunity to convert to Section 8 project-based assistance.

What is the Public Housing Authority’s ongoing role after the conversion of a Mod Rehab
contract under RAD?
The PHA that is currently administering the Mod Rehab or Mod       Rehab SRO contract would play an
ongoing role if the property converts to PBVs. Upon conversion to PBV, new vouchers are added to the
PHA’s Voucher Annual Contributions Contract (ACC) and the PHA would receive an ongoing
administrative fee. The PHA would be responsible for performing tenant certifications, unit inspections,
administration of subsidy, and other responsibilities of the PBV HAP Contract.

If the property converts to a PBRA contract, HUD, rather than the PHA, would administer the contract.
Accordingly, the PHA would not receive an administrative fee and would not be responsible for contract
administration roles such as inspections, tenant certifications, and the administration of the HAP
subsidy.

What are the key eligibility requirements for Mod Rehab owners?
The owner must be in good standing with HUD and the PHA. The owner must follow applicable fair
housing and civil rights requirements. The project must currently meet HUD’s physical inspection
standards.




Public Housing Authorities and Owners Fact Sheet
                                                                                                                     (SMENTOR,,
                                                                                                                   Pa
                                                                                                                                      3
                                                                U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development   sw                       Zz
                                                                                                                                            Q

                                                                                      Office of Recapitalization   %                        b
                                                                                                                                      "s
                                                                                                                                       eS
                                                                                                                       Peay   peve”




How will the new contract rents be established?
When a property converts through RAD from assistance under a Mod Rehab contract to a long-term
Section 8 contract, the rents will generally be set based on the market rent, though there are some
differences based on whether the property converts to PBV or PBRA. The chart below explains the
differences for initial contract rent setting and subsequent adjustments during the term of the contract.



                 PBRA Contract Rent set at lower of:                            PBV Contract Rent set at
                                                                                lower of:
                a)    comparable market rents (determined bya                   a)    market rent levels
                      Rent Comparability Study                                        (determined by PHA’s
                 b)   110% of FMR                                                     Rent Reasonableness
                          Owners may request to use Small Area FMR                    analysis)
                          (zip-code based)                                      b)    110% of FMR
                      *   SRO Units use Efficiency FMR                                 ©    SRO Units use
                      *   With HUD approval contract rents may be set                           ..
                          up to 120% of FMR                                                 Efficiency FMR

                Annually adjusted by OCAF                                       Re-determined annually to
                                                                                Rent Reasonableness/ 110%
                                                                                of FMR (see 24 CFR 983.302)



Is there a limit on the volume of Mod Rehab properties that can convert under RAD? Do all
units under the existing Mod Rehab contract convert under RAD?
There is no cap on the number of Mod Rehab or Mod Rehab SRO properties that can convert under
RAD.   All eligible properties can convert. For conversions to PBRA, all units are eligible. For conversions
to PBV, only units occupied within 24 months of the contract expiration or termination are eligible.
(Conversions to PBV are funded through the issuance of tenant protection vouchers.)

What is the process for converting a property under RAD?
A RAD conversion typically takes between 6 and 18 months from initiation to completion. The major
conversion steps are on the next page. Please note that some steps take more time to accomplish than
others.




Public Housing Authorities and Owners Fact Sheet
                                                                                                                     &
                                                              U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development   + wi
                                                                                    Office of Recapitalization   %




    RAD Conversion Process for Mod Rehab Properties
                                             Submission of Interest
                   Owner provides basic property and owner information to HUD through
                           Resource Desk; HUD assigns a “Transaction Manager”


                             Prior to submission of Financing Plan, owners are
                             required to:
                                 e   Notify residents of their intent to
                                     participate in RAD and provide
                                     opportunities for comments on proposed
                                     plans
                                 e   For conversion of Mod Rehab SROs -
                                     Consult with local Continuum of Care
                                     (CoC) (for conversion of Mod Rehab
                                     SROs)
                                 e   Initiate the process with HUD to identify
                                     a PHA to administer the PBV contract (for
                                     conversion to PBV)
                                 e   Prepare Financing Plan documents


                                                Financing Plan
                       Owner submits all related due diligence (CNA, environmental
                      review documents, financing commitments, etc.) and proposes
                                 sources & uses and operating pro forma




                                              HUD Approval
                               HUD issues letter to approve Financing Plan




                                                 Conversion
                    PHA and owner terminate Mod Rehab contract; new PBV or PBRA
                       HAP contract is executed; any construction financing closes




Public Housing Authorities and Owners Fact Sheet
                                                                                                                                  7   NT Oy
                                                                                                                             pe
                                                                                                                        Pr
                                                                 U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development   -                          Zz
                                                                                                                                               ro)

                                                                                       Office of Recapitalization   %                          R
                                                                                                                                          "8
                                                                                                                                          eS
                                                                                                                         Rey MM




Is it typical for RAD Mod Rehab conversions to include new financing and/or a sale of the
property?
New financing is common,      but it is required only when the project cannot otherwise pay for the capital
needs identified in the Capital Needs Assessment.      Sale of the property is permitted and frequently
occurs when the owner is recapitalizing the property with Low-Income Housing Tax Credits and/or when
a preservation-minded purchaser acquires the property.

May a PHA or its affiliate acquire the property as part of the conversion to RAD?
Yes.

What rights and protections does RAD offer residents?
Residents enjoy the following rights and protections under RAD:
¢      Owners must consult with residents prior to conversion.
e      Residents may not be rescreened as a result of conversion (except for rare requirements established
       by statute).
e      If residents need to be relocated temporarily due to repairs on the property, residents have a right
       to return to the property.
Except for certain conversions to PBRA, residents have a right to a tenant-based voucher after a period
of residency at the property (i.e., “choice-mobility”). (The household’s move does not affect the number
of units on the Section 8 contract.)

Are properties required to continue to serve the homeless following conversion?
Yes,    a homeless preference is required to ensure that the property continues to serve this population.
For RAD PBV SRO conversions, the required preference is established by the PHA through its
Administrative Plan. For RAD PBRA SRO conversions, the required preference is established by the
owner (in accordance with HUD Handbook 4350.3) and is documented               in the Tenant Selection Plan. The
homeless definition requirements of the CoC Interim Rule (24 CFR 578.3) apply. The homeless
preference outranks any other preferences. PHAs and owners are prohibited from adopting
discretionary policies that circumvent the homeless preference; for example, discretionary policies that
would prevent homeless individuals
                              / families from becoming eligible would be prohibited.

Is RAD technical assistance available for Mod Rehab owners?
Yes. HUD has made available a limited amount of funding for RAD technical assistance. Email HUD at
RAD2@hud.gov for more information.




Public Housing Authorities and Owners Fact Sheet
                                                                                                                         ite
                                                                                                                                3




                                                                                                                   %
                                                             U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development                        z




                                                                                                                   x s
                                                                                                                                     :
                                                                                                                                     QO




                                                                                                                  WU
                                                                                     Office of Recapitalization
                                                                                                                                aS
                                                                                                                     “Peay mM




                             FOR MORE INFORMATION, VISIT:

  For conversion requirements, see RAD Notice (PIH-2012-32 (HA) H-2017-03, REV-3):
  portal.hud.gov/hudportal/documents/huddoc?id=RAD Notice Rev3_Final.docx

      For tools and additional information on RAD, see:
      e    www.hud.gov/rad
      e    www.hudexchange.info/programs/rad/


  To submit a letter of interest, visit the RAD Resource Desk: www.radresource.net/


  For additional information on Multifamily Preservation, see:
  www.hudexchange.info/programs/multifamily-housing-         preservation/



          Questions? Contact the Office of Recapitalization at rad2@hud.gov




Public Housing Authorities and Owners Fact Sheet
