About The Association for Intelligent Information Management | AIIM Member Login Education Certification Training Courses Virtual Training Workshops Events AI+IM Global Summit AI+IM Regional Events Upcoming Events Resources AIIM OnAir Podcast AIIM Swag Shop Blog Buyers' Guide Job Center Partners Resource Center Join AIIM Become a Member Subscribe to AIIM's Blog Solution Provider Programs Become a Sponsor Trade Memberships Menu × About AIIM The Association for Intelligent Information Management ( AIIM) is the world’s leading association dedicated to the information management industry. Share Hi, We're AIIM! 👋 Founded in 1944, AIIM is a nonprofit association serving information leaders in 67+ countries.​ Our members are solution providers and practitioners who share our vision - to create a world where every organization benefits from technology-driven information management to reach better business outcomes. ​ By providing certification, training, community support, and practical resources, AIIM helps organizations leverage technology to improve the management of unstructured data and be more prepared for AI and automation. Vision AIIM will work to create a world in which every organization benefits from information management to reach their desired business outcomes.​ Mission AIIM helps organizations benefit from information by providing future-focused and technology-enabled certification, education, events, networking, research, solutions, and support. We empower information leaders to help their organizations succeed. Strategy Learn more about AIIM's strategy . Board of Directors We wouldn't be able to do all of the great things we do without the support and guidance of our Board of Directors, an elected council of industry practitioners and solution providers. They volunteer their time to provide us with strategic direction, oversight, and constituent representation. Meet the Board The AIIM Company of Fellows Established in 1963, the Company of Fellows honors those individuals in the association who merit recognition and distinction for their outstanding contributions to the information management industry. View Inductees AIIM Ambassadors AIIM Ambassadors are association members who are passionate about the information management industry and dedicated to contributing to the growth and development of the AIIM Community. Learn More AIIM's History Since 1944, AIIM has been at the forefront of revolutionizing how organizations leverage information with emerging technologies. On July 28, 2024, AIIM is celebrating our 80th anniversary. Learn more about our rich history and download our association timeline. Learn More About AIIM's History AIIM News Read AIIM's press releases to find out what we have been up to and how we are serving our community of information leaders. Read AIIM's News Meet Our Team We are proud to support the intelligent information management community. Connect with the AIIM staff to learn how we can help you and your organization. Georgina Clelland, Chief Operating Officer Tori Miller Liu, President & CEO Amy Michalski, Chief Business Development Officer Sasha Sicard, Education & Research Manager Shelly Strickland, Marketing Manager All the Things We Have for You Articles If you're just getting to know AIIM, start with our blog. With thousands of valuable articles, you will learn the basics, best practices, and latest trends in intelligent information management. >> Read Articles Webinars, Podcasts, & Resources (Oh my!) Aside from our articles, we also offer an expansive content library to help you take what you're learning a step further. Including long-form educational guides, webinars, templates, checklists, monthly podcasts, and more, our resource library is a must for anyone looking to get a little more advanced with their information management strategy. >> Visit Resources Training In today's rapidly changing information management industry, keeping your skills up-to-date isn't a luxury; it's a necessity. AIIM has trained more than 37,000 information professionals from across the globe and from every industry you can imagine. Our training courses cover all of the topics an information professional needs to know to be successful today. >> Take a Training Course Community Information management is always evolving – new technology and the skills required for your job are in constant change. The good news is, you don't have to go it alone. Join AIIM+ and connect with the sharpest minds in information management. Tap into our buzzing community to keep your skills current and do your job better. >> Join AIIM+ Education Training Courses Certification Virtual Training Workshops Events Upcoming Events AI+IM Global Summit Resources Resource Center Job Center Buyers' Guide Community Online Community Chapters and SIGs Awards About About Us Contact Us Join AIIM Subscribe to AIIM's Blog Become a Member Solution Provider Programs Trade Memberships Become a Sponsor Copyright © 2025 Association for Intelligent Information Management. All rights reserved. Privacy Policy