 OREGON SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT
       CHARGES STUDY:
              WHY SDCs MAT TER
  AND       aa THEY AFFEC T HOUSING




                      Prepared for Oregon Housing and
December   2022
                          Community Services (OHCS)
                                 Acknowledgements

This report was prepared by ECONorthwest on behalf    of Oregon Housing and Community Services
(OHCS) with funding from the 2021 Oregon State Legislature and substantial contributions from
FCS GROUP and Galardi Rothstein Group. Staff and project team members are grateful to the
many cities, counties, special districts, and housing developers who participated in focus groups
and interviews and/or provided written commentary to inform this study.



    While many individuals contributed to this study, core project team
    members are listed below.

    OREGON HOUSING AND COMMUNITY                                  SERVICES
     " Elise Cordle Kennedy, Project Lead
     " Kim Travis, Engagement Support

    ECONORTHWEST
     " Becky Hewitt, Senior Project Manager
     " Tyler Bump, Project Director and Senior Advisor
     " Lorelei Juntunen, President and Senior Advisor
     " Michael Wilkerson, Director of Data Analytics
     * James Kim, Research and Analysis Lead
     = Lee Ann Ryan, Engagement Lead
     " Spencer Keating, Analyst

    GALARDI             ROTHSTEIN       GROUP
      "   Deborah (Deb) Galardi, Principal

    FCS GROUP
     * John Ghilarducci, President/Principal
      "   Doug Gabbard, Project Manager




-              s
                            ECONorthwest                            >   ECS GROUP
                            ECONOMICS   +» FINANCE   + PLANNING
                                                                                            GALARDI
 OREGON   HOUSING   and                                                                   ROTHSTEIN
 COMMUNITY   SERVICES
                                                                                              GROUP
                                                   Table of Contents
EXCCUTIVE SUIMIMALY ....ccsccescoscesccscnscnscnscnsccscsscnscnscnscnsccscnssnscnscnscoscnssnscnsenssoseossessasensenssscesssnsonses i

INEOCUCTION .......ccseccssscsscssscsscssscnscssscnsccnscessssssnsssnscanssscssssassansscssssssassanssasssassasssnssesssassasseseons 1

SUMIMNALY Of FINGINGS .....1sssssscsesscssccssscsssccsscsssscsssccssscssssnsscessssnssscssssssscnsssassscnssasssessssascensssassees 3

Part 1: SDC History and Legal CONteXt ..........sssccssscsesscsssccsscssscccssccsscssscssssccssscnscessssssssssssesssenses 1
   1.1 History of System Development Charges .........ssssssssssssssssssssssscnsscensssssssesssssssessssssssssssassssessenssees 2
       1.1.1 Origins Of American IMpact Fee 2.0.0... cceecccesccccceccsessnneeeeeeesseeeneeeeeeeeesnaaeeeeeecsseeeaaeeceeeseeeseeeeeeeseeeeeaaeeeeeeesees 2
       1.1.2 The Rise of State Enabling Acts ...........cccccccsscccccccssssnnneeeceeesseseneeeeeceeessnaaeeeeecsseeeenaaeeeeeeeeesaeeeeeeeeessenaaeeeeeeesees 3

   1.2 Legal Framework ...........sssssssssssscssscsssssscsssssssessenssesssessesssessesssesssnssesssessesssessssssessssssesssnssossonssanses 5
      1.2.1 Landmark Case LaW .........cccccccccccsssssssececeeeseeenneeeeeeeessnnaaeeeeeeseeeeaeeeeeeeeesaaaeeeseeeeeeeeaaeceeeeeeeesaaeeeeeeseeeenaaeeeeeeeeees 5
      1.2.2 Oregon SDC Act: Overview of Key El@Ments ...........ccccccccccessssssneceeeeeeseeeeeeeecseeeensaeeceeeesesesneeeseeeeesnaaeeeeeeesensags 6

Part 2: The Role of SDCs in Funding Infrastructure .........ssssscssscsssccssscssscsssccsscsssscssscssssssssessees 10
   2.1 Evolving Fiscal CONteXt............cssssscsssssssssscessssscessesscessssssesssessesssssesssssssssesssnssesssessssssesssnssossonss 11
      2.1.1 Federal and State FUNING Trends ..........ccesesssccceceesesseseececeeeesaeeeecceseeecasececeeseeesaeeeececsecsaaaaeeceseseseneeeeess 11
      2.1.2 Infrastructure COSt TANS 0.0... cccccsssscccecccsessnnceeeeeesesesneeeeeeeeesaaeeeeeseseeeeaaeeeesessesaaeeeescseeeaaaaaeeeseeeeeeeeeeees 19
       2.1.3 Property Tax LIMitations ........               eee    ec cecccccceeeceeeeeeseseeeseeeeeeeeeeeceeceeeaaaaaaaaaaassesseeeeeeeeeeeceeeeaaaeaagaaasseeeeeeeeeeeeees 23
       2.1.4 Trends in Utility Rates and Other User Fees ............cccccsssccccceeeesnneceeecceseeseaaeceeeessenaaeeeececeessaaaeeeeeessesesneeeeees 26

   2.2 SDCs’ Role in Local Infrastructure FUNING ...........ssssscsssccssscsssccssscsssscssscnsssssssssssssssssesssssssssssnses 31
       2.2.1 Perspectives From Oregon JUrISCICTIONS ...........:cccccccesssssseceeceeeeesnaceeecceseeecnaaeceeeessesanseeeeecsseaaaaeeceseeeeuseeeeees 31
       2.2.2 SDCs as Part of an Infrastructure Funding Plan: Examples From Oregon............cccsccccccccsssssneeeeeeesssssteeeeees 31
       2.2.3 Benefits tO DEVEIOPESS ..........ccssccccceessssnccceceeeessnnaeeeeeeeseeeeeeeeeeeeesnaaeeeeeceseeeeeaaeceeeeseesaeeeeeeceeesauaaeaeseeeseeeeeeeeees 35
       2.2.4 Benefits to RESIGENTS............cccsssccccessssscceecececssnneeeeeeesseeeeeeeeeeeeesaaeeeeeceseeeeaaeeeeeessesaaeeeeescsseuaaaeeceesseeeseeeeees 36

Part 3: How and Why SDCs Vary ACross OL€QOn .....ssscsssssssscssscssscssscsssccsscsesccsssssssssssssesssassees 39
   3.1 SDC Rates: Geographic Variations And Trends...........sssssssssssssssscsssccsscssscsssessssssesssnssssssessesssessooss 40
      3.1.1 System Development Charges Across the State ...........cccccccccccssssneeeceeseeesneeeceeesseaeeeeeeeseeeeaeeeeeeeeeeseneeeeees 40
      3.1.2 Trends in System Development Charge Levels .............ccsccccccecesssneeeccesseesnceeeeeeeseaeeeeeeeseesaaaaeeeesesesesneeeeees 45
       3.1.3 Comparison to National Data ...........ccccccccccccssssssceceeeesesssneeececeeesnaaeeeecesseeeeaaseceeesseesseeeeeecssesaaeeeeeesseeeseeeeees 47

   3.2 Key Factors Affecting SDC Rates ............scsssssssscsssssssssessscsssssssessssesssessssessssssseesssessssssssssssssssosss 49
       3.2.1 Broad Infrastructure Planning and FUNCING DECISIONS..............csssscecccesseseeneeeceeeseceneeeeeecessensaeeeceesseeesneeeeees 49
       3.2.2 SDC Methodology Factors ........c.cccccccsssssccccccsssssnnneeeeeeseeecneeeeceeeessaeeeeeceseeessaaeeeeeeesesaaeeeesessesaaaaeeeeesseeeseeeeess 51
       3.2.3 Rate-Setting: Implementing a REAUCEd SDC...                          eee eeccscccceeeesnseeeeeceeeesnnaaeceeeesseaeeeeeeeceesnaaeeeeeeseeseneeeeees 60
       3.2.4 Underlying Cost Drivers.........cccsccccccsssssssececccccssnneeeeeeeseeesneeeeeeeeeseaneeeeeceseeeenaaeeeeeeseesaaeeeeseeeesaaaaaaeeeeseeeeeeeeeees 62

Part 4: SDCs ANd HOUSING COSES .......ccssscssscoscsscssscssscnscsscsssccsscnsccnscsscsssnssenscoscesssesssnssesssassasees 64
   4.1 OVErVICW........cccsccsscsscsscnscsscnscnsencencsnssnscessessnssnssessnseessnssnssnssnsonssnsensonsenssusensensensensessensensensensonss 65
      4.1.1 How SDCs Affect Development OUtCOMES: OVErVICW ........:ccccccccsessssseeceeceeseeeeeeecccssenaaeeeeceseeeeeseeeeeeeeesaaees 65

   4.2 SDCs as a Cost in Housing Development: Conceptual Framework ..........ssssssssssssssssessesssesssessesees 66
      4.2.1 INCPOCUCTION..........ccccecccsesssecceeeeeseceeeeeecssesnaaeeeceeessesneeeeeeeeeeesaaeaeeeeeeeeeaeeeeeeeessesaaeeeescsecaaaaeeceeseeeeaeeeeeeeeesaaaes 66
      4.2.2 Economic Theory on Cost Incidence Of SDCS .........c:ccccccccsssssecceeeeeseesnaeeceeeeseuaeeeeeessesenaaeeeeeessceeeneeeeeeeeesnaaaes 68
      4.2.3 How SDCs Affect Development DeCISIONS .............ccccccccccesssnneeeeceesesesaeeeeeeeeeaaeeeeeceseseaaaeeceeseeeesaeeeeeeeseeaaees 70

   4.3 SDC Costs in Context: SDCs as a Share of Development Costs ............sssssssssscssssessscssssssesssssssssees 73
       4.3.1 National Data on Impact Fees Relative to HOUSING COSTS ............cccesssccccecesssneeeeeeccsseeaeeeeeeeseeeeneeeeeeeeesaaaes 73
      4.3.2 SDCs and Development Costs in Oregon ...........cccceccccccceesssneceeeeeeseeesaeeceecesesaeeeeeeesseeeaaaeeceeseeeesseeeeeeesseaaaes 74
      4.3.3 SDCs as a Share of Affordable Housing Development COSts............c:sccccccesssseneceeeecessnnneeeeeeeseeseneeeeeeesseeaaees 82
      4.3.4 SDCs Compared to Other Development-Related Costs ............cccccsssssecccceessseneeeeeecsesesneeeceeseeeeeeeeeeeeeesnaaees 86

   4.4 Impact of SDCs on Financial Feasibility of Market-Rate Residential Development................s000 95
      4.4.1 Testing Impacts Across the State ...........cccccccccccsssssneceeeceeessneeeeeceeseeenaeeeceeesseeeaeeeeeccsscaaeeeeeeeseeesaeeeeeeeeeeaaaes 95
      4.4.2 Findings From Developer INtervieWs.........::ccccccccsssssccccccesesnneeeeceeseeseneceeeeesenaeeeeeeecsseaaaeeeeeseeeceeeeeeeseeesaaaes 99

   4.5 Relationship Between SDCs and Home Prices ...........sssssssssssssssssssesssssscsssnssessssssssssessscssesseessens 100
      4.5.1 Evidence From Empirical Literature ............ccccccccesssssececeeccssesneeeeceeseeeeeeeeeeeccssnaaeeeeeeeseeseneeeeeceeesnnaneeeeseneees 100
      4.5.2 Oregon Case Studies and Data .......ccccssssscccccesssnsneeeeeccseeesnneeeceeesseeeeeeeeeeeeeseaeeeeeeeseeeeneeeeeeeesenneeeeseneees 102

Part 5: SDC Administrative Policy IMplicAtions..........ssssssssscsssscsssccsscsssccssscsssccsssssssssssssssssnses 111
   5.1 Timing of SDC Assessment and Collection ............csssscsssscssscsssscssscssscsssscssssssssssssessssssssessssessees 112
      5.1.1 Requirements and Current Practices .0.........ccccsscccccessssssecececeeeeseneeeeeeccsseenaaeeceeseeecenseeeeseeseaaeeeeeeeeeeeenaaeeees 112
      5.1.2 Timing Implications for Service PrOViCels .........:.ccccccsssssssecceeeeesenseeeeeeceseennaaeeceeseeeesseeeeececseaaeeeeesssesenneeeeees 113
      5.1.3 Timing Implications for Developers ............cceeesscccceeesessensceceeeeesesaeeeeeecsseennaaeeceeseceeeneeeeeceesasaeeeeeeeseeennaaeeees 114

   5.2 SDC Exemptions ANd WaAIVELS. ..........sssssssssssssssscnsccsscessssssesscessesssessssssessenssesssnssessessenssesssnssonses 116
      5.2.1 Requirements and Current Practices ...........ccccssccccceesssssecececeeeeseeeeeeeccsseennaeeceesececnneeeeeceeseaaeeeeeeeseeesnaaeeees 116
      5.2.2 Impacts on Affordable and Lower-Cost Housing Developme nt..............c:scccccesssssneccececeeesnneeeeeeesseesenaeeeees 118

   5.3 SDC Credits.............ccscsscsscsscsscsscsnccessescescescescesescnsonsonsossesoesesoesoesoesoesoesoesossssessossssossossosooses 125
      5.3.1 Statutory REQUuireMent ...0.....                   eee eccceccecccceececeeeceeesseeeeeeeeeeeeeccececeaeaaaaaaaaasaeeeseeeeeeceeeceeeeaaaaaagaaaeeeseeeeeeeeeeees 125
      5.3.2 Credit Implications for Service Providers .........:.:ccccccsssssssecceeeeesenceeeeecsseeneaaeeceeseeeenaeeeeeceeseaaeeeeeeeseeenneeeeees 125
      5.3.3 Credit Implications for DeVelOpers...........cceessssccceeessseesneeceeeeeseaeeeeeecsseeeaaeeceeeeceeeneeeeeceeseaaeaeeeeeseeennaaeeees 126

   5.4 Program Information and Transparency .........sssssssssscsssccnsscssscssscsssesssscsssessssssssessssssssassssessees 128
      5.4.1 Statutory REQuireMent ...0..... eee eecccccceeccceeeeceeeeeessseeeeeeeceeeeecceeeceeeaaauaaaaaaaeeeseeeeeeceeeceeeeeaaaaaaaaaaeeseeeeeeeeeeees 128
      5.4.2 Common Practices and Local Jurisdiction Perspective ............ccccccccccessesssceceesesseeeeeeeececssnaeeeeeeeseeessaaeeees 129
      5.4.3 Implications for Development and Developer Perspectives............ccccssssssceccessssseneeececeessnnaeeeeeessesseneeeeees 131

Part 6: CONCIUSIONS .....1.cssssccssscsssccssnscsscssscssscassccsssccsssssscsnssssssanssesssensssenssansssensenssscsssssssonees 132
ACFONYMS ANA GIOSSALY.......ccssscescsssccsssnassccssnsssscssccssscnssssssccsssssssnssscssscnssscsssnsssenssssssssssoans 134
      ACIONYIMNS.......ceeececcccecceeeeeeeenesseeeeceeeeccceeeeceneaaanaaaaeseseeeeeeeeeceeeceeeaaeeeaaaaasaaaasseeeseeeeeecececeeeeaaaeaaaaassseeseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaaanaaea 134
      GIOSSALY 00... ccscccccecesssscceecceseeenaeeeeeeesseseneeeeeeeeeseaaaeeeeceseeeeeaaeeeeeeesesaaeeeeeeeseeeeaaaeeceeseeeeeeeeeeceseeaaaaaaeesseseeeeeaeeeseeeseaaes 135

APPCNICES .....ssccsscssscssscsscssscnscsscssscnsscnsccnscsssasssnssenscansesssnssenscenssosssssnssanssassesssnsssnssssssassesees 141

Appendix A.               Summary of Input from Service Providers ........ssssssssssssscsssccssscssccssssssscsssesens 142

Appendix B.               Summary of Input fromm DeVelOPes ........ssssccssscsssscssccssscsssccssssssssesssassssssseass 156

Appendix C.                Key Oregon SDC Court COS€S .......sssscssscsscssccsscsssccscssccnscssscsssssscnscsssssssssssosces 175

Appendix D.                Other Potential Infrastructure FUNGING SOUICES ..........+s0sseescesessescssccessescsesees 178
      State and Federal Funding Programs Available for Local Infrastructure Projects ...........ccssccccceesssssseeeeeeeeeenaees 178
      Other Local or Regional FUNdINg MECHANISMG..............cccccsssesssecceeeeesenceeeeeceseennaeeceeseeeesaeeeeeceesenaeaeeeeeseeesnneeeess 178

Appendix E.               SDC Fees by Jurisdiction, 2007 ANd 2022 .......sscsssscsssncssscsssccssssssccsssccssecssssaes 182
Appendix F.            — Pro Forma Model Methodology. .........ssssssssssssscsssscssscssscsssccsscsssscssssessssssseass 186
      Geographic Markets ............ccssccccccessssnecccccceessnnneeeceesseeeseeeeceeessesaeeeeeecseeesaaeeeceeseeceeeeeeeeeeesaaaaaeeeeeseeeeneeeeeseeeeeaees 186
      HOUSING TYPOS ..........:esseeeeeeseeeeececeececeeaaeecaessssseeeeeeceeeeeeceeeaeceeaaaaeaaaaseeeeseeeeeeceeceeeeaaaaaaaauaaseeeseeeeeeeeeeeeeeaaaaaeauaaeeeneees 188
      Full Results for SDC Share of Total DevelopMent COStS.............ccccssssececeeesenaneceeeeessnnaeeeeeesseseeeeeeeeeeeeesaeeeeseneees 191
      Key Assumptions for Feasibility EvalUation...............cccccccsssscccceeecssssnnececeeeesseeeeeeeeecsseeaaaeeeeeesseeeneeeeeeeesssnaaeaeeseneees 195
Appendix G.             Literature REVICW..........sssscsscssccsscssscsssssscssccsscsssccscssssnscanscssscsssnssssssssssoscesees 197

Appendix H.             Case Study Methodology... .....:..ssssssssssscsscsssscsssccsscsssccsssccsssccsscassssssssssssssssans 202
    StUGY ALO .......cececcssscccccceessennaeeceeeesseeeeeeeeeeeeenaaeeeeeeeeeeeaaeeeeeeeeesaaaeeeeceseeeeaaeaeceeseeeeneeeeeeeeseaaaaaeesseseeeseaeeeseeeseaaaes 202
    SDCs in the Study Are as........cccccccccesssssncccceccssesnnneeeeceseeesnaeeeceeeseseaeeeeeecseeeneaaeeceesseeenseeeeeeeesaaaaeeeeeeseeeeneeeeeeeeesneaaes 203
    REgression MOCEl..........:cccccccesssssseccecceceenneneeeeeeseeseneeeeeeeeseeaeeeeeeeseeeenaaeeeeeeesesaeeeeeeeeeeeaaaaeaeeeeseeeeneeeeeeeeesuaaaeeeseeeees 203

Appendix I.             Testimony on HB 3040 Related to Timing of SDC Payment ........ssssssssscsesseees 206

Appendix J.             Summary of Feedback on SDC Deferral EXPerience..........cs0ssesssescsssescescesees 208
    Feedback SUIMIMALY .......ccccccccessssncccececeseenneceeeeeeseeesneeeeeeeeseeaeeeeeecseeeenaaeeeeeeeseeeeeeeeeeceseaaaaeeeeseeseeeeeeeeeeeeseaueeeeeeneees 209
    K@Y FINGINGS ..........ccccceesssceccceeeesnsaneeeeeeeessenaeeeeeeeseeseeeeeeeeeeeeeaaaeeeeeeseeeenaaeeeeeeeeeeseeeeeeeseeeaaaaeaeceeseeeeneeeeeeeeesenaaeeeeseneees 210
                           Executive Summary
In 2021, the Oregon legislature passed House Bill 3040 (HB 3040), directing Oregon Housing
and Community Services (OHCS) to prepare a study of System Development Charges (SDCs) —
a form of one-time impact fees charged on new development to help pay for infrastructure that
serves or provides capacity for growth. The legislature requested that the study cover the
history of the charges, methodologies for setting the fees, recent trends in fee levels, how the
fees relate to other development costs, and how they ultimately affect the cost and production
of housing. The findings from this study can inform future policy discussions related to SDCs,
but the legislature’s direction for this study did not include making policy recommendations.

OHCS contracted with ECONorthwest and subcontractors FCS GROUP and Galardi Rothstein
Group to undertake this report. The team drew its findings from reviews of national and local
studies; surveys of cities, counties, and special districts; interviews and focus groups with local
government officials and housing developers; original data analyses; and decades of experience
conducting SDC studies, analyzing residential development, and evaluating infrastructure
funding mechanisms.

Key Findings

SDCs have become an essential funding mechanism in many Oregon communities, for
practical, political, and policy reasons.

    =   SDCs are increasing faster than inflation due to lack of alternative funding and
        increasing infrastructure costs. Over the last several decades, flat or declining state and
        federal infrastructure spending, limitations on property taxes, and increasing costs for
        operations, maintenance, and regulatory compliance have increased dependence on
        SDCs and other local revenue sources. On average, both SDCs and water and sewer
        utility rates have increased faster than construction costs over the past 10-15 years. Even
        so, many jurisdictions report falling behind in their ability to pay for infrastructure,
        especially in the last few years as costs have escalated so quickly that annual indexed
        adjustments have not kept up.
    #   SDCs are acritical component of local funding for infrastructure needed to support
        growth. SDCs can allow communities to build the infrastructure needed to
        accommodate orderly growth, making them an important part of Oregon’s growth
        management system. They can benefit both developers (by funding investments that
        make development possible and distributing costs among multiple benefitting parties)
        and existing residents (by reducing reliance on utility rates, bonds, and other
        community-wide funding mechanisms that can disproportionately impact lower-income
        households). Further, the requirements associated with other local funding sources for
        capital improvements (e.g., voter approval for general obligation bonds) can increase
        jurisdictions’ reliance on SDCs. However, small, slow-growing communities tend to use


Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report
         SDCs less, as they have less need to increase infrastructure capacity, few costs
         attributable to growth, and little development that would generate revenue.
    =    The variation in SDC rates across the state reflects differences in local needs, cost
         factors, and priorities. Oregon’s SDC Act and the broader legal context provide
         guardrails to ensure SDCs recover an equitable share of costs of capacity, while also
         providing flexibility to tailor the approach to community values and local
         circumstances. Local differences in funding choices, system needs, and construction and
         land costs can lead to differences in the total costs that SDCs are expected to cover. Local
         choices related to how costs are linked to development impacts can also lead to
         differences in SDC rates for similar development in different communities. Further,
         because SDCs are adopted by local elected officials, some communities intentionally
         keep SDC rates down to avoid discouraging development, either by discounting the
         calculated charges or reducing the size of the capital improvements list.
SDCs also increase the cost of building new housing in ways that can skew housing
development towards higher-cost homes and can impact buyers and renters. SDCs likely
account for anywhere from just under 2 percent to nearly 13 percent of total development costs
for housing in Oregon, depending on the housing type, SDC rates, other cost factors, and
market conditions. There are many other factors driving home prices, rents, and development
costs—SDCs are just one contributor that impacts the market by influencing development
decisions. In an accounting sense, housing developers pay the SDC (e.g., write a check), but the
cost is typically shared with other actors, including landowners, homebuyers, renters, and
(rarely) investors. A large body of evidence, including new analysis for Oregon, finds that
higher SDCs/impact fees tend to be associated with higher home prices, though there are
multiple possible explanations. This study identifies several ways that SDC costs may affect
buyers and renters:

    =    Smaller and lower-cost housing units tend to be more affected by SDCs than larger
         and more expensive homes. SDCs typically account for a larger share of total costs for
         smaller homes, middle housing, and moderately priced apartments. These housing
         types are often targeted to moderate-income households who may not be able to absorb
         higher prices or rents, making them sensitive to small increases in development costs.
         They often also have lower system impacts than larger homes. Scaling fees for smaller
         units based on lower demand for infrastructure (as a growing number of communities are doing)
         can even out financial impacts across housing types and sizes, but only if implemented across
         multiple infrastructure systems at a meaningful discount.
    =    SDCs can combine with other factors to exacerbate challenges for housing production
         and affordability,’ even if they are not the primary driver.
         -    Communities with lower home prices and rents tend to be more sensitive to SDCs
              (and other development costs). The market may not support passing costs on to


! As used in this report, housing affordability means households’ ability to find housing within their financial means,
with or without public support or restrictions in place, across a range of income levels.


Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                                     ii
              buyers/renters and lower land values mean less room to absorb SDCs or other costs
              through land price negotiations. Over time, lack of housing production can lead to
              higher rents and home prices for existing housing, which can indirectly affect buyers
              and renters. However, SDC rates in these communities tend to be lower. Keeping
              SDC rates low in areas with lower home prices and rents can reduce barriers to housing
              production, if key projects to enable growth can still be funded.
         -    Communities with strong demand and limited new housing supply are more
              likely to see rising costs—including SDCs—shift to homebuyers and renters.
              Higher SDCs in this context likely reinforce other market factors— including high
              land costs and demand from higher-income households—that encourage more
              expensive housing development. Higher land and construction costs can contribute
              to both higher SDC rates and higher home prices/rents. In addition, some
              infrastructure investments (e.g., parks) can serve as amenities, and affluent buyers
              and renters may choose to pay more to live in places that are making more
              investments in that infrastructure, though low and moderate-income households
              may not have this option. Keeping SDC rates low overall may be neither politically
              palatable nor aligned with infrastructure needs, but when SDC rates are both
              relatively high and relatively flat among different types and sizes of housing, it can
              increase the barriers to building smaller and lower-cost housing. For medium or
              large single-family homes in moderate and high-cost areas, ECONorthwest’s
              analysis suggests that SDCs typically represent a relatively small percentage of costs
              (e.g., 2 to 7 percent), and reductions would likely have at most a modest impact on
              new home prices. However, for smaller and lower-cost units in moderate and high-cost
              areas, evidence from a few Oregon communities suggests a major reduction or elimination of
              SDCs can sometimes enable development that would not be financially feasible otherwise.
    =    SDCs on affordable housing development? can increase the difficulty of securing
         adequate funding for the development and, even as a small percentage of total
         development costs, likely consume millions of dollars per year in funding for
         affordable housing statewide. Smaller affordable housing developments and those with
         less traditional funding sources (which often includes affordable homeownership
         projects) are more impacted. SDC exemptions or reductions for affordable housing
         development can allow funding for affordable housing to stretch further and reduce obstacles to
         affordable housing development, provided the needed infrastructure can still be funded.
Some jurisdictions have implemented SDC measures to support affordability, but broader
adoption is hindered by administrative, legal, and financial concerns. SDCs must remain
rooted in recovering an equitable share of costs based on the impacts of the development, but
jurisdictions have discretion over many choices that can affect how and to what extent SDCs
impact housing development. Many jurisdictions are concerned about housing affordability,
and a growing number have implemented new SDC rate structures and policies in response.



? As used in this report, affordable housing means income and/or rent-restricted housing that is affordable to
households earning a certain income level (e.g., at or below 80 percent of area median income).


Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                            iii
Some have adopted scaled rates that account for lower demand from smaller dwelling units,
some offer policy-based exemptions for affordable housing, and some allow developers to defer
paying SDCs until construction is complete rather than before it begins. other jurisdictions
express serious reservations about some of these measures, and each has trade-offs to consider.

    =    Scaled SDC rates for smaller units are typically tied to evidence of lower development
         impacts, which is well within the discretion allowed under statute. Scaling reduces costs
         for smaller units while remaining revenue neutral for the jurisdiction, but it can increase
         complexity for both applicants and jurisdictions. The primary barriers to broader adoption
         include the effort associated with a methodology update, collecting and analyzing supporting
         data, and updating permitting systems to collect the necessary information.
    »    SDC waivers can offer substantial savings for affordable housing development, but
         there are differing views on their validity. Some practitioners believe that jurisdictions
         implicitly have the discretion to exempt certain classes of development, including
         affordable housing. Others see legal risks if lost funds are not paid from another source
         because the issue is not explicitly addressed in statute,? and the loss of revenue may
         prevent an agency from completing the project list upon which the SDCs were
         calculated. Overcoming these concerns would require clear legal authority and ways to mitigate
         lost revenue.
    =    SDC deferrals reduce financing costs for developers, which can be 10 to 25 percent of
         the SDC amount. While the financial impacts for jurisdictions are minimal, many
         expressed concerns about their ability to collect fees after permits are issued, increasing
         administrative cost and complexity, and, in some cases, delaying revenue collection.
         Those that have implemented deferrals reported mixed results: Some saw a substantial
         increase in administrative effort, while for others this was minor. Major challenges with
        nonpayment were rare (and mostly linked to commercial development) but time-
         consuming to resolve. This suggests that there is potential for more jurisdictions to
         adopt administrative approaches to deferrals that have worked well for others, but that
         the level of effort may depend on jurisdiction-specific systems and practices and may
        not allow for a one-size-fits-all approach. Broader adoption may require additional focused
         discussions with stakeholders to identify a range of approaches to administering deferrals that
         could work for jurisdictions of different sizes and staffing levels and additional/better mechanisms
        for enforcement that reduce the risk of (and costs associated with) nonpayment.
Difficulty estimating SDC costs up front can create challenges for multifamily, affordable
housing, middle housing, and greenfield development. Developers value being able to
estimate total SDC costs with some certainty during early project budgeting, but this is difficult
for some types of development. Multifamily SDCs can be especially hard to calculate early in a



3 Oregon’s SDC statutes emphasize that new users should contribute no more than an equitable share of costs but say
little about assigning costs to individual developments. Other state statutes make clear that jurisdictions may waive
SDCs for affordable multifamily housing in at least some circumstances, but they do not clearly address whether
 “backfilling” lost revenue is required.


Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                               iv
project because they are often not a flat rate per unit. When they exceed initial estimates after
financing and budgets are set, this can cause major challenges, especially for affordable
housing. Rates for middle housing types are often not listed or defined. Policies related to
credits for building SDC-eligible projects, which is common for greenfield development, can
also be difficult to discern. While most jurisdictions provide some information about SDCs
online, many do not yet fully comply with recent updates to statute increasing requirements for
transparency and may not be aware of the change. SDC rate structures and approach to SDC
changes can lead to variability between initial estimates and final SDC costs, but uncertainty for middle
housing SDCs and SDC credit policies could be addressed through clearer information for applicants.

Conclusion

At their core, SDCs are a funding mechanism; reducing SDC costs broadly in the interest of
housing production and affordability would require greater availability of other funding for
infrastructure that does not increase development costs or burden low-income households.
The jurisdictions and special districts that provide water, sewer, stormwater, transportation,
and park infrastructure have a clear mandate to keep those systems functioning and provide
sufficient capacity for planned development. Given fiscal constraints, SDCs are likely to remain
central to local funding for infrastructure, and most stakeholders agree that development
should contribute to growth-related infrastructure costs at some level. SDCs provide a
consistent and relatively predictable mechanism for development contributions to growth-
related costs, and they can support housing production by funding capital projects needed for
growth. However, the equity implications of relying on SDCs to fund eligible infrastructure
projects are mixed. Residential SDCs can be regressive, with higher impacts on lower-cost
housing (especially when applied more uniformly to all housing), but some alternatives (e.g.,
raising utility rates) can also be regressive and directly impact lower-income households.
Expanding other funding mechanisms or increasing state funding for infrastructure with a focus on
mitigating impacts to affordable and lower-cost housing could help even the playing field for lower-cost
housing development while retaining SDCs as a key funding source for infrastructure to serve growth.

Even in the current fiscal context, jurisdictions can take steps to mitigate the impacts of SDCs
on housing production and affordability. SDC rates must relate to impacts, which limits
jurisdictions’ ability to align them with housing costs. However, some jurisdictions have
implemented measures that offer improvements at the margins. This includes changes to rate
structures (e.g., scaling by unit size), policies (e.g., allowing discounts or waivers for regulated
affordable housing), and administrative practices (e.g., allowing deferral to certificate of
occupancy for some residential development, offering clear SDC estimates for more housing
types). All have trade-offs and can increase administrative costs, suggesting that these changes
may not be appropriate in the same form for all communities. Still, broader implementation of
these measures could yield a meaningful change. Jurisdictions can identify locally appropriate
measures to reduce or mitigate SDCs’ impact on housing development during SDC methodology updates,
housing production strategies, infrastructure funding plans, or other policy discussions related to
infrastructure and/or housing.




Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                       Vv
                                       Introduction
In 2021, the Oregon legislature passed House Bill 3040 (HB 3040), directing Oregon Housing
and Community Services (OHCS) to prepare a study of System Development Charges (SDCs) —
one-time fees charged on new development to help pay for existing and planned infrastructure
to serve growth. The legislature requested that the study cover the history of the charges,
methodologies for setting the fees, recent trends in fee levels, how the fees relate to other
development costs, and how they ultimately affect the cost and production of housing. OHCS
contracted with ECONorthwest and subcontractors FCS GROUP and Galardi Rothstein Group
to undertake this study. This report’s framework is drawn from the legislative request.

This report is not intended to pit SDCs against housing production or affordability, but rather to
clarify how they interact. The scope of this study, as established in HB 3040, does not include a
comprehensive evaluation of local funding mechanisms for infrastructure, cost drivers for
housing development, the impact of housing production on affordability, or strategies to reduce
the cost of housing development or support housing production. Other recent and on-going
studies address some of these topics in greater detail;* others may need further study.
Furthermore, HB 3040 did not direct the study to include recommendations, though the study’s
findings provide a fact base to inform consideration of related future policy choices as they
emerge in the legislative process.


What Is a System Development Charge?
SDCs are one-time fees paid by new development (or, in some cases, re-development) at the time
of development. They are intended to capture an equitable share of the cost of “system”
capacity—large backbone facilities that provide service system-wide or to a portion of the service
area, with extra capacity beyond an individual development’s needs. They can be based on the
value of existing facility capacity available to serve growth and/or the cost of building future
facilities to provide additional capacity to serve growth.


This report provides a statewide look at how SDC rates are established, the role they play in
funding infrastructure, and how they impact housing cost and production. In addition to
research, data collection, and analysis by the consultant team, this report is based on input from
stakeholders, including a wide range of service providers — cities, counties, and special
districts —that charge SDCs and housing developers. (See Appendix A and Appendix B for
summaries of the input from stakeholders.)




4 See, for example:
Oregon Department of Land Conservation and Development Oregon Housing and Community Services, “Oregon
Housing Needs Analysis Draft Recommendations Report: Leading with Production,” Draft Report, August 2022.
Blue Sky Consulting Group for Oregon Housing and Community Services, “Affordable Housing Cost Study:
Analysis of the Factors that Influence the Cost of Building Affordable Housing in Oregon,” 2019.
Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                       1
A summary of findings follows this introduction, followed by more detailed discussions of SDC
History and Legal Context, The Role of SDCs in Funding Infrastructure, How and Why SDCs
Vary Across Oregon, SDCs and Housing Costs, and SDC Administrative Policy Implications
that document the project team’s research and analysis as well as input from stakeholders,
where applicable. A list of acronyms and a glossary are included following the Conclusions,
followed by appendices with additional details of data and analysis discussed in the report.

Similar studies have been conducted recently in different contexts. The University of California
Berkeley’s Tener Center for Housing and Innovation completed a study of residential impact
fees in California in 2019. The Federal Highway Administration completed a national study of
development impact fees and other development charges in 2021. Topics in both works include
impact fee structure, design, transparency, and timing; legislative history and case law;
alternative funding options; impact of housing affordability, development feasibility, and cost
incidence; and case studies and nexus studies. This report explores many of these topics within
Oregon's context.


Housing Affordability vs. Affordable Housing
This report addresses the implications of SDCs for housing affordability and for affordable housing
and lower-cost housing. As used in this report, these terms are differentiated as follows:
e   Housing affordability means households’ ability to find housing within their financial means,
    with or without public support or restrictions in place, across a range of income levels. This is
    commonly measured based on spending no more than 30 percent of gross income on housing
    (rent or mortgage, plus utilities). Housing affordability is a greater challenge for low-income
    households than higher-income households, but it is not exclusively focused on households at a
    particular income level.°
e   Affordable housing means income and/or rent-restricted housing that is affordable to
    households earning a certain income level (generally below 60 or 80 percent of the area
    median income). Sometimes described as “income-qualified affordable housing” or “regulated
    affordable housing.”
e   Lower-cost housing means market-rate housing (without income or rent/price restrictions)
    that offers lower sale prices or rents than most new housing in a given area and typically also
    has lower development costs.




5 The 30 percent standard is widely used but simplistic. See discussion and additional context related to defining
affordability and affordable housing in the following memorandum:
Nick Meltzer, Sadie DiNatale, Bob Parker & Rebecca Lewis, University of Oregon, “Definitions of Affordable
Housing,” to the Department of Land Conservation and Development and the HB 4079 Rulemaking Advisory
Committee (RAC), September 19, 2016. https://www.oregon.gov/led/UP/Documents/UO-Defining Affordability.pdf
Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                                2
                            Summary of Findings
History and Legal Framework

              Impact fees have a long history, emerging nationally after World War II and in
              Oregon in the 1970s. Requiring developers to build public improvements became
              common during the Great Depression.° After World War II, local governments began to
              require that developers pay money instead of or in addition to dedicating land or public
              improvements.’ The first SDC in Oregon was enacted in 1972 by the City of Corvallis.®
              U.S. Supreme Court rulings on development exactions inform how impact fees are
              set, though it’s unclear whether they apply directly. Legal doctrine surrounding
              development exactions (required dedications of land, money, or anything else of value
              as a condition of development approval) requires that they be clearly related and
              roughly proportional to the development’s impact. A 2013 Supreme Court ruling raises
              questions about whether the same tests extend to impact fees, given that they are
              established in a legislative policy context rather than ad hoc for individual properties,
              but this broader legal context informs local approaches to impact fees.°
              The Oregon SDC Act of 1989 established guidelines on the purpose and use of the
              charges and the methods for developing SDC rates. The Act intended to help Oregon
              public agencies equitably recover the costs of infrastructure needed to serve growth
              from growth, thereby reducing the likelihood that those costs would be shifted to
              existing rate and taxpayers. The statutes allow SDCs to be used for capital
              improvements for five categories of public facilities: 1) water supply, treatment, and
              distribution; 2) wastewater collection, transmission, treatment, and disposal; 3) drainage
              and flood control; 4) transportation; and 5) parks and recreation. SDCs can be based on
              future improvements (an “improvement fee”) identified in a capital improvement
              program or comparable plan and/or on available capacity in systems the jurisdiction has
              already built (a “reimbursement fee”).°

Fiscal Context and the Role of SDCs

              Federal infrastructure spending has declined since the 1980s, particularly for water
              infrastructure, while state and local infrastructure spending has increased. Much of
              the increase in local infrastructure spending has been for system operations and




6 Vicki Elmer and Adam Leigland, Infrastructure Planning and Finance:    A Smart and Sustainable Guide for Local
Practitioners (Routledge, 2014), page 228.
” Thid 228.
8 Oregon Legislative Policy and Research Office, “System Development Charges” (State of Oregon, December 17,
2020), page 2.
? Koontz v. St. Johns River Water Management District, 570 U.S. 595 (2013).
10 ORS 223.297.
Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report
         maintenance, rather than capital projects.!! The 2021 Bipartisan Infrastructure Law
         promises substantial federal investment in transportation and water infrastructure over
         the coming years, much of which is targeted at the repair and replacement of aging or
         unsafe infrastructure.'* However, given the scale of the need, it will not fully close the
         gap for needed investment, and some funding will come in the form of loans rather than
         grants that must be repaid from local sources.*
    =    In Oregon, declining state gas tax revenues and reductions in timber payments to
         many Oregon counties have caused further declines in available funding for
         transportation.'* This has limited available revenue at the state and county level to fund
         major road improvements.
    =    Oregon property tax limitations imposed in the 1990s slowed the growth of property
         tax revenue and sharply reduced localities’ abilities to use property taxes to finance
         infrastructure improvements. Oregon’s Measures 5 and 50 limited property tax rates
         and the growth in assessed values, respectively. New operating or bond levies require
         voter approval under Measure 50, and special operating levies are subject to Measure 5
         limits on total tax rate. These changes have constrained property tax revenue at the local
         level, which has generally grown at less than 5 percent per year for the past 2 decades,!®
         and they make funding infrastructure investments through property taxes more
         challenging.
    =    Atthe same time, higher environmental and safety standards have increased the cost
         of infrastructure investments and maintenance, while construction costs and
         personnel costs (including pensions) have also risen. Factors such as Clean Water Act
         requirements, requirements to manage water pollution from roadway runoff, and
         improvements to address particular pollutants and combined sewer overflows have
         increased the cost burden on local governments.'® '” '® Increasing awareness of risks from
         natural hazards such as earthquakes and tsunamis has also led to higher costs for many
         infrastructure capital projects, even before accounting for changes in material and labor



ll Congressional Budget Office, “Public Spending on Transportation and Water Infrastructure, 1956 to 2017,” October
18, 2018; and Congressional Budget Office, “Public Spending on Transportation and Water Infrastructure, 1956 to
2014,” March 2, 2015.
2 The White House. 2022. “Data Guidebook.” A Guidebook to the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law.
13 McKinsey & Company, “US Water Infrastructure: Making Funding Count,” November 24, 2021,
https://www.mckinsey.com/industries/electric-power-and-natural-gas/our-insights/us-water-infrastructure-making-
funding-count.

14 Oregon Legislative Policy and Research Office, “Funding Transportation Background Brief,” September 2016,
https://www.oregonlegislature.gov/lpro/Publications/BB2016FundingTransportation.pdf.
5 Oregon Department of Revenue, “A Brief History of Oregon Property Taxation,” 150-303-405-1 (Rev. 6-09).
https://www.oregon.gov/DOR/programs/gov-research/Documents/303-405-1.pdf
16 Rhiannon Jerch, “The Local Benefits of Federal Mandates: Evidence from the Clean Water Act” (Temple University,
2021).
’ Arthur C. Nelson, et al., A Guide to Impact Fees and Housing Affordability (Island Press, 2008), pages 12-13.
18 McKinsey & Company, “US Water Infrastructure: Making Funding Count,” November 24, 2021,
https://www.mckinsey.com/industries/electric-power-and-natural-gas/our-insights/us-water-infrastructure-making-
funding-count.

Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                                 4
         costs. Smaller cities and rural communities may be disproportionately impacted by these
         costs.”

    =    Local governments and special districts have increased water/sewer rates and added
         user fees to close funding gaps. Water and wastewater utility rates have risen faster
         than inflation for many years, increasing by over 80 percent in total from 2008 levels
         compared to an increase of a little over 20 percent in the Consumer Price Index (CPI)
         over the same period.” At least 50 cities across Oregon also impose on-going user fees
         for government services like parks, streets, and public safety to fill the void that tax
         limitations created.?!
    =    SDCs are not the only local funding mechanism for infrastructure, even for growth-
         related infrastructure needs, but they are a key part of local infrastructure funding
         plans, particularly in fast growing communities.
         :   SDCs can benefit developers by helping fund key infrastructure investments to
             make growth possible. For example, SDCs often account for a substantial share of
             funding for infrastructure in new growth areas, with much of the rest coming from
             other development-derived sources.” In this case, SDCs may make greenfield
             development costs more predictable and more evenly distributed, but not
             necessarily higher, if they substitute for other forms of exactions or developer
             contributions. In addition, several Oregon communities have used SDCs to help
             fund major water supply projects needed to allow residential development to
             continue, although they also needed to bond against utility rate revenue to provide a
             dependable income stream for debt payments.” 4
         -   §SDCs also provide an important source of local matching funds for state and
             federal infrastructure grants, particularly for parks and transportation.»
         -   §$DCs may be more viable than the alternatives. Given the political challenges and
             legal or financial limitations associated with other potential local funding sources,
             jurisdictions face obstacles in using other funding sources to pay for infrastructure.
             This can increase pressure to maximize the use of SDCs for eligible costs, within the
             bounds of state law and legal precedent.




  Scott Lazenby and Diane Odeh, “2021 Infrastructure Survey Report” (League of Oregon Cities, January 2021),
pages 12-13.
70 Robert Raucher et al., “Developing a New Framework for Household Affordability and Financial Capability
Assessment in the Water Sector” (April 17, 2019).
21 FCS GROUP,   “Water, Sewer & Storm Rate Study” (City of Newport, 2017),
https://www.newportoregon.gov/dept/fin/documents/WaterSewerStormRateStudy2017v6.pdf.
22 ECONorthwest, “Infrastructure Funding Plan Toolkit: Guidance for Title 11 Concept and Comprehensive
Planning” (Washington County, October 2020).
* Memorandum to Chris Cummings, Assistant Director, Economic Development regarding City of North Plain,
Reservoir & Pump Stations Improvements (June 21, 2018).
4 Jeff Bauman, “Review of Wilsonville's Water Supply Planning,” (City of Wilsonville, February 23, 1998), 1.
* See Oregon SDC Study Summary of Service Provider Focus Groups (Appendix A).
Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                          5
    =    SDCs can benefit existing residents by supporting infrastructure investments and
         mitigating utility rate and property tax increases. While not all of a jurisdiction’s capital
         needs are related to growth and eligible for SDC funding, being able to draw on SDCs
         for costs that are eligible means less cost needs to be allocated to ratepayers or property
         owners. Increases to utility rates and property taxes impact residents’ cost of living on
         an on-going basis and may not track with household income (particularly for utility
         rates), creating their own affordability challenges for low-income households.
         Investments that maintain current service levels or create facilities that the whole
         community can use (e.g., new parks) also benefit existing residents.

SDCs Across Oregon

    =    Most cities in Oregon charge at least one of the five allowable SDCs, but total rates
         vary substantially. The total 2022 SDCs for a single-family residence range from under
         $5,000 in some small cities to close to $50,000 in some Portland Metro area jurisdictions
         based on data collected by FCS GROUP. Some of the smallest cities, particularly in
         Eastern Oregon, do not charge SDCs at all.

         =    Based on 2022 data collected by FCS GROUP, the average total SDC rate for a single-
              family residence statewide is roughly $15,000. SDCs for water, wastewater,
              transportation, and parks all average between $3,800 and $4,600 per single-family
              dwelling for the jurisdictions included in the sample, but substantial variability
              exists in these amounts across the state.
         -    There is less aggregated data available on SDC rates for other housing types (e.g.,
              multifamily and townhouses), but rates are typically less than those applied to
              single-family detached homes (roughly two-thirds as much for apartments and
              roughly 90 percent of the single-family detached rate for townhouses based on a
              review of several example communities).
    =    SDC rates have increased over time in most Oregon communities for most
         infrastructure systems. The average increase between 2007 and 2022 in total SDCs for
         single-family homes was roughly 105 percent over 15 years, with the highest increases
         for parks and transportation SDCs (101 and 110 percent, respectively).*° For comparison,
         construction costs escalated by roughly 60 percent nationally and the Seattle area (the
         closest city included in the available construction cost index data) over the same period
         of time. Because many SDCs are indexed to construction cost escalation (increases in
         labor and material costs broadly), a faster pace of increase suggests other factors at play,
         such as regulatory mandates that drive more costly facility designs; less grant funding;
         changes to SDC methodology or discounting policies; land cost escalation (especially for
         parks); or under-reporting of some regional and district charges in 2007.




6 2007 data comes from the earliest available SDC survey data from the League of Oregon Cities (LOC). 2022 data is
from data collected by FCS GROUP for the same jurisdictions who participated in the 2007 survey. Note that regional
and district charges may not be consistently reported in the 2007 LOC data, which could exaggerate the magnitude of
increases to some extent.

Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                             6
    =   Many other states use impact fees, but comparing SDCs in Oregon to impact fees in
        other states can be misleading. While a few studies have published national data on
        impact fees, differences between states in terminology and in which infrastructure
        systems or public services impact fees may apply to make it difficult to draw useful
        comparative conclusions. For example, both Idaho and Washington have separate
        statutes applicable to water and wastewater charges, and facilities charges related to
        these systems may not be consistently reported as impact fees. These studies primarily
        serve to highlight that impact fees in one form or another are used extensively in many
        states, and that total rates vary substantially between different communities in the states
        where they are in use.
    =   Variation in local SDC rates stems from several factors, not all of which are related to
        the SDCs themselves. Key factors include planning and policy choices made prior to
        establishing or updating an SDC rate that determine future system needs, methodology
        choices during rate-setting, and cost factors that service providers do not control.
         »   SDC project lists typically draw from local infrastructure system plans, which can
             vary widely in type and level of planned capital investments.
             -   Water, sewer, and stormwater master planning efforts are largely technical
                 exercises informed by state and federal regulations. Depending on the nature
                 and condition of the system, some communities may need to make more costly
                 investments than others.
             -   For transportation, while state standards and requirements can impact local
                 project lists, local governments generally have discretion over priorities and
                 standards for city streets. Communities may need different amounts and types of
                 investment to meet local goals and state standards.
             -   Parks plans are generally responsive to community-defined goals and informed
                 by public input. This aligns investments with local priorities but can also result
                 in greater variations in SDC-eligible project lists.
         -   Decisions about use of other local funding mechanisms to pay for infrastructure
             may occur prior to SDC updates. For example, if there is support by the local
             community, a General Obligation (GO) bond may be used to fund a recreation center
             or a group of high-profile transportation projects.
         :   In establishing the SDC methodology, jurisdictions have flexibility on many
             elements that can impact SDC rates while staying within the bounds of statute.
             There are many methodology variables that can impact the total costs the SDCs are
             designed to recover or how those costs are allocated to future users. Within the
             framework of Oregon SDC law, local governments have flexibility in selecting
             approaches that balance local objectives and data availability. Examples of SDC
             methodology choices that could impact rates include:
             -   Narrowing projects to include in the SDC project list to keep costs down.
             -   Valuing existing facilities based on replacement cost vs. original cost (with or
                 without depreciation) in setting a fee based on available capacity.


Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                 7
             -   How costs are allocated to growth vs. existing users when facilities serve both
                 (e.g., relative to existing level of service, based on the incremental cost of an
                 oversized facility, or based on share of demand).

             -   Whether grants or other sources are assumed to cover a portion of eligible costs
                 for bigger projects (e.g., aquatic centers or major transportation improvements).
             -   Whether rates account for financing and administrative costs.
             -   How demand is measured (e.g., meter size for water, impervious surface area for
                 stormwater, trip ends for transportation, or population for parks).
         -   A growing number of jurisdictions are adopting SDC methodologies that adjust
             rates to reflect differences in demand or impact based on housing unit size. These
             adjustments are typically based on local demand data. While they often pivot off an
             average rate for an average-size unit, they can lead to substantial differences in SDCs
             across jurisdictions for smaller or larger units.
         »   Many jurisdictions make policy choices to reduce SDC rates below what their
             methodology would support. Among jurisdictions surveyed in 2020, 14 percent
             reported discounting a wastewater SDC, and 29 percent reported implementing a
             discounted parks SDC.” In focus groups, service providers highlighted elected
             officials’ concern about impacts to development and desire to remain competitive
             with peer jurisdictions as primary reasons for these choices. Some also noted
             phasing in larger SDC increases over several years for similar reasons.
         :   The cost of constructing capital improvements varies across the state. Local cost
             drivers include lack of local labor and materials in some rural areas, high land costs
             in some urban areas, and geological and soil factors (e.g., steep slopes, rock
             outcroppings, or soils at risk of liquefaction) that can increase the costs of grading
             and construction.

Implementation Considerations
    =   Beyond the SDC rates themselves, administrative decisions can play a big role in how
        SDCs affect developers and jurisdictions. Key factors include the timing of SDC
        payment, exemptions for affordable housing or other types of development, policies
        related to credits for making improvements on the SDC project list, and availability of
        information about SDCs.
         -   There are differing views on the validity of SDC exemptions for affordable
             housing (or any purpose that is unrelated to a reduced demand for system capacity).
             Several cities and service providers have waiver policies in place for regulated
             affordable housing, while others do not feel it is fair (or, in some cases, legal) to
             waive fees for affordable housing unless the foregone revenue is “backfilled” from




27 FCS GROUP analysis of data from League of Oregon Cities, System Development Charges Survey Report
(February 2020).
Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                  8
             other sources. A growing number of communities offer SDC exemptions for
             regulated affordable housing, but this is still the exception rather than the rule.
         :   SDC credits for developers that build public improvements on the SDC project
             list can be a win-win for developers and jurisdictions, particularly in greenfield
             settings, but how they are administered matters. Credit policies differ across
             providers in terms of project eligibility, creditable costs, and transferability. This
             variation, combined with a lack of clear information regarding how to calculate
             credit-eligible costs, can create uncertainty for developers. In addition, jurisdictions
             occasionally require developers to pay SDCs up front that will be reimbursed later
             even when they are building eligible projects, and this further increases carrying
             costs. Transferability was cited as a valuable benefit by multiple developers,
             especially given statutory limits on how long credits are valid (10 years). However,
             transfers can increase administrative costs for jurisdictions and reduce cash flow as
             more developers build projects or buy credits rather than paying SDCs directly.
         -   The timing of SDC payment is important for both jurisdictions and developers,
             but for different reasons. Jurisdictions have flexibility under statute to assess and
             collect SDCs at issuance of a development or building permit, or connection to or
             increased usage of a capital improvement.
             -   Many developers prefer to pay later in the process, primarily for financial
                 reasons. Payment at certificate of occupancy or even at time of sale (for for-sale
                 housing) reduces financing costs or allows the money to go towards early
                 construction costs, reducing the impact of the SDCs.
             -   Most service providers prefer to collect SDCs at issuance of the building
                 permit as this offers the greatest certainty of payment with the least
                 administrative effort. Many expressed concerns about challenges with collecting
                 payment at certificate of occupancy, and even more so at time of sale. However,
                 the timing of the revenue was less of a concern, except in limited situations (e.g.,
                 park land acquisition within a new growth area). Jurisdictions that offer (or
                 previously offered) deferral to certificate of occupancy report mixed results. All
                 noted an increase in administrative effort to process and track deferrals, but the
                 magnitude varies widely. Nonpayment issues and avoidance behavior do not
                 appear to be common (some were linked to commercial development or to a
                 specific developer) but were time-consuming when they did occur.
         -   Developers value certainty about SDC costs for a particular project. Unexpected
             increases to SDC costs can be difficult for both market-rate and affordable housing
             developers to absorb after financing and budgets are set. Estimating costs for
             multifamily development can be particularly challenging when SDCs are based on
             detailed characteristics such as fixture counts that may not be known early on. Clear
             definitions of housing types (particularly related to middle housing) are also
             important to allow for accurate early estimates of SDC costs. And if developers that
             defer SDCs are subject to the SDCs at time of payment, the uncertainty about SDC
             rate changes erodes the value of the interest cost savings from the deferral.


Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                   )
         -   Some jurisdictions go above and beyond statutory notice and information
             availability requirements to engage and inform stakeholders, while others may
             not fully comply with (or be aware of) recent additions to state law regarding
             transparency. Some jurisdictions pro-actively engage stakeholders in methodology
             decisions, provide simplified summary information about SDCs for the general
             public, and/or offer SDC estimation tools for developers. However, based on focus
             groups and review of several jurisdictions’ websites, newly required informational
             items (current SDC rates, methodology reports, project lists, and contact information
             for questions) are not consistently available online —most jurisdictions provide at
             least one of these items, but not all.

SDC Impacts on Housing Costs and Production
        SDCs fund infrastructure that is needed to support growth, which can enable
        development and benefit future residents, but they also increase the cost of building
        new housing. Both factors can influence housing costs and housing production.
        In an accounting sense, housing developers pay the SDC (e.g., write a check). But the
        cost burden of the charge can be shared with a variety of other actors, including
        investors, landowners, homebuyers, and renters. Developers need to weigh SDCs and
        other cost inputs against the sales prices or rents they are expecting to achieve on each
        project. Because SDC costs are outside developers’ control, they must make choices
        about other aspects of the development to bring total costs and prices or rents into
        alignment. How the SDC costs are ultimately distributed among the various market
        actors depends on the actors’ relative sensitivity to prices. Economic theory assumes the
        party with fewer alternatives is less sensitive to change in price and bears a greater
        portion of the SDC.
         :   Homebuyers and renters in tight housing markets likely bear a greater share of
             SDC costs. If developers build larger units to justify higher prices, build smaller
             units to stay within what buyers or renters are willing to pay, or charge higher
             prices/rents for the same housing, end users are getting less value for their money
             and absorbing some of the costs, even if they are paying the same amount.
             Developers cannot charge higher prices or rents unless the market demand is strong
             enough to accept the increase. This is more likely to occur if demand exceeds supply.
             Affluent households are less likely to be cost-sensitive than lower-income
             households, but limited supply and lack of lower-cost options can also affect lower-
             income households, even if they are not absorbing costs directly.
         -   Theory suggests that landowners should absorb SDCs in large part by receiving
             less value for their land, though this may not always be the case. Whether and to
             what extent SDCs are absorbed in land prices depends on the availability of other
             developable land within the same market, how much SDCs vary between
             comparable pieces of developable land, and the timing of the land purchase relative
             to when SDCs are known.
         :   Investors, lenders, and developers are unlikely to absorb SDCs by accepting lower
             returns except in very unusual circumstances or when SDC costs increase
             unexpectedly during development and cannot be passed on to others. Generally,
Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                              10
             market-rate development will not occur unless the expected revenues from the
             project exceed the expected costs by a sufficient margin to create financial returns for
             investors, lenders, and developers that justify the risk of their investment. Investors
             and lenders usually have other options to invest in across multiple markets and will
             avoid places that generate lower risk-adjusted returns. Developers may absorb costs
             when they exceed initial expectations, but they avoid this as much as possible
             through contingency funds and by getting estimates of SDC costs up front.
    =   Studies from Oregon and across the country have consistently shown a pattern of
        higher home prices in areas with higher SDCs. However, the reasons behind this
        remain unclear.
         »   Academic research from across the country and across several decades shows
             positive correlations between impact fees and housing prices in a range of
             contexts. The difference in home prices was larger than the difference in impact fees
             in some studies and smaller in others, but the direction of the relationship was
             consistently positive (higher home prices in areas with higher impact fees). Studies
             that evaluated relationships between impact fees and land prices or housing
             production had mixed results, with some finding positive relationships and others
             finding negative ones. These studies could not control for all other potentially
             relevant variables and do not establish causation, though some authors posit that the
             amenity value of the infrastructure itself is responsible for the relationship, rather
             than the costs of the impact fees. Others suggest potential cost-related explanations.”
         »   Academic literature has also established a link between property values and key
             infrastructure. Studies suggest that property values are higher closer to parks and
             that congestion is associated with “disamenity” (negative) values for some economic
             indicators, while bicycle and pedestrian infrastructure can increase property values.
             These factors can potentially drive home prices and rents in areas where SDCs are
             providing infrastructure that is valued by housing consumers.
         -   A comparison between average single-family home values and single-family SDC
             rates for 76 cities in Oregon shows a general pattern of higher SDC rates in areas
             with higher home values, but also substantial variation between communities.
             Statistically this relationship accounts for only 33 percent of the variation in the data
             without controlling for any other factors. Service provider focus groups suggest that
             policy direction to keep rates low due to elected officials’ concern about impacts on
             development could account for some of the observed relationship (i.e., areas with
             lower home values and weaker housing markets may be less willing to impose high
             SDCs, even if infrastructure needs would justify them).
         -   An original analysis by ECONorthwest found a positive relationship between
             SDC levels and home prices for new development in Washington County,
             Oregon. ECONorthwest analyzed sales transactions for new homes in three urban
             expansion areas and adjacent recent subdivisions in Beaverton, Hillsboro, and
             Tigard. Current SDC rates for the areas range from roughly $33,000 to $53,000 per


8 See Appendix G for works cited.
Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                11
             single-family detached unit, with higher rates in the expansion areas and differences
             between jurisdictions. A linear regression model showed higher housing prices in
             places with higher SDCs after controlling for other readily available housing
             characteristics: a $10,000 difference in SDCs was associated with a $7 per-square-foot
             difference in the price of newly built housing (about $16,800 for a 2,400-square-foot
             home). However, developer interviews suggest the difference may also be due to the
             overall amount of infrastructure needed in the expansion areas and use of premium
             design and amenities to capture demand from higher-income households.
         -   Longitudinal data from the City of Bend shows that changes in new home prices
             have not tracked closely with changes in SDC rates over time. While both have
             increased over the past decade, new home prices have tracked with broader housing
             market conditions while SDC rates have tracked with construction cost indices that
             are used to adjust the rates year to year. While rising SDC costs could still be a
             contributing factor in rising home prices in Bend, they are not the primary driver.
    =   SDCs affect some housing more than others—smaller entry-level homes, lower-cost
        middle housing and apartments, and communities with weaker markets are
        disproportionately affected by SDCs. High-end single-family detached housing is
        generally impacted least.
         :   Fora typical new single-family home, SDCs account for a relatively small share of
             development costs (estimated at roughly 3 percent in Oregon at average costs). Even
             a relatively high SDC rate (e.g., $30,000) would account for 6 percent or less of
             development costs in many medium and large cities. For larger single-family homes,
             the share of costs is even less.
         -   DCs are a greater share of costs for lower-cost housing types— multifamily,
             middle housing, and smaller single-family detached houses. ECONorthwest’s
             estimates suggest SDCs account for roughly 4 to 5.5 percent of total development
             costs for these housing types at average costs for Oregon, but potentially 10 percent
             or more in high-cost markets with high SDCs. SDCs have a greater impact on
             financial returns and feasibility for these housing types as a result. This is supported
             by findings from developer focus groups, which highlighted entry-level homes and
             middle housing as particularly sensitive to SDC costs.
         »   When SDCs are scaled to unit size, their share of development costs is more
             consistent across housing types and unit sizes. Compared to SDCs that are applied
             per unit, scaled SDCs result in a lower SDC share of development costs for lower-
             cost housing types with smaller units.
         -   While SDCs are typically lower in areas with weaker housing markets and lower
             land costs, these areas are also more sensitive to increases in SDCs. For example, in
             a small city outside a metropolitan area, typical SDC costs for a single-family
             detached home might account for only 2 to 3 percent of development costs.
             However, a $10,000 change in fee for a single-family unit would have a greater
             impact on financial feasibility in such a city than for developments inside a
             metropolitan area where land and housing prices are relatively expensive.


Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                   12
             In communities without SDC exemptions, affordable housing development can
             also face substantial SDC costs. Data from several Oregon communities shows that
             SDCs for an income-qualified affordable apartment development can cost from tens
             of thousands to over a million dollars in some jurisdictions. While other cost drivers
             may have a greater impact on affordable housing development costs overall, the
             cumulative expenditures on SDCs for affordable housing development across the
             state likely total millions of dollars per year.
             SDC reductions do not guarantee lower prices or rents for market-rate housing,
             but targeted exemptions or reductions for certain housing types or price-points
             can support production of lower-cost housing options. Evidence from communities
             that offer exemptions for lower-cost housing without long-term affordability
             restrictions shows that in some cases eliminating SDCs for housing that meets
             specific price points (or for small units like ADUs) can increase production of that
             type of housing by for-profit developers. However, the difference must be enough to
             meaningfully change development costs, and the development must be close to
             viable already. For more expensive housing, cost savings may or may not be passed
             on to buyers or renters, depending on how competitive the housing market is.




Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                             13
                                            Part 1:
                     SDC History and Legal Context

                                     Primary Contributors: Galardi Rothstein Group, FCS GROUP




Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                           1
1.1 History of System Development Charges
1.1.1 Origins of American Impact Fees
System development charges (also referred to as impact fees) are a form of exaction. When an
owner of land plans to develop that land, the local government may determine that the planned
development will create a need for additional public infrastructure. Having made such a
determination, the local government may require the owner to provide some form of
contribution or payment as compensation for the additional infrastructure that the local
government must provide. This requirement is known as an exaction.

Exactions have long been viewed as the
                                                    In terms of the police power, most local governments
legitimate exercise of a local
                                                    have great discretion in regulating to protect the
government's police power. Requiring                public’s health, safety, and general welfare. In
developers to build public improvements             contrast, local governments have almost no discretion
became common during the Great                      in the exercise of their power to tax. It was natural,
Depression.* Exaction of land or public             then, that local governments would turn to the police
                                                    power, where they had discretion, in order to finance
improvements is still common today, and
                                                     infrastructure needs.?
such an exaction is known as a
dedication.

After World War IL, local governments began to require that developers pay money instead of,
or in addition to, dedicating land or public improvements.*! These monetary exactions come in
two forms. An ad hoc monetary exaction is a customized calculation that is unique to a single
development, its impacts, and the means of mitigating those impacts. A legislative monetary
exaction is a rate or set of rates adopted by a governing body and applied consistently to
development applications. These exactions are known generally as impact fees and known in
Oregon as SDCs.

The first impact fee imposed in the United States (U.S.) may have been a “tap in” fee for new
users imposed by the Hinsdale, Illinois, Sanitary District in 1947. The purpose of the fee was to
finance expansion of the water treatment plant. The fee was challenged in court, but the Illinois
Supreme Court ruled that the impact fee was “legal if used for capital and not operating
expenses.”*? The first SDC in Oregon was enacted in 1972 by the City of Corvallis.*




29 Arthur C. Nelson, Liza K. Bowles, Julian C. Juergensmeyer, and James C. Nicholas,   A Guide to Impact Fees and
Housing Affordability (Island Press, 2008), page 49.
39 Vicki Elmer and Adam Leigland, Infrastructure Planning and Finance: A Smart and Sustainable Guide for Local
Practitioners (Routledge, 2014), page 228.
31 Thid 228.
32 William Grady Holt, “Impact Fees” in The Encyclopedia of Housing, second edition, edited by Andrew T. Carswell
(2012), page 385.
3 Oregon Legislative Policy and Research Office, “System Development Charges” (State of Oregon, December 17,
2020), page 2.

Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                               2
1.1.2 The Rise of State Enabling Acts
States have explicitly authorized impact fees in a variety of forms, for a variety of public
services, since 1987. By 1995, 21 states had authorized impact fees of one form or another. By
2007, 27 states had authorized impact fees.“ It is now estimated that as many as 34 of the 50
United States have codified impact fee authority and accompanying constraints. All 4 of the
states neighboring Oregon— Washington, California, Idaho, and Nevada—have impact fee
statutes.°°

Local governments in Oregon and other states have always had the authority to impose impact
fees on developers, but constitutional, statutory, and case laws constrain that authority.

The Oregon SDC Act: A Brief History
The Homebuilders Association (HBA) sponsored an SDC bill in Oregon that was vetoed by then
Governor Goldschmidt in 1987. A small group of city and homebuilder representatives
subsequently collaborated on a bill that became the initial law. In 1989, the Oregon Legislative
Assembly passed the first provisions of the SDC Act, which is now codified in Chapter 223
(223.297 to 223.316) of the Oregon Revised Statutes (ORS). The SDC Act became effective in
1991.

The SDC Act’s broad objective was to “provide a uniform framework for the imposition of
system development charges by local governments, to provide equitable funding for orderly
growth and development in Oregon’s communities and to establish that the charges may be
used only for capital improvements.”*” It was thought that having a uniform framework would
protect both developers and public agencies — and reduce the cost of potential future litigation.

More specifically, the law was intended to help Oregon public agencies equitably recover the
costs of infrastructure needed to serve growth from growth, thereby reducing the likelihood
that those costs would shift to existing ratepayers and taxpayers.

Since its original passing in 1989, there have been multiple attempts to modify key provisions of
the Oregon SDC Law, including expansion and restriction of the types of costs that may be
included in the SDCs, clarification of legislative intent and other “housekeeping” modifications,
and changes to procedural and methodological requirements.

The most significant changes to the law occurred with the passage of Senate Bill 939 in 2003.
Ultimately, SB 939 was a negotiated solution to a longer list of changes sought by the




34 Arthur C. Nelson, James C. Nicholas, Julian C. Juergensmeyer, “State Impact Fee Enabling Acts”, contributed by
Clancy Mullen, in Impact Fees: Principles and Practice of Proportionate-Share Development Fees (2009), page 114.
%® National Impact Fee Survey: 2019, Mullen.
36 Washington, RCW 82.02; Idaho, IC 67-82; Nevada, NRS 278B,   California, CGC 66000.
37 ORS 223.297.

Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                               3
Homebuilders Association. The most recent change to the statutes occurred in 2021. Section
1.2.2 outlines the key elements of ORS 223.297 — 223.316.




Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report
1.2 Legal Framework
1.2.1 Landmark Case Law
A number of U.S. Supreme Court cases related to exactions have defined tests of their
constitutionality for exactions generally and monetary exactions. The most recent of these raises
questions about whether the same tests extend to impact fees given that they are established in
a legislative policy context rather than ad hoc for individual properties, but this broader legal
context informs local approaches to impact fees. These cases are summarized below. The timing
of these cases relative to other key events in SDC history is shown in Exhibit 1.

Exhibit 1. Impact Fee/SDC                     Historical Timeline
Source: FCS GROUP




        First U.S. Impact Fee                           First Oregon SDC             Oregon SDC Act

                                                                                               Measure 5 Measure 50




                                                                 e                         @       ee
 1940       1945     1950       1955   1960      1965     19/0       1975   1980   1985)         1990        995     2000   2005   2010   | 2015   2020



                                                                                                        Dolan Case                  Koontz Case


                                                                                   Nollan Case




Nollan (1987): Essential Nexus

Whether authorized by statute or not, all impact fees in the U.S. are subject to the Fifth
Amendment of the U.S. Constitution, which created a distinction between an exaction that is a
legitimate use of a local government’s police power and a taking that would require the local
government to compensate the property owner.

The U.S. Supreme Court further clarified the line between exaction and taking in 1987 with its
ruling on Nollan v. California Coastal Commission.*® This ruling introduced the concept of
“essential nexus” as a test for the validity of an exaction: Whatever is being required (exacted)
as a condition of development approval must be clearly and directly related to the impact of the
proposed development.

In this case, the California Coastal Commission was concerned that the new, larger home that
the Nollans proposed would obstruct the public’s view of the ocean. But instead of imposing a


38 Nollan v. California Coastal Commission, 483 U.S. 825, 837 (1987)
Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                                                                     5
restriction on the house’s height or width, the Commission required an easement for public
access to the beach. The Court found that this requirement (exaction) did not fulfill the purpose
of maintaining the public’s view and was therefore a taking. In other words, if the impact of the
development is an obstructed view, a valid exaction must mitigate that particular problem. This
is the “essential nexus” that was henceforth required of a valid exaction.

Dolan (1994): Rough Proportionality

Like the Nollan case, Dolan v. City of Tigard,? was about dedications, not monetary exactions.
Taking a step beyond an “essential nexus,” the U.S. Supreme Court ruling held that a “rough
proportionality” must exist between the impact of the proposed development and the exaction
intended to mitigate that impact.

However, the exaction in Dolan was a land dedication, or “possessory exaction,” required ad
hoc at the time of permit approval, leaving open the question of whether the “rough
proportionality” standard applied to legislatively adopted, non-possessory (monetary)
exactions, like impact fees. The court also noted that generally applicable legislative regulations
should be treated with more deference than property-specific determinations.”

Koontz (2013): Monetary Exactions

In 2013, the U.S. Supreme Court finally ruled on a case involving monetary exactions. In Koontz
v. St. Johns River Water Management District" the Court held that the Nollan and Dolan tests
apply to monetary exactions just as they do to dedications, at least in the case of adjudicative
exactions (specific to an individual parcels). However, the ruling may still leave open (to lower
courts) the question of whether the more restrictive essential nexus test applies to legislative
exactions that are programmatic or apply to development more broadly (e.g., service area-
wide). 4344


1.2.2 Oregon SDC Act: Overview of Key Elements
As mentioned previously, the broad objective of the Oregon SDC Act was to provide a uniform
framework for the imposition of SDCs by local governments. The essential elements of this



% Dolan v. City of Tigard, 512 U.S. 374 (1994).
40 U.S. Department of Transportation, Federal Highway Administration, “Essential Nexus, Rough Proportionality,
and But-For Tests: State of the Practice,” 2021.
“| Koontz v. St. Johns River Water Management District, 570 U.S. 595 (2013).
® Julie Kim, Bene Tellus, Thay Biship, and Stefan Natzke. Value Capture: Development Impact Fees and Other Fee-
Based Development Charges, A Primer. Report No.       FHW A-HIN-21-004. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of
Transportation, August 2021 (page 26).
48 Howard Ellman, Esq. and Kimberly Huangfu, Esq., “U.S. Supreme Court’s Koontz Decision Seemingly Broadened
Landowner Protection in the Realm of Regulatory Takings Law, While Leaving Several Intriguing Questions
Unanswered,” Buchalter Nemer Client Alert, September 2013.
“4 Adam Lovelady, “The Koontz Decision and Implications for Development Exactions,” Coates’ Canons NC Local
Government Law, UNC     School of Government, July 1, 2013.

Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                             6
framework are listed below. More specific requirements and local approaches to each element
are addressed later in this report. Appendix C summarizes Oregon case law that clarifies some
provisions of the Oregon SDC Act.

Definition of Capital Improvements

SDCs may be used for capital improvements for the following public facilities:

    =    Water supply, treatment, and distribution
    =    Wastewater collection, transmission, treatment, and disposal

    =    Drainage and flood control
    =    Transportation
    =    Parks and recreation

Previous legislative bills to amend the law by broadening facilities to include schools, police or
fire improvements have been unsuccessful.** However, because of some of these efforts, the
legislature did adopt a construction excise tax that is charged per square foot for new residential
development to provide additional funding for schools.’

Determination of SDC Amount and Methodology

SDCs may consist of a reimbursement fee, an improvement fee, or both. Improvement fees are
associated with capital improvements to be constructed, while reimbursement fees are designed
to recover the costs associated with capital improvements already constructed or under
construction. The statutes put some constraints on the costs that may be included in each fee
component:

    =    Reimbursement fees exclude existing facility costs funded by gifts or grants and costs
         associated with “used capacity” (facility capacity needed to meet existing development
         service demands).

    =    Improvement fees are based on the projected costs of capital improvements included on
         an SDC capital project list that expand capacity to meet the service demands of future
         system users.”

An SDC methodology based on a combination reimbursement and improvement fee structure
must demonstrate that the charge is not based on providing the same system capacity.*




® For example, HB 2581 from the 2007 Oregon Legislature.
46 ORS 320.176
4” An increase in system capacity may be established if a capital improvement increases the level of performance or
service provided by existing facilities or provides new facilities. ORS 223.307
48 This requirement is straightforward to meet if there is no overlap in specific facility improvements between the two
fee components, and if the value of used capacity in facility components is excluded from the reimbursement fee.
Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                                     7
Beyond these constraints, the statutes provide flexibility in determining SDC amounts and
methodologies, provided that new users contribute no more than an equitable share of costs.*? It
is important to note that the statutes do not prescribe specific bases for charging individual
developments, nor do they preclude local governments from providing discounts, waivers, or
exemptions for certain classes of development, consistent with modern rate-making principles.

SDC Capital Project List

Local governments are required to prepare a capital improvement program or comparable plan,
prior to the establishment of an improvement SDC, that includes a list of the improvements that
the jurisdiction intends to fund with improvement fee revenues and the estimated timing, cost,
and eligible portion of each improvement.* This requirement was an added provision to the
original statute to provide greater transparency on the basis for improvement fee costs and
expenditures. Since reimbursement fees are based on facilities already constructed or under
construction, the project list requirement is not applicable.

SDC Credits

A credit must be provided against the improvement fee for the construction of “qualified public
improvements.” Qualified public improvements are improvements required as a condition of
development approval, identified in the SDC capital project list, and either:

    a)   Not located on or contiguous to property that is the subject of development approval; or
    b)   Located in whole or in part on or contiguous to property that is the subject of
         development approval and required to be built larger or with greater capacity than is
         necessary for the particular development project to which the improvement fee is
         related.”

SDC Expenditures, Accounting, and Appeals

Expenditures of SDC revenues are limited to payment for capital improvements (including
repayment of indebtedness) for the systems for which the fees are collected. Improvement fee
revenues are limited to capacity-increasing capital improvements needed to provide service to
future users, in accordance with the SDC capital project list. SDC revenue may also be spent




® ORS223.297 (Policy) indicates that the imposition of SDCs is intended “to provide equitable funding for orderly
growth and development in Oregon’s communities...” and 223.304 indicates that reimbursement fees must “promote
the objective of future system users contributing no more than an equitable share to the cost of existing facilities.”
»° See for example, “Affordability and Equity Considerations for Rate-Setting” (Eric Rothstein, Stacey Isaac Berahzer,
Joe Crea, and Michael Matichich for Journal AWWA,     September 2021) which argues that water, wastewater, and
stormwater service providers have a social responsibility to ensure universal, affordable access to services, as part of
their rate-setting framework. Not all service providers or experts agree with this interpretation.
5t ORS 223.309
52 ORS 223.304(4)
8 Per 223.307(2), “an increase in system capacity may be established if a capital improvement increases the level of
performance or service provided by existing facilities or provides new facilities.”
Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                                      8
on the cost of complying with the statutes, but not for administrative office facilities or
operation and maintenance costs associated with capital facilities.

Local governments are required to deposit SDC revenues into dedicated accounts and provide
an annual accounting of revenues and expenditures.™ Furthermore, local governments must
create administrative procedures for individuals to challenge SDC revenue expenditures or
calculations, and to provide adequate notice regarding review procedures, including the right
to petition for review pursuant to ORS 34.010 to 34.100.

Methodology Notification, Review, Updating, and Transparency
The local government must maintain a list of persons who have made a written request for
notification of establishment or modification of an SDC and provide notice to such individuals
at least 90 days prior to the first public hearing to enact anew or modified SDC. The SDC
methodology must also be made available for review 60 days prior to the first public hearing.®

Application of one or more cost indices periodically is not considered a change in the
methodology, provided that the index is published by a recognized agency, independent from
the methodology, and incorporated into the methodology or adopted separately by ordinance
or resolution.*

Similarly, the SDC capital project list may be updated at any time. However, if an SDC is to be
increased by a proposed modification to the list then written notice must be provided to
interested parties at least 30 days prior to adoption of the proposed modification, and if
requested within 7 days of the planned adoption, a public hearing must be held.°”

As a result of the most recent amendments in 2021, local governments are required to make
information on SDC rates, methodologies, planned capital improvement project funding, and
local official contact information available on a website or other means free of charge upon
request.°®




4 ORS 223.311. While not required, some local governments track fund balances for improvement fees and
reimbursement fees separately, because there are fewer restrictions on reimbursement fee spending.
55 ORS 223.304(7)
56 ORS 223.304(8)
57 ORS 223.309(2)
58 ORS 223.316
Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report
      Part 2: The Role of SDCs in Funding
                                                                  Infrastructure

                Primary Contributors:         ECONorthwest,   FCS GROUP,   Galardi Rothstein Group




Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                            10
2.1 Evolving Fiscal Context
There are a number of potential funding sources for water, wastewater, stormwater,
transportation and parks infrastructure. However, the level of funds available to support
development-driven infrastructure is constrained by local, state, and federal laws (that limit
overall funding) and by rising costs for system operations, repair and replacement, and other
capital improvements (that compete for some of the same funds). Beyond legal restrictions,
broad local funding sources, like utility fees, are also increasingly constrained by concerns over
ratepayer affordability, as ongoing user fees place an added burden on local households.

Exhibit 2 provides a list of potential infrastructure funding sources, which are described in more
detail in Appendix D. While it is beyond the scope of this study to fully evaluate the trade-offs
associated with each option, Sections 2.1.1 through 2.1.4 discuss key local, state and federal cost
and funding trends that have elevated the importance of SDCs for funding development-driven
infrastructure costs and implications of shifting the cost burden to other local sources like user
fees.

Exhibit 2: Potential Infrastructure Funding Sources
 Category                      Examples

 State and federal grants    | Water Wastewater Fund, Congestion Mitigation and Air Quality
 or low-interest loans         Improvement Program, Safe Drinking Water Revolving Loan Fund
 Property tax-based            General obligation bonds, designating existing permanent rate operating
 funding                       tax revenue, or redirecting growth in operating revenue through tax
                               increment financing
 User-based funding            Utility rates, parking fees, facility rental fees, tolls, and system-wide user
                               charges
 Development-based             System-wide or area-specific SDCs, exactions, development agreements,
 funding                       local improvement districts
 Fees or taxes on              Franchise fees, local gas tax, vehicle registration fees, prepared food and
 economic activity             beverage tax, or transient lodging tax




2.1.1 Federal and State Funding Trends
Trends in Federal Funding for Infrastructure

Historical Trends

The U.S. Congressional Budget Office (CBO) describes historical trends in federal funding for
infrastructure compared to state and local funding, going back to the 1950s:

            From the 1950s to the 1980s, the federal share of public infrastructure spending was
            typically much larger than it is today, reaching a high of 38 percent in 1977. But that
            share started to decrease in the 1980s, when state and local governments began to
            invest more in transportation and water infrastructure while federal spending on
            infrastructure remained relatively stable. Since 1987, federal spending has accounted


Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                           11
                                                                                  for roughly one quarter of public spending on transportation and water
                                                                                   infrastructure.

This is shown in Exhibit 3.

Exhibit 3: Public Spending on Transportation and Water Infrastructure by Level of Government,
1956-2017
Source: ECONorthwest using data from the Congressional Budget Office, originally drawn from data from the Office of
Management and Budget, the Census Bureau, and the Bureau of Economic Analysis.
                                                                                600




                                                                                500
  Spending on Water and Transportation Infrastructure

                                                                                (o}
                                                                                oO
                                                                           £
                                                   (Billions of 2017 Dollars)




                                                                                300
                                                                                                                                                             State and Local
                                                                                                                                                              Governments




                                                                                                                                                           Federal   Government


                                                                                  0
                                                                                   6D
                                                                                   PPM DT PPX
                                                                                          © SAW Ak
                                                                                                MMP NW ODO LPLPLP
                                                                                                            M G     © > OGM
                                                                                                                  MPP   Sd & SSdOSPYA>                                            9
                                                                                  PP  PP   PPP     PPYKPTPFPrPrrPP           PLP L'
Dollar amounts are adjusted to remove the effects of inflation using price indexes for government spending that measure
the prices of materials and other inputs used to build, operate, and maintain transportation                                                          and water infrastructure.


The CBO notes that the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act (ARRA) “temporarily
boosted federal outlays for infrastructure by $55 billion, in nominal terms, over the 2009-2014
period; about one-half of that amount was spent in 2009 and 2010.”

Impact of Recent Infrastructure Spending Packages

The summary referenced above from the CBO predates passage of the federal Bipartisan
Infrastructure Law introduced in mid-November of 2021, which allocated funding to over 350



» Congressional Budget Office, “Public Spending on Transportation and Water Infrastructure, 1956 to 2014,”
https://www.cbo.gov/sites/default/files/114th-congress-2015-2016/reports/49910-infrastructure.pdf, March 2015, page
27.
  Ibid, page 16.
Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                                                                                                 12
programs across several federal departments and agencies to improve broadband, rail and
transit, clean energy, water, and other infrastructure.” This infrastructure bill specifically
budgeted almost $570 billion for transportation projects, including roads, bridges, public transit,
passenger and freight rail, and airports and waterways projects. Furthermore, the bill’s budget
allocated over $100 billion to resilience, water infrastructure, and clean drinking water projects.
These investments far exceed those noted above from the ARRA and could dwarf federal
spending on transportation and water infrastructure in 2017.

Exhibit 4: Bipartisan Infrastructure Law Budget, 2021: Transportation and Water Investments
Source: The White House. 2022. “Data Guidebook.” A Guidebookto the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law.
 Investment Category                                                          Budgeted (in billions)
 Transportation                                                                       569
          Roads, Bridges, and Major Projects                                          326
          Public Transit                                                               83
          Passenger and Freight Rail                                                   63
          Electric Vehicles, Buses, and Ferries                                        19
          Airports, Ports, and Waterways                                               42
          Safety                                                                       38
 Resilience, Water Infrastructure, and Clean Drinking Water                           102
 Total Transportation, Resilience, and Water                                          671

Additional discussion of recent federal legislation related to infrastructure funding for specific
types of infrastructure is included in the following sections.

Variation by Infrastructure System

Federal contributions to infrastructure have varied between water and transportation over time,
as shown in Exhibit 5. This shows that federal contributions to water infrastructure have
dropped more dramatically as a share of total public spending, while federal transportation
investments have remained relatively flat relative to total public spending.




61 The White House. 2022. Building a Better America:    A Guidebook to the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law.
62 The White House. 2022. “Data Guidebook.” A Guidebook to the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law.
Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                       13
Exhibit 5: Federal Contribution to Infrastructure Spending by Type, 1956-2017
Source: ECONorthwest using data from the Congressional Budget Office, originally drawn from data from the Office of
Management and Budget, the Census Bureau, and the Bureau of Economic Analysis.
        50%


        45%


        40%


          18)

   On 35%                                                                                                                     All Transportation
  =                                                                                                                             Infrastructure
   © 30%
   Qa
  ep)

  S
   © 25%
   oO
  <=
  n”
   © 20%
  S                                                                                                                                All Water
   ®
  uc                                                                                                                            Infrastructure
     15%


        10%


         5%


         0%
                    OG       ODO    GY       HS       @©   AN   Ak   MN SO    &     G    O&     D   OO    BD    SN   KK  KL        OO    WD
                m        2         0”    ©        ©        A’   WV   ND      YD   OD    DG    OQ’   A    OO    LN’   W AW     YY        YY -Y
                PP                 PPP                     vPPrvrVPvvVPrvrrvsvV
                                                                       LP PLP LLP

Federal Spending on Water and Wastewater Infrastructure

Historical Trends in Federal Water and Wastewater Spending
Data on public spending for water resources and water and wastewater utilities® specifically
(Exhibit 6) shows the rise of state and local spending for water-related infrastructure, and the
decline in federal investment since the 1980s.% Spending on water supply and wastewater
treatment facilities increased in the mid-1970s when the federal government provided grants to
state and local governments under the Clean Water Act of 1972.%




6 According to the CBO data notes, “Water resources include water containment systems (dams, levees, reservoirs,
and watersheds) and sources of freshwater (lakes and rivers). Water utilities include water supply and wastewater
treatment facilities.”
64 The rise in spending may be attributed to numerous factors including state and federal mandates and extensive
need for infrastructure repair and replacement. In Oregon, recent changes to land use laws imposed on communities
over 25,000 population by House Bill 2001 will further increase infrastructure spending needs for some local agencies
to upgrade infrastructure to accommodate higher density development.
6 Congressional Budget Office, “Public Spending on Transportation and Water Infrastructure, 1956 to 2014,” March
2015, page 16.
Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                                                              14
Exhibit 6. Public Spending on Water Infrastructure* by Level of Government, 1956-2017
Source: ECONorthwest using data from the Congressional Budget Office, originally drawn from data from the Office of
Management and Budget, the Census Bureau, and the Bureau of Economic Analysis.
                                              180


                                              160
                                                jo)
                                   b
                                              £
  Water Spending (Billions of 2017 Dollars)




                                              120


                                              100
                                                                                                                                                            State and Local
                                                                                                                                                             Governments
                                              (o)
                                              ©
                                              fo?)
                                              jo)
                                              2S
                                              oO




                                               20

                                                                                                                                                  Federal    Government
                                                (0)
                                                       ©     ODO    VY       oo       &   AN   Ak NW SS   &®   G&    O&@    DV   OO    BG    VD    KK    A          OO     WD
                                                      mS   ~—      ©”    ©        &       A”   VND        wD   DO   DOD    QO”   D    AD    AN’   DH  PW       YY        PY   -Y
                                                PP                 PP             PPP           vrPF      PF        vVFVPrPFrPrrPrvPvl
                                                                                                                                  ff
*Combines data on water resources, which include water containment systems (dams, levees, reservoirs, and watersheds)
and sources of freshwater, and water utilities, which include water supply and wastewater treatment facilities.


Recent Federal Funding Commitments for Water and Wastewater
Federal legislation like the Water Infrastructure Finance and Innovation and Infrastructure
Investment and Jobs Acts have also contributed new critical funds for restoration and
improvement since 2017 not reflected in Exhibit 6, including over $55 billion of new investment.
However, as Exhibit 7 shows, the combination of user fee revenue, municipal bonds, and
increased funding from state and federal sources is still projected to leave a gap between
available and necessary funds for these systems.




6 McKinsey & Company, “US Water Infrastructure: Making Funding Count,” November 24, 2021,
https://www.mckinsey.com/industries/electric-power-and-natural-gas/our-insights/us-water-infrastructure-making-
funding-count.
Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                                                                                              15
Exhibit 7. Water and Wastewater Funding Sources by Year, $ billions
Source: McKinsey and Company®?

    IIJA:*   Wastewater                                          i     State        grant     and      state         loan                                                    @      Municipal     bonds
 We JA: Water                                                          Water Infrastructure Finance and Innovation Act                                                       WM User fee revenue
 WB JA: Western Water                                            W@ Special Appropriation Act projects
                                                                                                                                                                                       Total system needs
    Private capital                                                    Drinking Water State Revolving Fund and                                                                                              :
                              -                                        Sléan Water State Bavelvina    Fund                                                                   —         Total spend:
    US Department of Agriculture loan                                  GICAR VV ATCL OUALe                     REVOVE                 UN

               250




               200
                                                                                                                                                                                                                —29%



                                                                                                                                                                                                        t       +5%

                150




                100




                 50




                  @)
                       2016                         2018                           2020                               2029                             2024                          9026


                               al funding   from   the Western   Water       and   Drinking    Water     and    Wa           ewater    Infrastructure Acts, excluding any potential funding from
                          structure Act (~$500         million) and   Resiliency      A ct    (~$5 billion};    it          does not include any pote:        al   funding   from   the $3.5   billion budget-
                  kage
                  =stment and Jobs Act
                       snd v            al stimulus,
                  ional Rese  ch Service; Global Water            Intelligence;
                                                                         o
                                                                                     Statista;    US    Environmental             Protection Agency
                                                                                                                                                 = |     4




Some of the largest federal contributions will be under the existing Drinking Water State
Revolving Fund and Clean Water State Revolving Funds. While roughly half of their $22 billion
allocation is required to be in the form of grants or forgivable loans, the remainder will need to
be repaid over time by the agencies receiving the funds.®




6? McKinsey & Company, “US Water Infrastructure: Making Funding Count,” November 24, 2021,
https://www.mckinsey.com/industries/electric-power-and-natural-gas/our-insights/us-water-infrastructure-making-
funding-count.

68 Seth Robertson and Ruby Wells, “Once-In-a-Generation Funding Opportunity: The $1 Trillion IIJA,” Hazen and
Sawyer, September 15, 2022, https://www.hazenandsawyer.com/articles/once-in-a-generation-funding-opportunity-
for-water-infrastructure-congress-passes-the-1t-iija.
Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                                                                                                                                  16
Federal Spending on Transportation

Historical Trends in Federal Transportation Spending
According to the CBO, “spending on highways increased under the Federal-Aid Highway Act
of 1956 when the federal government funded construction of the Interstate Highway System. In
the late 1990s, spending on highways and mass transit increased under the Transportation
Equity Act for the 21* Century.” As shown in Exhibit 8, federal transportation spending has
been relatively flat to slightly declining since the late 1990s in real terms.

Exhibit 8: Public Spending on Transportation* Infrastructure by Level of Government, 1956-2017
Source: ECONorthwest using data from the Congressional Budget Office, originally drawn from data from the Office of
Management and Budget, the Census Bureau, and the Bureau of Economic Analysis.
                                                       400



                                                       350
  Transportation Spending (Billions of 2017 Dollars)




                                                       300



                                                       250
                                                                                                                                             State and Local
                                                                                                                                              Governments
                                                       200


                                                       150


                                                       100
                                                       jo)
                                                       ol




                                                                                                                                   Federal    Government



                                                         0
                                                           6D DFP
                                                          LPP  YD © BD ar MMP
                                                                          ak MA D LPF
                                                                                   > © LPM
                                                                                        MD DM PPM
                                                                                              HO DW DH GMH& HSAOPV % ©
                                                         PP   PPP      PP PVYKPKPKPrPrPFrPP                 & LP L' &
* Transportation infrastructure includes highways, mass transit and rail, aviation, and water transportation.


According to one study:

                                                              The highway system that was to be primarily funded by federal sources has fallen into
                                                              disrepair with increasing congestion because of inadequate federal funding. States
                                                              elected not to assume the primary role that the federal government was abandoning
                                                             for precisely the same reason that the federal government was abandoning it: cost. The




Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                                                                          17
           responsibility for highway maintenance and other major public investments has fallen
           to local jurisdictions by default.

Another component of federal funding for transportation in Oregon comes from federal timber
payments in lieu of property taxes, 75 percent of which are dedicated to transportation. With
declining timber harvests, these payments have been reduced, even with special allocations to
address the decline.”

Recent Federal Funding Commitments for Transportation
The Bipartisan Infrastructure Law is expected to boost federal spending on transportation in
Oregon, some of which will include projects that would otherwise be funded (in whole or in
part) at the local level, including bridge replacements, safety improvements, and climate
resilience. (Note that these types of capital improvements are generally not growth-related, and
they are less likely to include projects that would be eligible for significant funding from SDCs.)
Much of the funding that could go towards local projects will be allocated through competitive
grants.”

State Funding for Transportation
Revenue limitations have affected state funding for transportation as well. Oregon’s State
Highway Fund is shared among the state highway program, county roads, and city streets
under a formula in which approximately 50 percent of revenues go to the state, 30 percent to
counties, and 20 percent to cities. The State Highway Fund’s revenue sources include state fuel
taxes, state weight-mile taxes on trucks, state vehicle registration and title fees, and federal
funds. Neither fuel taxes nor user fees are indexed to inflation, and increasing vehicle efficiency,
along with hybrid and electric vehicles, are reducing fuel consumption, which have led to flat or
decreasing funding from these sources.”

Federal Financial Backing for Subdivision Development
The spike in federal transportation spending in the post-World War II era was accompanied by
federal housing policies that supported new housing development and developers’ ability to
finance greenfield development costs. During that period, the Federal Housing Association
(FHA) incentivized developers to build large new segregated single-family subdivisions
through guaranteeing bank loans and mortgage insurance by way of pre-construction plan
approvals.” The FHA’s approval of subdivision plans ensured builders’ ability to obtain low-




® Arthur C. Nelson, Liza K. Bowles, Julian C. Juergensmeyer, and James C. Nicholas,    A Guide to Impact Fees and
Housing Affordability (Island Press, 2008), pages 12-13.
” Oregon Legislative Policy and Research Office, “Funding Transportation Background Brief,” Updated: September
2016. https://www.oregonlegislature.gov/lpro/Publications/BB2016FundingTransportation.pdf
U.S. Department of Transportation, “The Bipartisan Infrastructure Law Will Deliver for Oregon,” April 12, 2022,
https://www.transportation.gov/briefing-room/bipartisan-infrastructure-law-will-deliver-oregon

” Oregon Legislative Policy and Research Office, “Funding Transportation Background Brief,” Updated: September
2016. https://www.oregonlegislature.gov/lpro/Publications/BB2016FundingTransportation.pdf
* Rothstein, Richard. 2018. The Color of Law. New York, NY: Liveright Publishing Corporation. p. 70, 75.

Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                               18
interest loans issued by banks to finance their construction projects.” At this time, banks were
usually cautious about issuing loans for working families, but they often did so when the
mortgages were insured.” Therefore, because the FHA’s approval of the pre-construction plans
would automatically guarantee mortgage insurance, this meant little risk for the banks, and so
they regularly financed these massive subdivision construction projects and land aquations
costs, sometimes covering the full cost of entire suburbs.”

However, there was a major caveat to attaining the FHA’s approval and mortgage insurance:
the requirement of an “openly stated prohibition on sales to African Americans.””” FHA rejected
subdivision construction proposals that either considered housing African Americans and/or
were to be built too close to where predominantly non-white communities resided. Anything
that threatened possible integration was not federally insured.”* The FHA (and later the
Department of Veterans Affairs) required that any mortgage insurance approval would be
reliant upon the addition of racially restrictive covenants in every one of the subdivisions’
property deeds, often with overt racist language such as “no lot or portion of a lot or building
erected thereon shall be sold, leased, rented, or occupied by any other than those of the Caucasian race.””

Thus, suburban development during the post-World War II era enjoyed federally supported
low-interest financing that facilitated infrastructure investments by private developers, but only
for segregated, white-only subdivisions.

2.1.2 Infrastructure Cost Trends

Costs Associated with Changing Environmental Regulations

A growing understanding of the importance of environmental and public health protections has
led to an increase in federal regulations that affect water, wastewater, stormwater, and
transportation infrastructure, including the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) of 1969,
the Clean Air Act (CAA) of 1970, the Clean Water Act (CWA) of 1972 (CWA), and the
Endangered Species Act (ESA) of 1973. These policies have led to major improvements in
environmental protection and human health, but not without cost.

A study of the state and local costs associated with the Clean Water Act (CWA), for example,
found that local government wastewater expenditures increased by $157 per capita, or over 230
percent, after the implementing CWA mandates. Total city expenditures increased by




74 Rothstein, Richard. 2018. The Color of Law. New York, NY: Liveright Publishing Corporation, p. 10.
® Ibid., p. 11.
7 Ibid., p. 70- 71.
7 Tbid., p. 10.
8 Tbid., p. 74.
” Tbid., p. 84-85.
Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                    19
approximately 33 percent, primarily driven by increased wastewater spending. To recoup the
expenditures, cities increased wastewater user fees by $40.80 per capita.*

Another study found that the cost of water pollution control for streets also increased the cost
burden on local governments:

              As a result of new federal environmental mandates, local jurisdictions were also being
              directed to make massive investments in water pollution control facilities. These
              investments originally were funded up to 85 percent by federal grants. They are now
              funded by federal loans amounting to 45 percent.®!

Other regulatory requirements that improve safety and resilience but increase the amount of
capital needed for improvements include addressing levels of harmful polyfluoroalkyl
substances (PFAS) in drinking water, combined-sewer overflows, phosphorus and nitrogen
levels that impact algae blooms, and preparation for extreme weather events.*

In Oregon, the rising cost of keeping up with safety improvements may have disparate impacts
across the state. Many smaller cities lack the funding capacity to add additional expenses for
treatment and may not qualify for grants or loans because of population size or leverage in the
form of matching funds.®

Operations and Maintenance Costs

As the total amount of infrastructure has grown over time and major facilities built in previous
decades have aged, the cost of operations and maintenance for existing facilities has increased,
with much of this cost falling on local governments.

               Spending for the operation and maintenance of all types of transportation and water
               infrastructure has increased steadily since 1956. Spending for capital — particularly
              for mass transit and rail, for aviation, and for water utilities —has also increased since
               then, but it has typically done so at a lower rate.

              Since 1956, state and local governments’ expenditures for the operation and
              maintenance of infrastructure have grown at an average annual rate of 2.4 percent,
              roughly three times faster than the 0.9 percent average annual growth rate of


80 Jerch, Rhiannon. 2021. The Local Benefits of Federal Mandates: Evidence from the Clean Water Act. Temple
University.
8! Arthur C. Nelson, Liza K. Bowles, Julian C. Juergensmeyer, and James C. Nicholas,   A Guide to Impact Fees and
Housing Affordability (Island Press, 2008), pages 12-13.
82 McKinsey & Company, “US Water Infrastructure: Making Funding Count,” November 24, 2021,
https://www.mckinsey.com/industries/electric-power-and-natural-gas/our-insights/us-water-infrastructure-making-
funding-count.
8 Scott Lazenby and Diane Odeh, “2021 Infrastructure Survey Report” (League of Oregon Cities, January 2021), 12-
13.
4 Congressional Budget Office, “Public Spending on Transportation and Water Infrastructure, 1956 to 2014,”
https://www.cbo.gov/sites/default/files/114th-congress-2015-2016/reports/49910-infrastructure.pdf, March 2015, page
27.
Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                               20
                                                          spending on capital. As a result, although state and local governments spent more for
                                                          capital than for operation and maintenance in 1956, state and local spending for
                                                          operation and maintenance has exceeded capital spending each year since 1973.

This is shown in Exhibit 9.

Exhibit 9: State and Local Spending on Transportation and Water Infrastructure, by Category of
Spending, 1956 to 2017
Source: ECONorthwest using data from Congressional Budget Office originally drawn from data from the Office of
Management and Budget, the Census Bureau, and the Bureau of Economic Analysis.
                                                        300
  Spending on Transportation and Water Infrastructure




                                                        250                                                                                       240
                                                        (2)
                                                        NO
                                                        ©
               (Billions of 2017 Dollars)




                                                        150
                                                 bE
                                                 oO
                                                 oO




                                                                                                                                                  102



                                                         50




                                                              2010
                                                              2012
                                                              2014
                                                              2016
                                                              1992
                                                              1994
                                                              1996
                                                              1998
                                                              1986
                                                              1988
                                                              1990




                                                              2004
                                                              2006
                                                              2008
                                                              2000
                                                              2002
                                                              1982
                                                              1984
                                                              1976
                                                              1978
                                                              1980
                                                              1972
                                                              1974
                                                              1966
                                                              1968
                                                              1970
                                                              1962
                                                              1964
                                                              1956
                                                              1958
                                                              1960




                                                                                —   Capital   Operation
                                                                                              —              n   aintenance
                                                                                                          ied)
                                                                                                             or
                                                                                                             =




State and local spending is net of federal grants and loan subsidies.
a. Dollar amounts are adjusted to remove the effects of inflation using price indexes for government spending that
measure the prices of goods and services consumed by governments, including materials and other inputs used to operate
and maintain transportation and water infrastructure.
b. Dollar amounts are adjusted to remove the effects of inflation using price indexes for government spending that
measure the prices of materials and other inputs used to build transportation and water infrastructure.


The Bipartisan Infrastructure Law’s focus on bridge repair and replacing lead drinking water
pipes® could mitigate some of the more costly maintenance needs affecting water and
transportation infrastructure, but it will not eliminate local operations and maintenance and



    Congressional Budget Office, “Public Spending on Transportation and Water Infrastructure, 1956 to 2014,”
https://www.cbo.gov/sites/default/files/114th-congress-2015-2016/reports/49910-infrastructure.pdf, March 2015, page
22.
86 The White House, “President Biden's Bipartisan Infrastructure Law”, https://www.whitehouse.gov/bipartisan-
infrastructure-law/

Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                                                              21
other system replacement costs. A recent assessment found that “even a large increase in federal
funding won't fully cover the needed investment.”*” Some localities are employing strategies
like new metering technology to more efficiently track and plan for demand (ideally saving
costs in the long run), but that may require startup capital for these upgrades.®

Rising Capital Construction Costs

The most widely used construction cost indices in the Pacific Northwest are the Construction
Cost Index (CCI) for Seattle and the 20-City Average Index, both published by the Engineering
News-Record (ENR). Exhibit 10 shows the annual average percent change in each index between
2007 and 2021. While the Seattle index has greater variation from year-to-year (particularly
during the Great Recession and the few years following recovery), the longer-term trends of
both indices are similar, with each increasing an average of about 3.0 percent per year.
However, national and regional costs have increased significantly in the first half of 2022. Both
the Seattle and 20-City average indices increased by 8-10 percent through June, compared to the
2021 annual average indices.

Exhibit 10. Historical Construction Cost Escalation, 2006-2021
Source: ECONorthwest and FCS GROUP using data from Engineering News Record, Construction Cost Index for Seattle and
20-City Average
                                          70%



                                          60%
  Cumulative Percent Change 2006 - 2021




                                          50%



                                          40%



                                          30%



                                          20%



                                          10%

                                                         a——

                                           0%
                                                     ©     “\     Ne)        O)       9       \       Y       »      \&    Xe)       ©    A    S    1)     2)        y
                                                9S        ©     Le)      S        7       y       7          e7    e7     4      4       7    YY   ty    YY     Ly


                                                                        ——ENR-CCI (Seattle)               © ——ENR-CCI (20-City Average)




8? McKinsey & Company, “US Water Infrastructure: Making Funding Count,” November 24, 2021,
https://www.mckinsey.com/industries/electric-power-and-natural-gas/our-insights/us-water-infrastructure-making-
funding-count.

88 Thid.

Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                                                                                    22
2.1.3 Property Tax Limitations
Starting around 1974, the U.S. experienced an inflationary period that significantly affected
home prices. In areas where property tax bills were based on the market value of the home,
resulting tax increases drew resistance. In 1978, voters in California passed the first of many
such anti-tax measures across the country. Proposition 13 amended the California Constitution
in three important ways:

        Real property valuations were rolled back to their 1975-76 values.
        Increases in assessed value were limited to 2 percent per year.
        Except for some voter-approved levies, total property tax per year was limited to 1
        percent of a property’s assessed value.

Oregon Property Tax Measures

Oregon's property tax system changed substantially in the 1990s, following the trend in
California and other states. The system as it existed in the early 1990s, and the major changes to
it, are described in a publication from the Oregon Department of Revenue.® Excerpts of this
summary are included below:

          Measure 5, which introduced tax rate limits, was passed in 1990 and became effective
          in the 1991-92 tax year. When fully implemented in 1995-96, Measure 5 cut tax rates
          an average of 51 percent from their 1990-91 levels. Measure 50, passed in 1997, cut
          taxes, introduced assessed value growth limits, and replaced most tax levies with
          permanent tax rates. It transformed the system from one primarily based on levies to
          one primarily based on rates. When implemented in 1997-98, Measure 50 cut effective
          tax rates an average of 11 percent from their 1996-97 levels.

          Pre-Measure 5

          Pre-Measure 5 Oregon had a pure levy-based property tax system until 1991-92.
          Each taxing district calculated its own tax levy based on its budget needs. ...
          Generally speaking, the full market value of property was taxable; there was no
          separate definition of assessed value. ...Most levies were constitutionally limited to an
          annual growth rate of 6 percent, and levies that would increase by more than 6
          percent required voter approval. ...The annual growth in taxes on an individual
          property depended on a number of factors, including new or larger levies and the
          amount of new construction within the district. ...

          Measure 5

          Measure 5 introduced limits, starting in 1991-92, on the taxes paid by individual
          properties. The limits of $5 per $1,000 real market value for school taxes and $10 per



8 Oregon Department of Revenue, “A Brief History of Oregon Property Taxation,” 150-303-405-1 (Rev. 6-09).
https://www.oregon.gov/DOR/programs/gov-research/Documents/303-405-1.pdf
Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                       23
          $1,000 real market value for general government taxes apply only to operating taxes,
          not bonds. If either the school or general government taxes exceeded its limit, then
          each corresponding taxing district had its tax rate reduced proportionately until the
          tax limit was reached. This reduction in taxes to the limits is called “compression.” ...

          Measure 50

          The objective of Measure 50 was to reduce property taxes in 1997-98 and to control
          their future growth. It achieved these goals by cutting the 1997-98 district tax levies,
          and by making three changes: switching to permanent rates, reducing assessed values,
          and limiting annual growth of assessed value.

          While Measure 5 simply limited the tax rates used to calculate taxes imposed,
          Measure 50 changed the concepts of both assessed values and tax rates. Assessed value
          is no longer equal to real market value. For 1997-98, the assessed value of every
          property was reduced to 90 percent of its 1995-96 assessed value. ...

          For existing property, Measure 50 limited the annual growth in assessed value to 3
          percent. ...For new property (e.g., newly constructed homes), assessed value is
          calculated by multiplying the new property’s real market value by the ratio of assessed
          value to real market value of similar property. ...

          Under Measure 50, permanent tax rates replaced most levies, making the permanent
          rates central to the property tax system. There are three types of property taxes that
          taxing districts may impose: taxes from the permanent rates, local option levies, and
          bond levies. Only the permanent rates are fixed. ...

           Taxes from the permanent rates, typically referred to as operating taxes, are used to
          fund the general operating budgets of the taxing districts. ... Local option taxes
          represent the only way taxing districts can raise operating revenue beyond the
          permanent rate amount. Even so, these taxes are the first to be reduced if the Measure
          5 limitations are exceeded. Because voters at the local level must approve these levies,
           they represent one aspect of local control over the level of property taxes.

          Bond levies have remained largely unchanged. They are used to pay principal and
          interest for bonded debt. Under the provisions of Measure 50, new bond levies, like
          new local option levies, are subject to a 50 percent voter participation requirement if
          the election is not a general election.

The statewide revenue implications of these measures can be seen in data from tables published
by the Oregon Legislative Revenue Office, as summarized in Exhibit 11 and Exhibit 12, based on
data from the Oregon Department of Revenue.

In Exhibit 11, the impact of Measure 5 can be seen by the decrease in the “Average Tax
Rate/$1,000” beginning in July 1991 (the start of FY 1991-92). Similarly, the impacts of Measure
50 are reflected in the July 1997 decrease and then generally smaller increases in “Assessed
Value,” as compared to the “Real Market Value” column.


Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                 24
Exhibit 11. Property Value (Real Market Value and Assessed Value) and Effective Tax Rate History,
Oregon (Statewide), 1990-2020
Source: ECONorthwest and FCS GROUP, using data from Oregon Legislative Revenue Office, 2022 Oregon Public Finance:
Basic Facts, page D6
                                           $800,000                                                                                              $30


                                           $700,000        $26.61
                                                                                                                                                 $25




                                                                                                                                                       Tax Rate per $1,000 of Assessed Value (Nominal)
                                           $600,000
  Value in Millions of Dollars (Nominal)




                                                                                                                                                 $20
                                           $500,000
                                                                                                                                             $17.00


                                           $400,000                                                                                              $15


                                           $300,000
                                                                                                                                                 $10

                                           $200,000

                                                                                                                                                 $5


                                           _ $-        mill                    | | | |                                                           $-
                                                       OANMTNWNORWOOGCAMNTYW                           ORnNnWMHDOAAMNTH
                                                                                                       Seeedddddd
                                                                                                                               ©ao ao
                                                                                                                                   KORO
                                                       DOMNDDADADDADADDOODODCOOCSO                                                      AN
                                                       DADADADADADADDDCDDCSO                           SOSOSO0000C0O            e) SO00
                                                       SHAaeae AAA AAA ANANANANAN                      NANNNNANAN               nN aAaaa
                                                      ma   Real Market Value      mem Assessed Value     ~——~Average Tax Rate / $ 1,000


The impacts of these measures on city and county revenues become even clearer when the
resulting property tax imposed for the same period are considered, as shown in Exhibit 12.




Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                                                                                                           25
Exhibit 12. Property Tax Revenue History
Source: ECONorthwest and FCS GROUP, using data from Oregon Legislative Revenue Office, 2022 Oregon Public Finance:
Basic Facts, page D10
         20%                                                                                                  $2,000




         15%                                                                                                  $1,500   eg
                                                                                                                       &
   o
  eT!)
                                                                                                                       8
                                                                                                                       —
   =                                                                                                                   °o
  &
  )                                                                                                                 re)
                                                                                                                       2
  + 10%                                                                                                       $1,000=
   S                                                                                                                   E
  &®                                                        a
                                                                                                                       xo}
                                                                                                                       D
   _
   oO                                                   —                                                              °
  >5 5%
   ()
                        |         j)        me an
                                                    ;
                                                                                                              $500     =E
                                                                                                                       =


   8
   >

   oO
                        nt                                                                                             g
                                                                                                                       ke



  °       0%                                                                 il   hull                        $0       :
                                                                                                                       a
                                                                                                                       £:




         -5%
                 ANMTMWORWDHDOAAMTNDORWDDOANMHTNORWDOd
                 PRMRMPMDADAMDADOOOES
                                    ESE SETESCEFArHde rsa      QYg
                 DGANMTNORDHDOAANCAMTNORDHDOANMNTNHNONWADHOSO
                 DMHDDDDDDADDDOOCOCODCOCCOCCOCOd  dd ddd ded AHA
                 DADADADAADHDODDDSDDDDDDDDDDDDOOOOCSO
                 Ari   ti   nt   tet   TA   TAA   ANNNANNNNNNNNNNNNNNN

               mm Counties
                       % Change               «mamCities% Change   ——Counties ($ millions)   ——Cities ($ millions)


In addition to constraining property tax revenue, the requirement for voter approval of new
bond levies increases the political difficulty of using this mechanism to fund capital
improvements in infrastructure.

2.1.4 Trends in Utility Rates and Other User Fees
The combined effect of state property tax limitations and flat or reduced federal funding has
been increased pressure on local government-controlled user fees to meet growing
infrastructure funding needs (both operation and maintenance and capital investment). This has
resulted in significant increases in water, wastewater, and stormwater utility rates (ongoing
charges to utility customers based on system-specific usage measures) and imposition of new
user fees for other government services (e.g., parks and transportation).

Utility Rates

National Rate Trends

For the past several decades, utility rate increases have significantly outpaced growth in the
Consumer Price Index (CPI). Between the mid-1980s and 2000, the increase in water and sewer


Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                                        26
bills exceeded CPI growth by 50 percent.” More recently, the growth in utility bills relative to
the CPI has become even more pronounced. Between 1997 and 2017, utility bills (water, sewer,
and trash combined) increased an estimated 130 percent (4.3 percent per year on average),
compared to 52 percent increase in the CPI (2.1 percent per year on average), as shown in
Exhibit 13.?! Even more recent data (see Exhibit 14) shows average utility rate increases for
water and wastewater services of roughly 80 percent as of 2020 compared to 2008 levels (5.1
percent per year on average), while the CPI increased a little over 20 percent over the same
period (1.7 percent per year on average).

Exhibit 13. Annual Cumulative Increase in Household Costs for Water, Sewer, and Trash Compared
to Increase in CPI for All Items (1997-2017)
Source: Developing          A New Framework for Water Affordability and Financial Capability Assessment in the Water Sector?2
                                                                 emu       \\/ater, sewer, and trash                                            All items

    140%


    120%


    100%


     80%


     60%


     40%


     20%

                                  _   —_

       0%
                  %    O)         S        yy       VY       >         >         \o)            ©     ‘\     Ne)         O)            9     Ny              7            »          &          ye)        ©    “
             O)       Oy      S        D        D        S        9S            S           S        S      S           S          Y        Y            y            Y            YY         ‘YY      Y       ‘y
            PPP                       Py        PP               Pr        PF          SF           SF     PF      KP         HY           KY       YT           PY           PY         PY           PY OP
 Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2017
 Note: BLS does not separately report costs for trash, water, and sewer in its summary tables/data.




*? Van Abs, Daniel J. Evans, Tim. Assessing the Affordability of Water and Sewer Utility Costs in New Jersey. Jersey
Water Works. Final Report: September 2018.
2 R. Raucher, PhD. And J. Clements (Corona Environmental Consulting), E. Rothstein, CPA (Galardi Rothstein
Group) and J. Mastracchio, CFA and Z. Green (Raftelis Financial Consultants), Developing a New Framework for
Household Affordability and Financial Capability Assessment in the Water Sector, (April 17, 2019)
» Ibid., page 1-4.

Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                                                                                                                               27
Exhibit 14. Cumulative Water and Wastewater Utility Average Rate Increases Relative to 2008 vs.
CPI (2010-2020)
Source: ECONorthwest and Galardi Rothstein Group, using data from 2020 Water and Wastewater Rate Survey published
by American                                     Water Works Association (AWWA)   and Raftelis
                                          90%


                                          80%


                                          70%
  Cumulative Percent Change 2010 - 2020




                                          60%


                                          50%


                                          40%


                                          30%

                                                                                                   ae
                                          20%




                                           0%
                                                     2010             2012                2014         2016             2018            2020
                                                   —— National Average Water, Sewer, and Storm Rates          -——Consumer Price Index

Percent change is cumulative increase relative to 2008 baseline.


Drivers of Rate Increases

As discussed in prior subsections, historical cost increases have reflected landmark regulations
and growth in system operation and maintenance needs. Other cost factors include growing
infrastructure replacement needs and investments to address climate and seismic resiliency.

National data suggests that operating expenses account for a substantial share of utility rates:
between 45 and 67 percent of water and wastewater rates typically go towards operating
expenses depending on the year and the scale of the service provider, with an average of 52
percent for water utilities and 54 percent for wastewater utilities in 2020. However, growth in
operations and maintenance costs are not the only reasons for increasing rates.

One study, which estimated an average 43.2 percent increase in water and wastewater bills
from 2012 to 2021, pointed to regional differences in what was driving those increases (e.g.,
utilities in the Western U.S. investing in new water supplies due to drought vs. those in the
Northeast facing aging pipe and treatment systems) and noted that “the most significant water



3 American Water Works Association and Raftelis Financial Consultants, Inc., 2021 Water and Wastewater Rate Survey.

Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                                                          28
rate increases have been in response to specific capital investment needs,” including wastewater
treatment plant upgrades to address water quality issues and a major water system
improvement plan.”

A range of drivers within capital-related costs is also reflected in data from a national survey
regarding anticipated capital expenditures by water utilities, as shown in Exhibit 15. Based on
this survey, more than half of expected capital expenditures for water utilities in 2020 were
expected to be for replacements and upgrades to existing infrastructure, but expansion of
treatment, collection, and distribution systems as well as new source water supplies were
expected to account for a total of 28 percent of capital spending.”

Exhibit 15: Anticipated Water Utility Capital Spending in 2020
Source: American   Water Works Association?®



                      Treatment expansion

             Collection system expansion

            Distribution system expansion

            Meet regulatory requirements

                   New source water supply

  Replace /upgrade existing infrastructure

 Security/risk and resilience requirements     2%
                               Technology

                                               0%   10%         20%         30%        40%        50%         60%

                                   Utility executive/management and financial officer respondents (n = 528)

   i\     american Water Works Association                                  ©AWWA 2020 State of the Water Industry

While the specific drivers vary for each community and over time, recent examples from two
Oregon communities illustrate the role that capital improvements can play in driving rate
increases in some communities:




4 Bluefield Research, “Up 43% over Last Decade, Water Rates Rising Faster than Other Household Utility Bills,”
August 23, 2021. https://www.bluefieldresearch.com/ns/up-43-over-last-decade-water-rates-rising-faster-than-other-
household-utility-bills/
* American Water Works Association, State of the Water Industry 2020, page 21.
https://www.awwa.ore/Portals/0/Awwa/Professional%20Development/2020SOTW
                                                               Ireport.pdf
% Ibid.

Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                                29
    =    Ina2017 rate study for the City of Newport, FCS GROUP estimated that debt payments
         on needed capital improvements would increase revenue requirements for water and
         sewer by 4 to 8 percent per year over 5 years.”
    =   A 2018 Water Affordability Assessment Report from the City of Hillsboro highlighted
        the role of rising capital costs in recent and projected rate increases: “...over the last few
        years, rate increase percentages have been on the rise due primarily to rising capital costs caused
        by needed improvements to the existing infrastructure and also the construction of a second
        water supply system to serve Hillsboro’s growing needs. A Water Rate Study is underway and
        will most likely suggest double-digit percentage rate increases until 2026.”°8
Taken together, the data suggest that utility rates are increasing faster than inflation largely due
to factors that are unrelated (or minimally related) to growth, including increasing operation
and maintenance costs and the need to replace or upgrade older infrastructure to meet current
standards or due to deterioration, though growth-related costs can contribute to rate increases
in some cases. Consequences for rate affordability and capital funding choices are discussed in
Section 2.2.4.

Other System-Wide User Charges

In the context of fiscal constraints, local governments have increasingly implemented other
types of user fees for a broader suite of government services such as parks, streets, public safety,
and others. In 2018, research by the City of Salem found 50 cities charging such user charges
(sometimes referred to “operating fees”) across the state, for various services.”

While on-going user charges or operating fees have helped to fill the void created by tax
limitations, they typically rely on political/public support for fee increases, and as discussed
later in this report (Section 2.2.4), fee levels are approaching unaffordable levels for larger
segments of the population. Limitations on fee increases often mean that the fees for some
services such as transportation and parks may only be sufficient to fund ongoing operation and
maintenance costs (e.g., pavement preservation), as opposed to large-scale capital projects.




7 FCS GROUP, “Water, Sewer & Storm Rate Study,” Prepared for the City of Newport, 2017.
https://www.newportoregon.gov/dept/fin/documents/WaterSewerStormRateStudy2017v6.pdf
*8 City of Hillsboro Water, “Affordability Program Assessment Report,” October 2018, page 3.
” Sustainable Services Revenue Task Force Report, City of Salem (2018).
Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                         30
2.2 SDCs’ Role in Local Infrastructure Funding
2.2.1 Perspectives From Oregon Jurisdictions
As noted previously, the Oregon SDC Act was intended to provide a mechanism for recovering
erowth-related infrastructure costs from new development and to avoid shifting those costs to
existing rate and taxpayers. Local agencies participating in the Oregon SDC Project Focus
Groups indicated that SDCs have become an increasingly important way to address these
intergenerational equity concerns, particularly in fast-growing communities.

In focus groups, most service providers highlighted how important SDCs are to their ability to
fund infrastructure. As detailed in Appendix A, participants noted several ways in which they
play a key role in funding infrastructure:

    =   Growing communities rely heavily on them, and they are a key part of delivering
        infrastructure in new growth areas. (Slower growing communities see less SDC revenue
        and need to rely on other sources.)
    =   Some service providers highlighted SDCs’ importance in contributing to major
        infrastructure projects that might not have been possible without that contribution.
    =   Parks and transportation providers in particular noted SDCs’ importance for leveraging
        other funds (e.g., matching funds for state and federal infrastructure grants).
    =   Those with utility rates highlighted the importance of SDCs to balance out reliance on
        user rates, and highlighted equity considerations from putting the cost of capacity
        increases on existing users.

2.2.2 SDCs as Part of an Infrastructure Funding Plan: Examples
From Oregon
This section summarizes examples from a number of jurisdictions and situations —urban
growth boundary expansion area funding plans, a citywide transportation funding strategy,
and funding for major water supply capacity increases —to give a sense of how SDCs contribute
to funding local infrastructure in Oregon.

Transportation Funding Plans

Washington County Urban Growth Boundary Expansion Areas

As part of preparing an Infrastructure Funding Plan Toolkit for Washington County as a
resource for future infrastructure funding plans for new urban growth areas, ECONorthwest
compiled information from several infrastructure funding plans completed for newly
urbanizing areas across Washington County. As shown in Exhibit 16, the contribution from
SDCs (including the County’s Transportation Development Tax (TDT), which is a form of SDC,
and supplemental SDCs for some areas) varies substantially between the different expansion
areas. The funding plans also include a variety of other sources. Some are simply other
Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                            31
mechanisms for development to contribute, including developer contributions/requirements, a
“supplemental fee,”! and a local improvement district where the assessment is being paid off
as homes are sold. Most, but not all, include some contribution from another source that is not
development-derived, such as grants; contributions from Washington County’s Major Streets
Transportation Improvement Program (MSTIP), which is funded through a general fund
allocation; Tax Increment Financing (TIF); and a utility fee surcharge.

Exhibit 16: Example Transportation Infrastructure Funding Plan Strategies
Source: “Infrastructure Funding Plan Toolkit: Guidance for Title 11 Concept and Comprehensive Planning,” Prepared by
ECONorthwest for Washington County, October 2020. Original data compiled by ECONorthwest using infrastructure funding
plans for each planning area.


    Planning          Total Cost                           ,       :
       a            (in $millions)            Transportation funding strategy

   URA 6D -                              .                      ;    of.
   King City        $57.3m                     Supplemental fee: 100% - offset by
                                               existing SDCs
  West
                                         =     Private cost: 40%
                                         *     SDC citywide: 20%
                                         *     Developer contribution: 18%
   River                                 "     Transfers: 7%
  Terrace           $149.6m              "=     TDT: 7%
                                         =     Utility fee surcharge: 3%
                                         *"    SDC subdistrict: 2%
                                         "     Grants: 2%
                                         *     Washington County share: unknown
  South                                  =     New tools: 39%
   Hillsboro        $225m                      Regional share (e.g., MSTIP): 34%
                                               SDCs: 27%
                                               Developer requirements: 95%
   Evergreen     | $51.6m                      TIF: 16%
                                               (surplus revenues identified)
                                               TDT: 27%
  South                                        Developer contribution: 27%
   Cooper           $112.4m                    New SDC: 24%
   Mountain                                    MSTIP: 21%
                                         =»    Other: <1%

Notes:
TDT = Transportation Development Tax (Washington County’s version of a transportation SDC)
MSTIP = Major Streets Transportation Improvement Program, a County program funded through a general fund allocation
The “New tools” listed for South Hillsboro include a Local Improvement District.


Another older example from Washington County is the North Bethany Transportation Funding
Strategy. This strategy included up to $10 million from the County’s MSTIP; over $21 million
from TDT; over $22 million from anew, supplemental North Bethany Transportation System




100 Some jurisdictions use using “supplemental fees” that are similar to area-specific SDCs but can combine projects
from multiple infrastructure systems. These may be imposed as part of annexation agreements for new growth areas
rather than implemented under SDC statute.
Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                                 32
Development Charge; and over $13 million in additional property taxes from a new North
Bethany County Service District for Roads."

While the reality may not always align perfectly with the infrastructure funding plan, this gives
a sense of how SDCs can be combined with other funding tools to deliver infrastructure to serve
new growth areas. Despite the variation in specifics, development-derived funding accounts
for the majority of the funding for infrastructure in these new growth areas, and SDCs
specifically account for a substantial share of funding in most cases.

City of Bend Transportation System Plan Funding Strategy

As part of the City of Bend’s recent Transportation System Plan (TSP) update, ECONorthwest
helped develop a Funding Strategy for how revenue from multiple sources would pay for
capital costs as well as operations, maintenance, and programs (OM&P) with a focus on projects
prioritized for near-term implementation (within the first 10 years of the planning horizon).
Exhibit 17 illustrates one of two alternative funding strategies, showing how the available
amounts from existing sources and potential new funding sources could be allocated to capital
projects vs. OM&P, including existing funding commitments as well as priority new projects
and programs. It shows that:

    =   Nearly all the existing state and federal funding plus local general fund allocations are
        being directed towards existing operations and maintenance responsibilities.
    =   Nearly all of the 10-year projected revenue from the existing TSDC was already
        committed to projects on the near-term capital improvement plan (CIP) list plus debt
        payments for past capital projects.
    =   Funding sources such as franchise fees play a comparatively small role in the overall
        infrastructure funding plan, but they were large enough to include as a relevant funding
        source.
    =   The City considered (and ultimately passed!) a General Obligation (GO) bond to fund a
        citywide package of new projects.




101 Washington County, North Bethany Funding Strategy, October 10, 2021.
https://www.washingtoncountyor.gov/lut/documents/north-bethany-transportation-funding-
strateey/download?inline
102 City of Bend, “2020 Transportation GO Bond - Thank You Voters!” https://www.bendoregon.gov/city-
projects/safe-travel
Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                  33
Exhibit 17: Illustrative Diagram of Transportation Funding Sources and Uses for City of Bend Near-
Term Funding Plan (2021-2030)
Source: City of Bend Transportation System Plan, Appendix A. Near-term Funding Action Plan, page A-2.1°3

Figure A-1. Diagram of Near-term Funding Plan (Option A - Preferred),
FY Ending 2021-2030



                                                                                               Safety, Connectivity, and Capacity
|---

                                                                                               Pedestrian, Bicycle, and Key Routes

FBR transportation utility Fee                  Pool of Funds
                                                for Capital                                    Transit

gums TSOC (New)
                                                                                               Roadway Reconstruction
eu== Core Area Urban Renewal



[a TSDC (Existing)
                           \a                                                                  2020-2024 CIP Projects


                                                                                               Debt Payment on Past Projects
GB    Water/Sewer Franchise Fee

qu    Existing Urban Renewal
                                                                                               Safety, Bicycle, and Pedestrian Program
——    Other
                                                                                               Other Programs
===   Surface Transportation Block Grant
                                                                                               Increased O&M from New Facilities
                                                Pool of Funds
‘el State Highway Fund                          for OM&P
                                                                                               O&M of Existing Facilities

FB) General
         Fund
=== Garbage Franchise Fees
                                                                              Source: Calculations by ECONorthwest.



The committee that advised on the TSP and Funding Strategy did recommend some increase to
the City’s existing TSDC rates as part of the overall funding plan, but limited reliance on this
solution due to volatility with development cycles, steep recent increases in TSDC rates and
concerns about impacts to development and housing costs, and desire to leave room for use of
supplemental TSDCs as a funding option for projects in UGB expansion areas.!“ The City has
recently undertaken an TSDC update project that will determine the portion of projected capital
improvements that will be funded through TSDCs.

Water Supply Funding

City of Wilsonville Development Moratorium

In the late 1990s, the City of Wilsonville adopted a moratorium on development due to lack of
water system capacity. A city memo from that time notes that Wilsonville had relied on wells as
its sole municipal water supply source until the 1970s when “it became evident that local
aquifers would not be adequate to meet the needs of this growing community” and the City
was granted a water right on the Willamette River. By the time of the moratorium, the



103 Available online at https://www.bendoregon.gov/home/showpublisheddocument/47764/637381859539770000.
104 City of Bend, Transportation System Plan Appendix L—Initial Funding Assessment, January 30, 2019.
https://www.bendoregon.gov/home/showpublisheddocument/47702/637372519699600000
Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                                                34
“anprecedented growth” had “increased peak water demand to the limit of the City’s ability to
meet such demand, even with all the operational and capital improvements being
undertaken.”1

As part of the correction plan to allow development to go forward, the City needed to identify
funding and financing to pay for costly water supply improvements. The City proposed to
increase both water SDCs and water utility rates, using a voter-approved revenue bond to
finance the improvements.

This example highlights the role of SDCs in helping fund critical capacity improvements to
enable development to resume, even though SDCs reduce but do not eliminate the need to bond
against rate revenue to build large infrastructure projects.

City of North Plains

In 2018, the City of North Plains faced water system capacity constraints that had the potential
to limit additional growth. As noted in a memorandum from Business Oregon!™:

         The City of North Plains storage capacity is limited due to substantial growth within the last few
         years. The current wholesale water agreement with the Joint Water Commission (JWC) requires
         the city to maintain a three-day supply at all times. The current storage is meeting the agreement
         requirements at this time, but the city will be in violation with construction of approximately 700
         homes in the near future.

         The construction of a new two-million-gallon pre-stressed concrete reservoir and pump station
         and implementation of a new Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) control
         system will provide for water storage needs through the 25 year Master Plan period, based upon
         the JWC agreement for required water storage.

As part of the funding strategy for the new project, the City increased water SDCs to pay for the
new reservoir and associated financing costs.!”” The revenue from the updated SDCs was
included in the financial proforma the city submitted to Business Oregon as part of its funding
package.

2.2.3 Benefits to Developers
In a greenfield setting, and in situations where capacity constraints are severe, infrastructure
investments to increase capacity may be essential to enable new development to occur, and
SDCs are often a critical part of the infrastructure funding plan to pay for the new facilities or
expanded capacity. The alternative could be that development cannot move forward or that the


10 Jeff Bauman, City of Wilsonville Public Works Director, “Review of Wilsonville's Water Supply Planning,”
February 23, 1998, page 1.
106 Memorandum to Chris Cummings, Assistant Director, Economic Development related to City of North Plains,
Reservoir & Pump Stations Improvements (June 21, 2018).
107 Water System Development Charges Methodology Report, Prepared for City of North Plains by Galardi Rothstein
Group (December 18, 2017).
Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                         35
first development(s) must take on major infrastructure investments as a condition of approval
or through a development agreement, making it more difficult to allocate costs among multiple
benefitting property owners or developments. SDCs may make greenfield development costs
more predictable and more evenly distributed, but not necessarily higher, because SDCs may
substitute for other forms of exactions or developer contributions. Area-specific SDCs are
sometimes used for this purpose, but jurisdiction-wide SDCs can play the same role if they are
providing SDC credits to developers who build the needed infrastructure and charge SDCs to
other developers that benefit from it.

SDCs collected across a broad area and used to fund incremental capacity increases in many
locations may offer less direct substitution for property-specific exactions. However, the
infrastructure they help to fund can contribute to the value of homes in the area generally, as
discussed below.

Based on developer interviews, the value that developers ascribe to SDCs depends on how clear
it is what is being funded through SDCs and how critical the funded projects are to enabling
development to occur.

2.2.4 Benefits to Residents

Amenity Value of Infrastructure
There is strong evidence that living in a community with functioning infrastructure has value to
future residents.

    =    There is substantial literature demonstrating the value of parks to nearby residents. A
         review of 33 studies suggests that: a) property values are higher closer to parks, b) the
         price premium is higher for larger parks, and c) the price premium is higher for
         “passive” parks than for “active” parks.1%
    =    There are also studies that show a positive relationship between bicycle and pedestrian
         facilities and home values.'” Others show negative economic impacts from
         transportation delays."

Mitigating Utility Rate and Property Tax Increases

Existing residents also benefit from SDCs by reducing the need for jurisdictions to increase
utility rates, pass General Obligation (GO) bonds that increase property taxes, or implement
other funding mechanisms that could increase their costs. While not all of a jurisdiction’s
capital needs are related to growth and eligible for SDC funding, being able to draw on



108 John L. Crompton. 2020. “Impact on property values of distance to parks and open spaces: An update of U.S
studies in the new millennium.” Journal of Leisure Research, 51(2): 127-146.
109 See, for example: Shi, Wei, "Impact of Bike Facilities on Residential Property Prices" (2017). TREC Friday Seminar
Series. 110. https://pdxscholar.library.pdx.edu/trec_seminar/110
110 ‘Transportation Research Board. 2001. NCHRP Report 436. Economic Implications of Congestion. National
Cooperative Highway Research Program.
Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                                    36
SDCs for costs that are eligible means less cost needs to be allocated to ratepayers or
property owners. Without SDCs, existing residents may have to pay for capital improvement
projects related to growth through higher utility bills or property taxes.

Utility Cost Impacts Due to Capital Projects

As discussed in Section 2.1.4, utility rates have increased over time. Even with those increases,
they typically account for a small percentage of household income and are small in comparison
to housing costs (rent or mortgage and other costs of homeownership). However, given the
number of other expenses that households must cover, even a small percentage of household
income (e.g., less than 10 percent for a lower-income household) can be unaffordable."!

In Oregon, a recent League of Oregon Cities rate survey shows an average of roughly $99 per
month (about $1,200 per year) in water and sewer rates for a typical single-family home,"
which is roughly 1.8 percent of the state’s median household income.'* However, while utility
rates may not be problematic for a median-income household, they can be burdensome for
low-income households because utility rates and costs do not generally scale with income.
National data suggests that 20 percent of households (as of 2019) and closer to 24 percent of
households (in 2021) were spending more than 4.5 percent of their household income on water
and sewer bills. A 2018 survey of water customers in the City of Hillsboro found that 10
percent of customers considered their rates so high that “paying them is a struggle.”"

Many jurisdictions attempt to mitigate affordability issues for their most vulnerable customers
through payment assistance options for income-qualified households and/or seniors on fixed
income who are unable to afford their bills. (For example, both Newport and Hillsboro, which
were used as examples in Section 2.1.4, offer such programs.)

Given that, as described in Section 2.1.4, utility rates are already increasing faster than inflation
in many places (mostly due to factors other than growth-related capital costs), even if growth-
related capital costs account for a small share of total utility rates, they may layer onto other cost
increases. And although utility rates are generally small in comparison to household income
and housing costs, utility rate increases can disproportionately affect lower-income households
unless the service provider provides a robust customer assistance program. To the extent that




M1 R. Raucher, PhD. And J. Clements (Corona Environmental Consulting), E. Rothstein, CPA (Galardi Rothstein
Group) and J. Mastracchio, CFA and Z. Green (Raftelis Financial Consultants), Developing a New Framework for
Household Affordability and Financial Capability Assessment in the Water Sector, (April 17, 2019). As described in
this report, the approach to defining and measuring affordability is evolving, and there is not a clear agreed-upon
standard of affordability for water and wastewater utility rates.
12 Aljets Consulting. 2021 Water Rates Survey Report. December 2021. League of Oregon Cities.
13 Median household income for Oregon is $65,667 based on 2016-2020 American Community Survey data.
14 McKinsey & Company, “US water infrastructure: Making funding count,” November 24, 2021,
https://www.mckinsey.com/industries/electric-power-and-natural-gas/our-insights/us-water-infrastructure-making-
funding-count

MS City of Hillsboro Water, “Affordability Program Assessment Report,” October 2018, page 3.
Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                                 37
SDCs reduce the need for utility rate increases, they can benefit existing residents through lower
costs, particularly lower-income households.

Property Tax Impacts Due to Capital Projects

While the details can vary among communities, a few recent examples illustrate the magnitude
of property tax increases that could be due to new bonds for funding infrastructure projects:

    =    The City of Bend GO Bond discussed in Section 2.2.2, for example, had an estimated cost
         of $170 per year for an average-value home in the City."
    =    Tualatin Hills Park and Recreation District’s 2008 bond measure established a
         $0.34/$1,000 of assessed value levy,'"” which translates to roughly $100 per year for an
         average-value home (using an average assessed value for improved residential
         properties in Washington County of $295,978 as of the 2021/22 tax year"®).
The magnitude of these costs suggests that the impact of GO bonds on affordability is likely
modest for an average household and would account for a small share of an average
household’s budget. (With the example of Bend’s GO Bond, with a median household income
of $67,973 as of 2020, the bond cost for an average-value home would account for roughly a
quarter of a percent of a median household’s annual income.) Because property taxes vary with
property value, lower-income households would likely face somewhat lower costs from GO
bonds to the extent that they live in lower-value housing, but the costs may not scale linearly
with income because all housing costs typically represent a larger share of income for lower-
income households.




"6 City of Bend, “2020 Transportation GO Bond - Thank You Voters!” https://www.bendoregon.gov/city-
projects/safe-travel
17 Tualatin Hills Park and Recreation District, Making Good: 6'* Report on Bond Measure Progress, 2015, page 4.
http://cdn1.thprd.org/pdfs2/document3294.     pdf
18 Washington County Department of Assessment & Taxation, “Summary of Assessment and Tax Roll 2021-22,”
page 10. https://www.washingtoncountyor.gov/at/documents/tax-year-2021-2022-summary-book/download?inline
Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                             38
Part 3: How and Why SDCs Vary Across
                              Oregon

                                      Primary Contributors: Galardi Rothstein Group, FCS GROUP




 Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                       39
3.1 SDC Rates: Geographic Variations and
Trends
3.1.1 System Development Charges Across the State
Data Sources

Several organizations in Oregon publish compilations of SDC rates for multiple jurisdictions:

        The League of Oregon Cities (LOC) surveys its member cities every three years
        regarding their usage of SDCs and current rates. LOC’s most recent available report is
        from 2020 based on survey data collected in 2019. LOC has statewide coverage and
        relatively high participation. In the 2020 report (2019 survey), 96 jurisdictions
        responded. The respondents were distributed across the state with overrepresentation in
        the Metro, North Willamette Valley, and Central Oregon regions and
        underrepresentation of cities in the Coast regions, South-Central Oregon, and the
        Gorge.!!? Variation in which jurisdictions participate in a given survey can affect year-to-
        year comparisons. Because survey participants represent cities, there are some
        inconsistencies in how SDCs administered by special districts and other service
        providers are reported, given that city staff may not know the rates for all other service
        providers operating in their jurisdiction. Reported rates focus on single-family detached
        homes and an office building using example projects.
        The Homebuilders Association of Metropolitan Portland (HBA of Metro Portland)
        publishes estimates for most jurisdictions in the greater Portland region. The most recent
        estimates are from 2020 and include both single-family detached and multifamily
        summaries. Special district SDCs appear to be consistently reported, and special rates for
        specific subareas are listed in addition to citywide fees. However, the data does not
        attempt to provide estimated SDCs for an example multifamily project and may not
        reflect all the adjustments that would apply to a given project. For example, water rates
        are listed for the same meter size as listed for single-family development, which is
        typically not the case. The data encompasses most jurisdictions in Washington,
        Clackamas, and Multnomah Counties, as well as select jurisdictions in Hood River,
        Yamhill, and Columbia Counties, but it does not cover the balance of the state.!”°

        The Oregon Building Officials Association (OBOA) sends annual fee surveys to
        members. The most recent available data dates from January 2018 and covers 39




9 League of Oregon Cities, “System Development Charges Survey Report,” February 2020.
120 Home Builders Association of Metropolitan Portland, “System Development Charges,”
https://www.hbapdx.org/system-development-charges.htm]
Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                             40
         jurisdictions in various parts of the state. The data covers single-family detached,
         multifamily, and commercial office development using example projects.!7!
Given that all available sources are at least two years old and that some sources may not
capture all special district or county SDCs, FCS GROUP collected data on current (mid-2022)
SDC rates from jurisdictions across the state. To allow for historical comparisons, FCS GROUP
collected data from jurisdictions that were represented in the oldest LOC survey data available,
from 2007, which included a robust number of respondents.!” Research was based on a
combination of fee schedules published on City websites and direct communication with City
staff. The 2022 data include regional and district charges that apply in the researched cities, to
the extent data were verifiable. Where jurisdictions have area-specific SDCs, the 2022 data
collected reflects the citywide rate and does not include supplemental area-specific fees.

To make effective comparisons between jurisdictions, the 2022 SDC calculations are based on
the same single-family residence used in the LOC survey, as described in Exhibit 18.

Exhibit 18. Sample Survey Residence
Source: League of Oregon Cities, System Development Charges Survey Report (February 2020), page 3
      Single-family, 3-bedroom      home                Amount                Units
 Lot size:                                                    9,000 | sq. ft.
 Building size:                                               2,000 | sq. ft.
 Development value:                                       $190,000
 Land value:                                               $60,000
 Parking spaces:                                                     2
 Water meter size:                                                  % | inch
 Water flow (gallons/month):                                   6,000
 Fixture units:                                                    16
 Number of employees:                                            N/A
 Impervious square footage:                                    1,000 | sq. ft.

FCS GROUP did not collect additional data for multifamily SDC rates.

Who Charges and Who Doesn’t?
Most cities in Oregon charge at least one of the five allowable SDCs—66 percent of the 2007
LOC survey respondents charge SDCs in 2022.18 Exhibit 19 shows the number of services
charged among those researched, and the average population of those cities.




121 Oregon Building Officials Association, “OBOA Standards Committee,”
https://www.oregonbuildingofficials.com/standards
122 LOC reports that 121 out of 242 Oregon cities (50 percent) responded to the 2007 SDC survey. Of the 121
respondents, 79 (65 percent) charged at least one SDC. Of the 121 initial respondents, updated (2022) SDCs could be
verified for 76.
123 Tn the 2020 LOC survey, which captured a different sample of Oregon cities, 82 percent of the 96 respondents
reported charging at least one SDC.
Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                              A1
Exhibit 19. Surveyed Cities Charging SDCs in 2022
Source: FCS GROUP
   Cities Charging                               Number of Services Charged                             Total
           SDCs               0            1              2        3             4          5
 # of Respondents            39            3              12       10           17         34            115
 % of Respondents           34%           3%             10%       9%           15%       30%           100%

 Total population          82,810       18,006          21,750   33,886       247,174   1,406,700   | 1,810,326
 Average    population      2,123        6,002          1,813    3,389        14,540     41,374        15,742


This sample data suggests that more populous cities are more likely to use SDCs than less
populous cities. This pattern appears in both the most recent LOC data and the HBA of Metro
Portland data.

As noted in the Oregon SDC Study: Summary of Service Providers Focus Groups (included as
Appendix A), factors contributing to local decisions not to charge SDCs include:

    =   Little development activity.
    =   Political concerns about affordability or economic development.
    =   Developers required to install infrastructure directly via exactions.

How Do Rates Vary Across the State?

The cities included in the 2022 data are shown on Exhibit 20 by the total amount charged for the
sample single-family detached residence described in Exhibit 18. Cities with no SDCs are
largely (but not exclusively) located in eastern Oregon and away from major metropolitan
areas. The highest tier of SDCs (between $25,000 and $50,000) are primarily found in the
Portland Metro region, though the City of Bend and a few smaller communities, including
Carlton, Philomath, Donald, and Newberg, also have SDCs towards the lower end of this range.
While not directly comparable due to the age of the data, the 2020 data from the HBA of Metro
Portland suggests that there are likely more Portland region jurisdictions with rates in this
range than were included in the 2022 update by FCS GROUP. The charges for each city and
each infrastructure system are listed in Appendix D.




Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                             42
Exhibit 20. Total Single-Family Detached SDCs by City in Oregon, 2022
Source: ECONorthwest, using data from FCS GROUP

                             pO                   —<f20}



                                                                                 o.          ®
                                                                                                                                97                                                                      @
                       Front
                        Senate                    @                          @
                                                                                                                                 a            A
                                                                                                             1                                    97
                                                                                                                 26                                ,   ZS
                                                          Salen n ( a)                                                                        @        (sRads19                395                  ;
                                                                                                                                                                                                    30 }                         @

                                     i 20 }                         {
                                                  Oe                                                                                                       @
                                                                                                                                                                                               26                      ®
                                 Coryallis                          {        2                                                                                       ®         &               26                            !

                                                                |                                                              @_®                                                                                           xX            .
                                                  e-'                   Eug
                                                                                                                           ®   Bend                                            ©
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         6 @
                   @                                            )
                                          @           a                                3                                                               —
                                                                                                                                                       {20                 a
                                                      7                                                                                                                    ®

             /e
              .                               8                                                                                           .
      For}                                        \                                                 7}                                (sr 3)                                                                                         @
                                                                                                                                                               395         bp 209    Total Single-Family SDCs
                                                                                                                                                                            ~        by City

                                                                                  @                                                                                                  =
                                                          ~@.                                                                                                                             ~~
                                 199)                                         edford
                                                                                                    9.                “e                                                             @ ss
                                 =            —
                                                                                                                                                                                     ©   aaa
 0                25                 50                                          100 Miles               :            ®
  L      1         l     1            |       I             1            l         J                                                                                                                        HERE,   Garmir           3S,       EPA, NF




Exhibit 21 provides mean and median values by system.

Exhibit 21. Summary of City Mean and Median SDCs (2022)
Source: FCS GROUP
        Mean and Median SDCs                                                                     Number of Cities                                            Mean                    Median
 Water                                                                                                                               72                          $4,500                   $3,830
 Wastewater                                                                                                                          72                          $4,644                   $4,353
 Stormwater                                                                                                                          A5                          $1,078                     $756
 Transportation                                                                                                                      51                           $4,433                  $3,489
 Parks                                                                                                                               55                          $3,829                   $2,535
 Totals                                                                                                                              76                        $15,047*                  $12,168
* This value represents the average of the totals for each jurisdiction, rather than a sum of the averages for each system.


For comparison, the 2020 LOC survey report found average total estimated SDC costs for
single-family residential of $13,135 for fiscal year 2018,1% though, as noted previously, this
figure likely undercounts special district and county SDCs. The average across the jurisdictions
and special areas included in the HBA of Metro Portland 2020 data is just over $27,000, though
this data set is weighted towards larger jurisdictions and has little coverage outside the



124 League of Oregon Cities, System Development Charges Survey Report (February 2020), page 17.
Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                                                                                                                                                                    43
Portland metropolitan region.'* The average of the total SDC rates for jurisdictions included in
the January 2018 OBOA data was roughly $14,500.” This variability suggests that aggregate
statewide numbers from any given subset of communities may not be representative of the state
as a whole.

Exhibit 22 shows the distribution of each SDC type as well as the distribution of total SDCs from
the 2022 FCS GROUP survey data. The “box” captures the middle two quartiles of values for
each set of data (25 percentile to the median in the lower box and median to 75" percentile in
the upper box). Lines (“whiskers”) encompass the minimum and maximum range within the
survey data.

Exhibit 22. Distribution of SDCs Among Surveyed Oregon Jurisdictions that Charge One or More
SDCs by Infrastructure System (2022)
Source: ECONorthwest, using data from FCS GROUP
    $50,000 -




             $40,000 -




             $30,000 -
SDC Amount




             $20,000 -                                            ——




             $10,000 -




                   $0 -
                          Parks
                                  —
                                  Sewer
                                                 =Water       Transportation    Stormwater         Total


Exhibit 22 shows substantial variation in SDC amounts across all SDC types, with the greatest
range for transportation and sewer SDCs. In total, the range is even more pronounced, from a
low of $819 (Lakeview) to a high of $47,550 (Tigard).




12 Home Builders Association of Metropolitan Portland, “System Development Charges,”
https://www.hbapdx.org/system-development-charges.htm]
126 Oregon Building Officials Association, “OBOA Standards Committee,”
https://www.oregonbuildingofficials.com/standards. This figure excludes excise taxes, which are also listed in this
data set.

Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                                 44
Multifamily SDCs
In OBOA’s 2018 survey data, the only readily available data that includes fees for example
single-family detached and multifamily projects,!”’ the ratio of the average multifamily SDC rate
to the average single-family SDC rate is about 66 percent. The data shows there is a wide range
of relationship between multifamily and single-family SDC rates.

3.1.2 Trends in System Development Charge Levels
Using the data on SDC fee levels by infrastructure system for 2007 and 2022 for the sample
cities, Exhibit 23 shows fee level trends for each type of SDC.

Exhibit 23. Average SDC Levels by Infrastructure System for Surveyed Cities in Oregon, 2007 and
2022
Source: ECONorthwest and FCS GROUP using 2007 data from League of Oregon Cities* and 2022 data from FCS GROUP
                                      $16,000


                                      $14,000
                                  fo)
                                  fF
                                  NO
                                  Oo
                                  oO
                                  Bb
  Average System Development Charge




                                      $10,000


                                       $8,000


                                       $6,000


                                       $4,000




                                       ~ 60     Hl      :         :                  i              ail
                                                Parks   Sewer      Water          Transportation   Stormwater   Total
                                                                m2007      2022

* Regional and district charges may not be consistently reported in the 2007 LOC data, which could result in an
underestimate of average fees in that data.




127 As noted above, while the 2020 data from the HBA of Metro Portland provides SDC rates for multifamily, the data
does not attempt to provide estimated SDCs for an example project and may not reflect all the adjustments that
would apply to a given project. For example, water SDC rates are listed for the same meter size as listed for single-
family development, which is typically not the case.
Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                                   45
Exhibit 24. Percent Change in SDC Levels by Infrastructure System for Surveyed Cities in Oregon
Compared       to Change in Construction Costs, 2007-2022
Source: ECONorthwest and FCS GROUP using 2007 data from League of Oregon Cities*, 2022 data from FCS GROUP, and
Construction Cost Index data from Engineering News Record
        120%
                                                                         110%
                                                                                                             105%
                    101%
        100%



  N
  NY     80%
  N


  5                                   66%
  Si                                                    61%                                           59%
   %,    60%
   e
  S                                                                                         49%
  i=
   8
  o      40%




         20%




          0%
                    Parks            Sewer             Water        Transportation      Stormwater            Total

                               mam Percent Change in Average Rates         -——ENR 20-City

* Regional and district charges may not be consistently reported in the 2007 LOC data, which could result in an
underestimate of average fees in that data.


This shows that average SDC rates have increased across all infrastructure systems over the 15-
year period. Most infrastructure systems have seen increases that have outpaced the increase in
construction costs over the same period, in some cases by a substantial margin. As noted above,
regional and district charges may not be consistently reported in the 2007 LOC data, which
could exaggerate the magnitude of increases. On average, transportation and parks SDCs have
increased most over the past 15 years, exceeding the increase in construction costs. This could
be due to land values escalating faster than construction costs, as many parks service providers
account for land costs in their SDC indexing methodology, and right-of-way acquisition costs
can drive cost increases for transportation projects as well.!?8 Water and sewer SDCs have




128 While comprehensive statewide data on trends in land values is not readily available, there is evidence that land
prices are escalating faster than construction costs at least in recent years and in areas experiencing strong
development. For example, a review of documents related to SDC rate increases for some parks providers showed
that in 2017, data from the Washington County Assessor’s office (within the Tualatin Hills Park and Recreation
District) showed an increase in vacant land value of 19.54 percent, compared to the ENR CCI increase of 2.15 percent.
Similarly, data from Deschutes County Assessor’s Office showed an increase in land values of 18.06 percent over the
12-month period ending December 2021, which was significantly higher than the ENR 20-city CCI of 7.36 percent.

Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                                   46
roughly kept pace with construction costs, and stormwater SDCs have lagged behind
construction costs. Appendix D provides tables containing the 2007 and 2022 data.

3.1.3 Comparison to National Data
A limited number of sources offer national data on impact fees. Duncan Associates’ 2019
National Impact Fee Survey covers a sample of jurisdictions from many states. The Terner
Center report referenced previously includes impact fee data for a number of California
jurisdictions, but it does not include observations from other states.

The Duncan Associates Survey acknowledges a variety of limitations, including difficulty
parsing impact fees that are referred to by different names or may be combined with other
service fees, limited and non-random samples of which jurisdictions are included, and
estimations of the cost of standard developer exactions for communities that use those in place
of monetary impact fees. In addition, many impact fee surveys suffer from under-reporting of
fees from regional service providers.!” This appears to be an issue with the Terner Center data
that makes it less appropriate to compare to Oregon data in the aggregate.

Beyond these limitations, it is difficult to draw useful comparative conclusions from national
surveys because of differences in state statutes, terminology, and methodology constraints. As
noted previously, Oregon’s SDC law provides for water, wastewater, stormwater,
transportation, and parks charges. Among neighboring states, while all authorize impact fees,
there is variation in which systems are included:

    =    California authorizes the use of impact fees for any public facilities.!%° Survey results for
         California public agencies appear to under-count regional water and wastewater fees.
    =    In Washington, impact fees are authorized for only transportation, parks, fire, and
         schools,! while water, wastewater, and stormwater fees are authorized in a different
         statute! and are referred to general facilities charges. In surveys of impact fees, many
         Washington agencies report only their transportation, parks, fire, and schools impact
         fees, and exclude water, wastewater, and stormwater.

    =    Idaho also has two statutes. Impact fees! have been used historically for transportation
         and parks, although they are available for water, wastewater, and stormwater. Water
         and wastewater charges are typically charged under the authority provided ina
         separate statute.'*4 These fees are generally less cumbersome to administer than “impact
         fees,” although a 2015 supreme court case! essentially prohibits the inclusion of future



129 Duncan Associates, “2019 National Impact Fee Survey,” August 18, 2019.
180 CGC 66000
BT RCW 82.02
182 RCW 35.92.025
83 Authorized in IC §§ 50-10
4 1C §§ 67-82
185 NIBCA v. City of Hayden
Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                47
        facilities costs in the charge calculation—a methodology constraint not present in
        Oregon (or Washington or California).
These challenges undermine the value of comparing Oregon to its neighboring states in terms of
total impact fee amounts. In the 2019 Duncan Associates survey, for example, cities such as
Olympia and Tumwater reported no water, wastewater, or stormwater “impact fees” when in
fact they have robust general facilities charges. Olympia also has a park impact fee which was
not included. The totals for the five Oregon-comparable services should be $25,663.03 for
Olympia and $20,119.30 for         Tumwater —not        the $4,830 and $3,853 shown for each, respectively.

There are also differences between states in the availability of state funding for infrastructure
and the constraints on alternative local funding sources, which can lead to different levels of
reliance on impact fees.




Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                     48
3.2 Key Factors Affecting SDC Rates
As illustrated in Section 3.1.1, SDC rates vary substantially across the state. As shown in Exhibit
25, these variations are the result of a multitude of factors including both internal decisions
made by local governments and external factors that impact the relative costs of building
infrastructure across the state and in different service delivery and infrastructure contexts.
Internal factors include both infrastructure planning and funding decisions “upstream” of the
SDC methodology that impact local governments’ total infrastructure investment needs and the
portion of costs that may be eligible for SDC funding, as well as decisions specific to the
development of the SDC methodology and final rate-setting. Key external factors include
regional construction market conditions and local construction cost factors (e.g., soils or
geotechnical requirements), service provider scale and efficiency (e.g., regional vs. individual
service provider), and infrastructure-specific considerations.

Exhibit 25: Factors Affecting SDC Rates
Source: Galardi Rothstein Group, ECONorthwest

     INTERNAL FACTORS                                                            EXTERNAL FACTORS

                                                SDC RATE SCHEDULE
                                                                                    Local Construction
    “Upstream” Infrastructure                                                          Cost Factors
        System Planning &                  RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT
        Funding Decisions                     $XX per Single Family Dwelling
               :                                $X per Multifamily Dwelling       Service Provider Scale
                                                                                      and Efficiency
                                           NON-RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT
      SDC Methodology and                     SY per Commercial Building SQ FT
      Rate-Setting Decisions                  $Z per Industrial Building SQ FT    Infrastructure-Specific
                                                                                      Considerations




This section summarizes some of the key factors that lead to differences in SDC rates across
Oregon. While each factor —and its potential impact on SDC rates —is discussed individually,
the collective decisions and factors are ultimately reflected in the adopted SDC rates. For
example, a community with a larger, more expensive transportation system capital plan may
have a similar SDC than another community with a smaller capital plan if other funding sources
(e.g., voter approved taxes) are used to fund a portion of the improvements. Similarly, the
impacts of different individual SDC methodology decisions may be neutralized by other
decisions upstream or downstream (i.e., at the time of rate-setting). Because survey data shows
that there are significant variations in SDCs across the state, this section provides some insights
into what may drive those differences.

3.2.1 Broad Infrastructure Planning and Funding Decisions
Infrastructure System Plans and Capital Project Needs

As discussed in Section 1.2.2, Oregon SDC statutes allow local governments to charge SDCs for
five broad types of infrastructure: water, wastewater, stormwater, transportation, and parks.
Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                       49
Furthermore, local governments are required to prepare a capital improvement plan or
comparable plan prior to the establishment of an SDC, assuming a forward-looking
“improvement fee” is to be included.

Capital planning for all five SDC-eligible infrastructure systems generally involves preparation
of broader system plans (e.g., master plans, public facilities plans, or transportation system
plans) to determine future investment needs and priorities based on an in-depth technical
evaluation and input from regulatory agencies and the local community.

Water, sewer, and stormwater master planning efforts are largely technical exercises, where
state and federal permitting and other requirements drive the need for facility design, sizing,
and quantity. While discretion is involved in selecting among different technologies, siting
facilities, and prioritizing improvements for these systems, some decisions are beyond local
control, due to the need for state and federal regulatory compliance. For transportation, while
Oregon Department of Transportation (ODOT) standards and transportation planning rule
requirements can influence project design and prioritization in communities with state highway
facilities, local governments generally have discretion in setting level of service standards and
prioritizing improvements for city streets to align with local goals. Local governments also have
discretion in planning for a park system that aligns with community-defined goals around
livability and equity.

Because the system plans generally set the stage for the SDC project list, decisions made as part
of the broader system planning process can impact the size and cost of the project list as the
service providers seek to comply with regulations and be responsive to community
stakeholders engaged in the planning process. Even if only a portion of the project costs are
allocated to SDCs, a larger, more expensive project list can increase SDC levels. Developer focus
groups conducted as part of this study indicate a strong perception that differences in locally
established service levels and project priorities for parks and transportation facilities drive
differences in SDCs for these systems in particular.

Overall Infrastructure Funding Choices

As part of their financial planning process, service providers may make decisions to utilize
other non-SDC funds up front (1.e., before embarking on an SDC update) for a specific project or
group of projects, which then reduces the list of potential projects that may end up on the SDC
project list. For example, if there is support by the local community, a GO bond may be used to
fund a recreation center or a group of high-profile transportation projects. However, given the
political challenges and legal or financial limitations associated with other potential local
funding sources, it can be more difficult to implement other local funding options than to
maximize the use of SDCs for eligible costs, within the bounds of state law and legal precedent.

Additionally, many transportation capital plans include projects on state highways that serve as
local arterials through cities. Many cities decide to include only the “local” share of such project
costs, intending to leverage the participation of the Oregon Department of Transportation in
funding those projects. These up-front funding decisions may have a direct impact on SDCs if
they result in reduced SDC-eligible costs.

Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                              50
3.2.2 SDC Methodology Factors
An SDC methodology has many individual components, and within the framework of Oregon
SDC law, local governments have flexibility in selecting approaches to each methodology
component to balance local objectives and data availability. Methodology component choices
may be grouped in two primary areas: 1) decisions related to the total infrastructure costs to be
recovered from SDCs (the “cost basis”), and 2) decisions related to how the SDC costs will be
allocated across different development types, sizes, and contexts (the “charge basis”).

As shown in Exhibit 2, cost basis decisions generally impact overall SDC levels. A community
with a higher cost per unit of growth (as is the case with Community B) has higher SDCs across
all development types, compared to Community A, which is assumed to have a lower cost
basis. On the other hand, decisions related to the charge basis tend to impact relative fee levels
within a given development type (e.g., residential or commercial) and across development
types, locations, and contexts. In the example in Exhibit 2, Community C charges a lower cost
per unit for multifamily relative to single-family, while Community D charges a uniform SDC
for all homes of a given type.

Exhibit 26: Example of SDC Methodology Choices and their Impact on SDC Rates
Source: Galardi Rothstein Group, ECONorthwest


                      COST BASIS                                             CHARGE       BASIS


         ¢ Inclusion of past and/or future
                                                                    ¢ Development characteristics
           investments
                                                                      used to scale SDCs based on size
         ¢ Capital planning period
                                                                    ¢ Inclusion of intensity of use
         * Infrastructure valuation method                           factors that vary by land use
         ¢ Growth cost allocation basis                               types
         ¢ Future funding assumptions                               * SDC differentials based on
                                                                     development location or context
         « Compliance costs




 SINGLE-FAMILY         APARTMENT             COMMERCIAL      SINGLE-FAMILY       APARTMENT            COMMERCIAL
 DWELLING UNIT        DWELLING UNIT            BUILDING      DWELLING UNIT      DWELLING UNIT           BUILDING

                        Community A                                               Community C


                           @                                 506C                                       506
                        Community B                                               Community D


                           5¢
     Total costs vary for each community, but distribution       Total costs are similar between communities, but
              between different land uses is similar               distribution between different land uses varies



Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                                51
This section provides a high-level summary of individual methodology components, choices,
and the general impacts of each choice. However, as mentioned previously, it is the collective
decisions and factors that are ultimately reflected in the adopted SDC rates, and some
individual component choices may be offset by other decisions within the methodology, as well
as upstream and rate-setting decisions.

Cost Basis

As mentioned previously, the “cost basis” is the total cost that the SDCs are intended to recover.
Development of the cost basis involves anumber of methodological decisions, beginning with
selection of investments to include in the SDCs, the methods for placing a value on those
investments, assumptions related to future funding sources, and basis for determining an
equitable share of capacity costs for new development. Key decisions impacting the SDC cost
basis are discussed below and their potential impact on overall SDC levels.

Selection of Investments to Include in SDC Cost Basis

Reimbursement, Improvement, or Combined SDC Methodology
As discussed in Section 1.2.2, an SDC methodology can include a reimbursement fee, an
improvement fee, or a combination, so the first cost basis decision is whether to include existing
or future system capital investments, or both. This is generally a technical decision based on
whether existing facilities have capacity beyond existing development service demands (a
requirement for a reimbursement fee) and whether that capacity is sufficient to satisfy future
growth needs entirely, or if additional improvements are also required.

In many communities, the cost of existing facilities (per unit of service capacity) is lower than
the cost of providing the same amount of capacity in the future due to greater availability of
grant funding historically, new design standards which make construction of planned
improvements more costly, cost inflation, and other factors. Therefore, SDCs based on a stand-
alone reimbursement fee methodology are likely to be lower than SDCs that use stand-alone
improvement or combined reimbursement and improvement fee methodologies.

Reducing the Size of the Improvement SDC Project List
Improvement SDCs may vary among communities due to upstream planning and funding
decisions (as discussed in 3.2.1), but also internal decisions to reduce the SDC project list by
including projects planned for a shorter time period or a more focused and prioritized list. As
noted in Oregon SDC Study: Summary of Service Providers (Appendix A), some communities
described using “funded” and “unfunded” project lists or working to narrow and prioritize a
project list that would align with the maximum SDC amount the community was comfortable
charging (often a fee level comparable with other SDCs in the region).'°6




136 Tt is worth noting that projects assumed to be “unfunded” will remain unfunded (which also has implications for
SDC credits as discussed in 1.6.2) if not included on SDC project list or another funding source is identified.
Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                                 52
Assigning Costs or Values to Investments

Costs Estimates for Improvement Fees
The costs for planned projects used in the improvement fee calculation typically represent
planning level estimates from system plans, brought current to the time SDCs are calculated
and adopted based on a construction cost index. Future cost escalation (from the time the SDC
is calculated to the time a project is constructed) is typically addressed through periodic
updates to the project list or SDCs tied to a construction cost index, as allowed by statute.
However, as noted in Oregon SDC Study: Summary of Service Providers (Appendix A), many
communities indicate that their SDCs have not been indexed every year or at all since initially
adopted, so variation in indexing practices is likely a factor in SDC differences.

Approach to Valuation of Existing Facilities for Reimbursement Fees
While the SDC statutes refer to “the value ... or the cost of the existing facilities”*” in calculating
a reimbursement fee, a specific valuation basis is not prescribed. In fact, there are a wide range
of valuation approaches used in Oregon and across the country for SDC calculation purposes.
For example, the American Water Works Association M1 Manual (Principles of Water Rates,
Fees, and Charges) lists four common approaches for valuation of existing system facilities for
calculation of SDCs: 1) original cost, 2) original cost less accumulated depreciation, 3)
replacement cost new, 4) replacement cost new less depreciation.1!%*

Reimbursement fees based on original cost less depreciation tend to generate the lowest fees of
the options (all things being equal), while replacement cost-based fees would tend to be higher.
To the extent that local SDCs include a reimbursement component, the valuation method can
impact the overall fee level and result in differences across communities.

Allocation of Costs to Growth           (“Growth        Share”)

The determination of the portion of costs that may equitably be allocated to growth through
reimbursement and improvement SDCs is primarily a technical process that involves
consideration of upstream planning targets and other technical information. As discussed in
Section 1.5.1, the system plans establish facility design standards and service delivery targets for
each system. These targets form the basis for how system capacity and existing and future user
demands are measured, which then allows for existing system facility and future improvement
costs to be allocated to growth.

While there are some methodological differences in how local governments approach allocation
of costs to growth, the upstream planning decisions along with other technical considerations
generally have a greater influence on the allocation of costs to growth and resulting variations
in SDC fees. Nevertheless, a high-level summary of the technical process is provided along with
potential differences in approaches, given the importance of this methodology component to




137 ORS 223.304(1)(a)(D)
1388 Principles of Water Rates, Fees, and Charges, Seventh Edition, American Water Works Association, Denver, CO,
2017, page 332.
Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                               53
development of the cost basis and because it lays the groundwork for understanding different
“charge bases” (discussed later in this section).

System Capacity/Demand Measures
Measures of capacity and demand vary by infrastructure system. At a very high level, water
systems must be able to deliver water to users under various demand conditions, so production
and delivery facilities are generally designed based on peak water demands. Wastewater and
stormwater facilities need to be able to collect and treat wastewater or stormwater discharges
from users consistent with standards established by regulatory permits, so capacity and
demand measures may relate to both user wastewater flows and strengths. Demand for parks is
measured by people, as potential users of parks and service targets generally relate to the
desired quantity of facilities per capita and in some cases access measures (e.g., aneighborhood
park located within a short walking distance). Transportation systems are designed to
accommodate trips of all modes of travel (e.g., auto, bike, pedestrian, transit) generated by
businesses and households throughout the week and at peak hours of travel.

Determining Growth Share of Existing Facility Costs
The service needs of existing users are estimated from various data sources and compared to
the capacity of existing facilities under the same demand conditions. For example, water system
production data can be used to estimate the peak demands of existing users, which is then
compared to the peak hydraulic capacity of various facility types (e.g., production, storage,
distribution) to determine if and how much capacity is available for growth. Similar processes
are used for other infrastructure systems.

Existing facilities are generally assumed to first meet the service requirements of the existing
users who have paid for their construction through contribution of user fees, taxes, and other
mechanisms. Any capacity beyond existing user needs may then be allocated to growth through
the reimbursement SDCs. If existing facility capacity is equal to or less than existing user service
requirements, then there is no available capacity for purposes of developing a reimbursement
fee, which means that growth needs will be met through future system improvements.
Insufficient capacity for existing users also has implications for allocation of SDC project list
costs (discussed below), as a portion of planned new capacity costs may remedy existing service
deficiencies.

Existing system available capacity is generally evaluated system-wide or by major system
function (e.g., water production, transmission, storage). Local approaches reflect system design
and other considerations.

Project Cost Allocation for Improvement Fees
There are two conditions that need to be met for SDC project list costs to be eligible for
improvement fee funding: 1) the improvement expands capacity, and 2) the capacity is needed
to meet the service demands of future system users. Related to the first condition, the statutes
clarify that improvements are considered capacity increasing if they provide new facilities (e.g.,
new pump stations, parks, roads, etc.) or if they increase the level of performance or service
provided by existing facilities (e.g., new technologies that provide a higher level of water or
wastewater treatment, park amenities that expand the number of users that may be served,
etc.).

Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                              54
As mentioned previously, determining what portion of new capacity costs may equitably be
allocated to future system users depends on the amount of capacity needed to meet their service
demands (as determined by the service delivery targets and growth projections) and whether
any of the new capacity costs are related to addressing existing users service needs (either by
addressing existing system deficiencies or by replacing existing facility capacity serving existing
users). Again, these are generally technical decisions that can be evaluated based on
information developed as part of the system plans (upstream of the SDC methodology
development). However, there may be some methodological variations to apportioning costs
for dual purpose improvements which may influence improvement SDC fee level.

For example, if an 8” pipe that currently serves existing system users has to be replaced by a 12”
pipe to accommodate the additional service demands of future users, the share of the cost for
the 12” pipe that is attributable to growth could be based on the share of future flow from
future users vs. existing users, the incremental cost of installing a 12” pipe vs. replacing an 8”
pipe (if the pipe is nearing the end of its useful life anyway), or the cost of anew 8” pipe (the
minimum pipe size that would be required to serve future development from a separate stand-
alone pipe if the original pipe is still well within its useful life and would not require
replacement within the planning period but for the need for additional capacity). These
different approaches can result in different growth-attributable shares of project costs.

Assumptions Related to Other Funding Sources

Future Funding Assumptions for Improvement              Fees
As discussed in 3.2.1, local governments generally exclude planned improvement costs
earmarked for other known sources of funding (e.g., GO bonds). However, detailed information
on other funding sources like grants or developer contributions may not be available years in
advance of the planned project construction. Therefore, local jurisdictions may make
assumptions about other potential funding sources based on past experience (which may vary
across jurisdictions), or they may assume that SDCs will cover any local match that is required
for grant funding. Reductions to the cost basis for other funding sources may lead to variations
in SDCs, particularly if large, high-cost projects (e.g., major road improvements, aquatic centers,
new water or wastewater treatment facilities, etc.) are assumed to be funded by non-SDC
revenues.

Past Funding Sources for Reimbursement Fees
As mentioned in 1.2.2, reambursement fees must consider gifts or grants from federal or state
government or private persons (i.e., these are excluded from the SDC cost basis). Therefore,
local governments whose existing facilities were funded with significant support from state or
federal agencies or developers, may have relatively lower fee levels than those who have had to
rely more heavily on local government sources.

Assumptions About Use and Costs of Debt Financing
Assumptions about long-term debt financing may also impact the SDC levels across
jurisdictions. SDC revenue may be used for repayment of indebtedness;!* therefore, some local



189 ORS 223.307
Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                             55
governments include both financing and construction costs in the cost basis for the SDCs, while
other may exclude debt-funded facilities from the SDCs altogether. In other cases, the
reimbursement fee cost basis may be discounted for outstanding debt principal, or a future
looking present value debt service credit may be incorporated into the SDC methodology.

Compliance Costs

SDC revenue may also be spent “on the costs of complying with the provisions of ORS 223.297
to 223.316, including the costs of developing system development charge methodologies and
providing an annual accounting of system development charge expenditures.”° This has
generally been interpreted to mean that an estimate of these allowed expenditures can be added
to the total cost basis of the SDC for calculation purposes.

Many local governments track a broader range of SDC administration costs, including the
following which also relate to SDC compliance:

     =   SDC Fund management.
     =   Management of project lists (planning, engineering, legal).
     =   Developer credit calculations and tracking.
Compliance costs are another area where diverse approaches and assumptions lead to
differences in overall SDC levels. The types of costs included vary from the most basic (costs
associated with developing methodologies and the required annual accounting) to more
comprehensive SDC processing and potentially other related costs.

Many local governments include compliance costs in the calculation of the SDC cost basis, and
the compliance cost portion of the total SDC generally ranges from 1-5 percent. Other local
governments exclude compliance costs from their SDC cost bases altogether. For those service
providers who do not add these costs into the SDCs, revenue is either diverted from project
costs or funding must come from non-SDC sources.

Charge Basis

Overview

Perhaps the largest and most visible source of methodological variation in SDCs is the choice of
charge basis: the specific characteristic(s) of a development used to determine its proportionate
impact on an infrastructure system in relationship to the system-specific capacity or demand
measures discussed previously. Development size, type, or class (e.g., single family residential,
middle housing, apartments, commercial, industrial), and location or context are all potential
characteristics that may form the basis for charging SDCs, as summarized in Exhibit 27.




140 ORS 223.307(5)
Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                            56
Exhibit 27. Common SDC Charge Bases by Infrastructure System
Source: Galardi Rothstein Group and FCS GROUP
        System          Capacity/          Development Size (Scaling          | Development Type             Development
                         Demand                    Factors)                       (Intensity of Use        Location Factors
                         Measure                                                       Factors)
 Water                Average or  Water meter size, plumbing                 | Peak water                  Infill vs.
                      peak water  fixture units, building or                    demands or fire            greenfield; base
                      volumes     dwelling area (Square feet),               | protection                  vs. upper
                                  lot size, class-specific                      requirements               pressure zones
                                  characteristics*
 Sewer            Wastewater      Water meter size, plumbing | Wastewater                                  Infill vs.
                  flow volumes | fixture units, building or      strength                                  greenfield
                  and pollutant | dwelling area (Square feet), | concentrations
                  loads           class-specific
                                  characteristics*
 Stormwater       Stormwater      Impervious area, gross area | Water quality                              Infill vs.
                  quantity and    (total lot size)               factors; run-off                          greenfield
                  quality                                        coefficients
 Transportation | Vehicle or      Number of dwelling units,      Trip rates and                           Infill vs.
                  person trips    building or dwelling unit      adjustmentfactors                      | greenfield;
                                  area (Square feet), class-     (e.g., trip length,                      transit proximity
                                  specific characteristics*      pass-by trips)
 Parks            Persons or      Number of dwelling units,      Persons per                               Infill vs.
                  person hours    building or dwelling unit      household;                                greenfield
                                  area (Square feet)             employees per
                                                                 square feet
*Special characteristics specific to a particular land use type or class of service (e.g., number of school students,
restaurant seats, vehicle fueling stations, car wash bays, etc.).


Oregon statutes do not prescribe charge bases, with a few exceptions noted in ORS 223.301."
Instead, local governments may select approaches that balance data and administrative
considerations, and policy objectives. Charge bases have evolved over time to include
additional characteristics or factors that allow local governments to promote equity, economic
efficiency, and affordability objectives while still maintaining a rate structure that ties fees to
impacts. However, along with the greater complexity that results from inclusion of different
charge basis factors, the need arises for greater transparency, education, and tools for estimating
charges for specific developments.

While the charge basis does not, in theory, impact the total amount of revenue to be collected
through SDCs (for any given cost basis) overall, it does impact fee levels and revenue recovery
among different development types. Therefore, when comparing SDCs across communities for
a particular development typography, different charge bases can result in substantially different
SDCs.


Key decisions involved in selecting a charge basis are discussed below.




141 SDCs may not be charged based on the number of additional employees hired after a specific date without regard
to new construction, new development, or new use of an existing structure by the employer or for increased use of a
transportation facility that results from the production of marijuana on a property located in an exclusive farm use
zone.

Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                                         57
Characteristics Used to Scale SDCs Based on Development Size

Development size is an indicator of potential service demands or capacity needs, so an SDC
charge basis includes one or more development characteristics used to estimate the potential
scale of impact. The same scaling measures may apply uniformly across all development types,
as in the case of water meter size or plumbing fixture units used for estimating water and
wastewater demands, or the quantity of impervious area (used as an indicator of potential
stormwater runoff).

In other cases, scaling measures may be specific to a type or class of development, where local
or industry data establish a relationship between a size of a dwelling unit or building for
commercial business, and estimated system demand (e.g., water demand, person trips, etc.).
The wide range of development sizes makes the importance of scaling particularly acute for
commercial and industrial customers. For example, a large, big box retail business would be
expected to generate significantly more person trips than a small specialty retail store.

Scaling residential SDCs based on the size of the house (in square feet of living area or number
of bedrooms) has become more common practice in in the last decade. Scaled residential SDCs
may be implemented for single family and multifamily development individually or applied
uniformly to all residential development (regardless of the type of dwelling). A scaling
structure can lead to significant differences in SDCs for difference sizes of dwellings, as shown
in the three examples in Exhibit 28. The first two examples are tiered approaches applicable to a
specific type of dwelling (i.e., single family or multifamily). Example 1 tiers are based on the
size of the dwelling in square feet (sq. ft.), while Example 2 tiers are based on the number of
bedrooms in the dwelling.

Exhibit 28. Sample Scaled Residential Parks SDC Structures
Sources: Galardi Rothstein Group, using data from Tualatin Hills Parks and Recreation Department, 2021/22 SDC Fee
Schedule, City of Bend Systems Development Charges July 1, 2022-June 30, 2023 (pg. 5), City of Eugene SDC
Methodologies (Table 7)
 Example                               Agency and SDC Category                                           SDC
 1.           Tualatin Hills Park and Recreation District Single-Family SDCs per Dwelling
              Unit (Districtwide)
              Tiered (Square Feet Category) Basis
                     <1,500 sq. ft.                                                                        $9,088
                     1,500-2,500 sq. ft.                                                                  $10,717
                     2,501-3,500 sq. ft.                                                                  $12,217
                     >3,500 sq. ft.                                                                       $13,075
 2.           Bend Park and Recreation District Multifamily Parks SDCs per Dwelling Unit

              Tiered (Bedroom       Category) Basis
                      O Bedroom                                                                            $4,207
                      1 Bedroom                                                                            $4,636
                      2 Bedroom                                                                            $7,517
                      3+ Bedroom                                                                           $9,738
 3.           City of Eugene Residential Sewer SDCs

              Base SDC per Dwelling Unit                                                                  $485.63
              Scaled SDC per sq. ft. Living Area                                                          $0.1177




Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                               58
Exhibit 28 also provides an example of an alternative scaling approach that is applicable to all
residential housing (single and multifamily alike). Rather than charging a flat rate per dwelling
unit within a defined tier, each additional square foot of living area is charged an additional fee
on top of a base amount applied to each dwelling unit based on a regression analysis.

Intensity of Use Factors That Differentiate SDCs Based on Development Type

In addition to development size, the type of land use or class of service may be a factor in
estimating system demand.

For residential development, dwelling type (e.g., single family, duplex, apartment) is a common
charge basis, particularly for systems where demand for service is measured directly by people
(like parks), as the average number of occupants generally differ and may be estimated for local
areas based on readily available U.S. census data. Differences in the number of occupants also
may drive differences in demand for other infrastructure systems such as water, wastewater,
and transportation systems, where local utility billmg data and national trip generation surveys
show differences in average demands by dwelling type.

Single family and multifamily dwelling types are the most common factor for differentiating
SDCs. However, as zoning regulations continue to evolve across the state to support a broader
diversity of housing types and configurations, consideration is often given to pricing SDCs for
smaller and more affordable dwelling types, based on estimated system demands and policy
objectives. Examples of other dwelling types include:

    =   Accessory Dwelling Units (ADUs) — This practice of charging reduced SDCs for ADUs is
        theoretically consistent with data from a 2014 ADU survey conducted by the Oregon
        Department of Environmental Quality (DEQ). The DEQ survey found average
        occupancy of all ADUs was 1.45 persons per household, which is generally significantly
        lower than the average occupancy for a single-family home.
    =   Middle housing — As a result of House Bill 2001, cities with population over 25,000 must
        allow development of up to four dwelling units on properties previously restricted to
        single-family housing. As the density of housing increases, system demands per
        dwelling unit also tend to decrease (relative to single-family housing) due to lower
        average occupancy and smaller lot sizes which may reduce stormwater runoff and water
        use per unit.
    =   Other housing types — As with middle housing, consideration of specific demands per
        unit for manufactured housing, cottage cluster, and tiny homes may also be considered
        as more data becomes available to evaluate relative occupancy rates and system-specific
        demands.
As with dwelling type, the intensity of system use/demand may vary greatly across different
nonresidential (commercial, industrial, and institutional) development types. Many
communities charge different transportation SDCs per 1,000 sq. ft. of building area for dozens of
different nonresidential development types, reflecting national data on trip generation. For
example, surveys indicate that an average convenience market generates significantly more
trips per 1,000 sq. ft. of building size than a small specialty retail store. Similarly, some

Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                             59
communities differentiate water and wastewater SDCs for different classes of nonresidential
development based on volume or wastewater strength factors. For example, a restaurant
generally is assumed to demand more water/discharge more wastewater volume (and pollutant
loads) per 1,000 sq. ft., compared to an office building.

For parks, intensity of use considerations impact both the allocation of growth-related costs
between residential and commercial development and the SDC per 1,000 sq. ft. for different
nonresidential development types. On average, a resident is assumed to have a higher potential
park use than a business employee based on some limited survey data and theoretical estimates
that take into accounts the hours per week available for park use. The number of employees per
1,000 sq. ft. of building area also differs among nonresidential development classes, which
further forms the basis for charging SDCs in many communities.

Other intensity of use factors that may help establish different SDCs by type of development
include seasonal variations in water use (i.e., peak water demands), stormwater quality, and
transportation trip characteristics (like trip length and pass-by trip adjustments).

SDC Differentials Based on Development Location or Context

Development location is often considered in three contexts that can drive differences in cost of
service or capacity needs: 1) infill vs. greenfield areas, 2) areas requiring specialized facilities
(e.g., upper water pressure zones that require storage and pumping facilities), and 3)
development context (considerations around density, mixed use developments and proximity
to transit may impact service demands). Location-based overlay SDCs are relatively common in
ereenfield areas (e.g., City of Hillsboro) or in areas of major redevelopment (e.g., City of
Portland Transportation SDCs). Accessibility to public transit —as in the case of transit
corridors— may have a measurable impact on the cost of providing transportation system
infrastructure in urban settings, so may be reflected in the SDC charge basis and lead to
significant fee levels across jurisdictions.

3.2.3 Rate-Setting: Implementing                        a Reduced SDC
In addition to methodological and cost differences, some local governments choose to
implement SDCs at levels lower than the calculated amounts. Implementing an SDC that is less
than what is calculated in the methodology is an approach that is technically and legally simple,
however, it sets up a situation where the SDCs are lower than required to fund the growth-
related costs. Choosing a lower SDC requires no findings or justification, though many local
governments will articulate a basis for the charges in the implementing resolution.

Implementing a lower SDC typically takes one of two forms. The simple form is
implementation of the SDC at the desired level (i.e., some percentage of the calculated SDC).
The more nuanced form is a multi-year phase-in schedule that may (or may not) terminate at
the calculated SDC. This approach provides an initial concession to developers that may have
planned projects in the pipeline.

This is reflected in the Oregon SDC Study: Summary of Service Providers (Appendix A). Many
communities noted charging less than the full amount justified in their methodology, generally
Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                              60
because of local elected officials’ desire to remain competitive for development relative to other
nearby communities, or because of concerns about the impact on housing costs and
affordability. Other communities noted using phase-in periods when a change in methodology
would lead to anotably higher rate. (As noted above, other jurisdictions adjust their SDC-
eligible project list to achieve a lower cost basis and lower SDC rate instead.)

The LOC recently added questions on this subject to its annual SDC survey, asking whether the
city adopted an SDC that was less than what was calculated in the methodology for each
infrastructure system. As shown in Exhibit 29, a majority of cities report implementing the full
SDC for most infrastructure systems, but 14 percent reported discounting a wastewater SDC,
and 29 percent reported implementing a discounted parks SDC.!"

Exhibit 29. SDC Discounting Among Survey Respondents
Source: FCS GROUP and ECONorthwest using data from League of Oregon Cities, System Development Charges Survey
Report (February 2020)

                                           Implementation of SDCs
 100%


  90%

  80%

  70%

  60%

  50%

  40%

  30%
                                     53%                                        52%
  20%

  10%

   0%
                Water            Wastewater             Stormwater      Transportation          Parks

                                  m= FullSDC    s# DiscountedSDC     s Unsure




142 FCS GROUP analysis of data from League of Oregon Cities, System Development Charges Survey Report
(February 2020). The possible responses were “yes,”
                                                 Wh
                                                    “no,” and “unsure.”
Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                           61
3.2.4 Underlying Cost Drivers
Cost of Capital Improvements
Regional Cost Differences

While national and even international factors impact the costs of material and supplies, regional
cost differences may impact infrastructure costs and SDC levels across the state. Regional cost
factors may include the following:
     =    Rural areas may have less access to labor and supplies, particularly during busy
          construction periods, which may drive-up project costs. This is particularly acute in
          areas where limitations in affordable workforce housing further limit the pool of local
          contractors.

     =    Land values vary significantly.
     =    Differences in geology impact costs of grading and excavation.
The rising cost of labor has created upward pressure on project costs for all types of projects
throughout the state. However, Central and Eastern Oregon seem to be impacted
disproportionately because of a shortage of local contractors. This shortage limits the number of
bids received for a project, and the limited number bidding contractors increases the pricing
power of those who do bid.

Infrastructure-Specific Cost Drivers

Different kinds of infrastructure projects incur different kinds of costs, and different kinds of
costs are subject to different market forces. Examples of specific cost factors by infrastructure
system include:

     =    Pipe is a major cost driver of water, wastewater, and stormwater projects, and the cost of
          pipe has risen dramatically in recent years."8
     =    Land is a significant cost factor for many park and transportation infrastructure projects,
          and land values in many areas have risen substantially more than construction cost
          indices in some years.!+4
Beyond the costs of materials and land, infrastructure systems may be impacted by varying
types of regulatory requirements that result in more costly facility designs (e.g., seismic
resiliency standards and water and wastewater treatment requirements).




18 According to data reported by the Bureau of Labor Statistics the producer price index for plastic construction
products (primarily, PVC pipe) increased almost 30 percent in 2021 (January to December).
144 For example, in 2017, data from the Washington County Assessor’s office (within the Tualatin Hills Park and
Recreation District) showed an increase in vacant land value of 19.54 percent, compared to the ENR CCI increase of
2.15 percent. Similarly, data from Deschutes County Assessor’s Office showed an increase in land values of 18.06
percent over the 12-month period ending December 2021, which was significantly higher than the ENR 20-city CCI of
7.36 percent.
Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                                62
For water SDCs, securing new and expanded sources of supply are a significant cost component
in most SDC project lists. Available water sources vary significantly across the state and the cost
of developing new sources vary based on the type, location, and other factors.

Cost Escalation and Timing of Indexing Rates

As described in Section 2.1.2, construction costs have escalated rapidly in the past two years as
measured by the ENR Construction Cost Index (CCI) (both the 20-city average and Seattle
indices). Many local governments use one of these indices to adjust their SDCs each year in
accordance with statute. However, these increases may not yet be incorporated into the SDCs
shown in Appendix D, as many cities adjust SDCs annually, but the timing of updates and the
timeframes used to calculate the index vary.

Service Delivery Structure

SDC variations across the state may reflect differences in service delivery due to economies of
scale for different types of service providers. The cost of producing a gallon of water or treating
a gallon of wastewater may be less for large regional utilities compared to single-utility service
providers.




Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                               63
                                                           Part 4:
                                           SDCs and Housing Costs

                                                        Primary Contributors: ECONorthwest




Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                    64
4.1 Overview
Part 4 of the report focuses on the relationship between SDCs and housing costs, including:

    =   How and to what extent SDC costs are passed on to housing consumers, and which
        other entities absorb those costs (“SDC cost incidence”).
    =   How SDC costs compare to other costs of housing development, including land, labor,
        and materials for construction, permitting, and development review costs, carrying and
        financing costs, cost of building on-site infrastructure (where applicable), etc., and how
        this varies for different types of housing.
    =   How and to what extent SDC costs affect overall housing costs and the housing
        options delivered by the private market, including differential impacts for housing at
        different sizes and price points.
    =   How SDC cost incidence varies for market-rate and affordable housing development.
The findings in Part 4 draw on a combination of published literature (both theoretical and
empirical studies); case studies of housing development under varying SDC rate structures;
analysis of a range of hypothetical housing developments across different market conditions to
show how SDCs impact housing types differently; and interviews with housing developers and
homebuilders with experience building housing across Oregon, including single-family
homebuilders and multifamily developers working in different market niches, and developers
of affordable housing.

4.1.1 How SDCs Affect Development Outcomes: Overview
SDCs affect development outcomes in two primary ways:

    =   SDCs fund infrastructure that is needed to support growth, which can add value to
        development, or make development possible in newly developing areas or areas
        without sufficient infrastructure.
    =   SDCs are a cost imposed on development, which increases the cost of building new
        housing.
Both factors can influence housing costs and housing production. Section 2.2 addressed the
value and benefits of SDCs to development. Sections 4.2 to 4.5 address SDCs as a cost that
impacts housing development.




Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                            65
4.2 SDCs as a Cost in Housing Development:
Conceptual Framework
4.2.1     Introduction

Who Pays? An Introduction to Cost Incidence
SDCs are one cost among many that developers typically pay as part of building housing. Like
the other costs of housing development (e.g., land, construction labor and materials, design fees,
financing costs, etc.), these costs are typically paid by developers initially and factored into their
financial decisions. Although developers initially pay SDCs, they can recoup at least a part of
the cost by passing on the cost to others involved in the housing development process or
transactions. Thus, it is important to ask not only who pays SDCs, but who ultimately incurs the
cost. This economic concept is referred to as cost incidence. Cost incidence describes who
ultimately incurs the cost, which can be split among parties, or incurred entirely by one party.

Housing Development 101
Understanding cost incidence in housing markets requires an understanding of housing
development. Market-rate housing development is a business, and, like other businesses, must
generate a financial return to operate. Generally, market-rate development will not occur unless
the expected revenues from the project exceed the expected costs by a sufficient margin to
create financial returns for developers, lenders, and investors that justify the risk of their
investment. Developers must identify sites and development products that they expect to be
financially feasible.

SDCs are one of many costs that developers take into consideration when determining whether
a project is feasible, which is part of a broader decision-making process that considers density,
location, design, and market conditions along with development costs. Exhibit 30 illustrates the
different factors that feed into overall housing cost and price. SDCs are one of many
jurisdictional policies and practices that affect development costs, including: speed and
complexity of permitting; zoning regulations; and other direct costs such as permit fees and
construction excise taxes. Developers often have an estimate of their SDC costs prior to securing
land and financing, but the accuracy of this estimate can vary with the timing of the land
purchase, the complexity of the development, and how much SDC rates change during the pre-
development period. Developers need to weigh SDCs and other cost inputs against the sales
prices or rents they are expecting to achieve on each project. Because SDCs costs are outside the
developers’ control, they must make choices about other aspects of the development to bring
total costs and prices or rents into alignment.




Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                               66
Exhibit 30. Detailed Model of Housing Cost and Price
Source: ECONorthwest, originally published in “Cost Components of Housing”145
                               Number of                                                   .
                                Builders                                             Materials

             Size of                                               Labor                         Financing



                                                                                                  —
             Builders              |         Other


                               INDUSTRY                                        OTHER FACTOR
                              STRUCTURE                                            COSTS

                                                          ‘
   SUPPLY/PRICE
    OF EXISTING                                   ON                       <                     Physical Constraints
      HOUSING                                                                                     e.g., Topography
                                                                                                  e.g., Wetlands, etc.
                                                                                                 Public Services
                        _|   PRICE OF NEW    |.                                                  Service/T ax Policy
                        ‘|     HOUSING       |—                                                  Zoning
                                   A                                                             Parcelization
                                                              ,|   COST OF      |.               Other Public Policy
                                                                     LAND


                                            DEMAND FOR
                                                                                     SUPPLY OF
                                       !       LAND                                  BUILDABLE
                                       1         7                                      LAND
                             DEMAND FOR
                                SPACE
        __                                  ee


Population and                                       Chanaes in
 Employment                                          Real income
    Growth

         Heed                                Housing           «——     Demographics
                                National                                   :        .
         Formation             Economic     Preferences                Socioeconomics

                                Factors


For affordable housing developers, whose revenues are constrained to keep rents or sales prices
affordable at specific income levels, and who are often (though not always) nonprofit
organizations, SDCs are also one cost among many that must be covered either by the project’s
limited revenues or by other sources to cover any funding gaps. As with market-rate
development, affordable housing developers must find ways to balance their costs against their
combined revenues and subsidies, but their options are more limited. When costs are too high,
they may modify the project to reduce costs, seek out additional sources of subsidy (though
these are often competitive and higher per-unit costs can make projects less likely to receive the
funding they need to move forward), or, in limited cases, adjust the targeted affordability levels
to the extent that the funding sources allow.




M45 Nick Meltzer, Bob Parker, Rebecca Lewis & Sadie DiNatale, University of Oregon, Memorandum to HB 4079
Rulemaking Advisory Committee (RAC), October 20, 2016, page 3.

Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report
Other Drivers of Housing Costs and Affordability

As illustrated in Exhibit 30, the prices that consumers experience in the housing market are a
function of both supply and demand factors. There is strong evidence whether and to what
extent housing production keeps up with demand has a pronounced effect on the pace of
housing price and rent increases.'*° The cost to build new housing affects both the minimum
sale price or rent that is required to make development feasible and the amount of housing
entering the market. SDCs, as one among many factors that influence the cost of producing
housing, play a role in broader market factors that determine home prices and rents.

4.2.2 Economic Theory on Cost Incidence of SDCs
Economic theory on impact fees suggests that impact fees “shift the burden of financing new
infrastructure from the community at large to the owners of developable land, developers, or
buyers of new homes.”!4” Landowners may receive lower offers for their land, developers and
their investors may receive lower financial returns, and/or homebuyers and renters would
either pay more for housing or receive lower-quality housing.

How additional costs or taxes are distributed among buyers and sellers depends on each party’s
relative sensitivity to prices. Economic theory suggests the party with fewer alternatives is less
sensitive to change in price and would bear a greater portion of costs (absorb more of the costs)
when additional costs are incurred. For example, the incidence is higher for consumers on
tobacco and gas purchases when taxes increase because they have few substitutes (choices),
while the producers bear less of the increased costs because they can find new customers and
markets. 1

Similarly, the theoretical impacts of SDCs can be understood in terms of alternatives and price
sensitivity. Whether and by how much developers can pass on the cost of SDCs depends on
market contexts.

    =    Because land’s location is fixed, landowners have few alternatives other than waiting for
         new offers from developers or policy changes that would improve the value of the land.
         The cost incidence for landowners depends on the availability of other developable land
         within the same market and how much SDCs vary between comparable pieces of


146 See, for example, Up for Growth, “Housing Underproduction in Oregon,” January 28, 2019; Jared Bernstein et al,
“Alleviating Supply Constraints in the Housing Market,” The White House Council of Economic Advisers, September 1,
2021 (https://www.whitehouse.gov/cea/written-materials/2021/09/01/alleviating-supply-constraints-in-the-housing-
market/); and Josh Lehner, “Construction, Housing Supply, and Affordability,” Oregon Office of Economic Analysis:
Oregon Economic News, Analysis and Outlook, February 15, 2022
(https://orezoneconomicanalysis.com/2022/02/15/construction-housing-supply-and-affordability).
4? Forrest E. Huffman, Arthur Nelson, Marc Smith, and Michael A. Stegman. 1988. “Who Bears the Burden of
Development Impact Fees?” Journal of American Planning Association, 54(1): 49-55.
M48 William N. Evans, Jeane S. Ringle, and Diana Stech. (1999). “Tobacco Taxes and Public Policy to Discourage
Smoking.” Tax Policy and the Economy 13, 1-56.
149 Joseph J. Doyle and Krislert Samphantharak. (2008). “$2.00 Gas! Studying the effects of a gas tax moratorium.”
Journal of Public Economic 92, 869-884.
Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                                68
         developable land. If developers have factored SDCs into their land budgets (the price
         they are willing to pay for land) before they acquire a property, it will constrain the price
         landowners are able to obtain for their land. So, landowners who sell at a lower price
         than similar locations with lower SDCs, are bearing some of the cost. Alternatively, they
         may choose not to sell.
    =    Homebuyers and renters are generally tied to a given regional housing market and
         sometimes to a specific submarket within the region based on employment, ties to
         family members or a school district, or other factors.

         -   In tighter housing markets (or “sellers’ markets’”!’), homebuyers and renters have
             fewer housing options; theory suggests they would bear a greater share of costs
             when there is strong competition for limited housing units. For example, in exclusive
             or highly desirable communities within a metropolitan area, studies show that the
             strength of the competition would allow developers to pass on more of the added
             costs.'°!
         -   Incommunities with many similar options for new housing, the cost incidence is
             expected to be lower for homebuyers because they have many choices within a
             reasonable distance. Studies show this pattern in communities around a dense
             metropolitan area where households would be willing to consider housing in
             multiple nearby cities.'?
    =    Investors, lenders, and developers are unlikely to absorb SDCs by accepting lower
         returns except in very usual circumstances or when SDC costs increase unexpectedly
         during development and cannot be passed on to others. Investors and lenders usually
         have other options to invest in across multiple markets and will avoid areas that
         generate lower risk-adjusted returns. Studies show that developers are less likely to
         absorb added costs in lightly regulated, fast-growing cities where they can quickly
         adjust their business strategies to target different housing markets.° However,
         developers are less likely to pass on the cost in more competitive markets with many
         developers and few development opportunities. When they are not able to achieve the
         expected prices or rents and financial returns fall below the expected rates, the
         developers absorb some of the cost of SDCs (as well as all a share of the other costs).




150 Market where there are very few options for new housing relative to strong preferences and ability to pay for
them.
1 Huffman, Nelson, Smith, and Stegman.
152 Richard K. Green, Stephen Malpezzi, and Stephen K. Mayo. 2005. “Metropolitan-Specific Estimates of the Price
Elasticity of Supply of Housing, and Their Sources.” American Economic Review, 95(2): 334-339.
53 Greem, Malpezzi, and Mayo.
Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                               69
4.2.3 How SDCs Affect Development Decisions
Overview

Developers may balance costs and revenues in a variety of ways to adjust to the cost of SDCs, as
described below. Which of these options are viable and which are most likely depends on
timing, market conditions, and other factors, as summarized below. (As a reminder, this
discussion focuses on how the cost of SDCs affects development decisions, while Section 2.2
discusses ways that the infrastructure funded by SDCs affects development.)

Exhibit 31. Summary of Potential Developer Actions to Cover the Cost of SDCs
Source: ECONorthwest
 Developer Action         Limitations and Consequences
 Seeking lower-cost       If SDCs are known early in the development process so that a developer can
 land to build on or      negotiate for a lower land price, and if there are many options for
 negotiating a lower      developable land, the cost incidence is likely to be greater for the
 price with the           landowners who would accept a lower price. Other landowners may not
 landowner                accept a lower price, choosing to hold off on selling their land, and absorbing
                          some of the influence of higher SDCs through the delay. If land is already
                          acquired or cannot be negotiated further, a lower land price is no longer an
                          option.1%4
 Seeking                  If SDCs are known before the housing design and finishes are determined or
 efficiencies on          finalized, developers may choose to build smaller units, limit some aesthetic
 design and               features or amenities, or use lower-cost building materials or processes
 construction to          (which could increase operating or maintenance costs over time). However,
 lower cost               cost-saving decisions need to be balanced with households’ demand for
 Adjusting unit size,     quality.
 finishes, and/or
 amenities to             Alternatively, developers can build larger units (for single-family homes), use
 command higher           higher quality products, or add amenities to justify higher prices and rents
 sales prices or          that can cover the cost of added features along with the cost of higher SDCs.
 rents                    The cost-saving approach could marginally increase the housing supply for
 Raising the asking       lower-income households, while the quality-enhancing approach could
 prices or rents          marginally increase the housing supply for higher-income households.

                          In both cases that change the value proposition, the cost incidence would
                          fall, at least in part, on housing consumers, through lower value for their
                          money or less availability of lower-cost housing options.

                          Raising the asking price or rent for the finished housing without changing the
                          design or features—which       passes costs more directly to housing consumers—
                          is a viable option only if there is sufficient demand among buyers and renters




54 Understanding cost incidence of SDCs within a land transaction is complicated by various business models and
landownerships that exist. A vertically integrated developer that is also a long-term landowner would bear a greater
portion of SDCs (at least within the context of land transactions) since SDCs would not be incurred until well after
land acquisition. Business models that specialize in taking undeveloped land and making them “ready for
development” by obtaining regulatory approvals (e.g., for new uses and lot divisions) could incur a relatively smaller
cost incidence even in a market with many buildable lands because their “development-ready” lands offer more
valuable and rare opportunities for developers.
Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                               70
 Developer Action        Limitations and Consequences
                         of newly constructed housing, compared to supply that lower-cost options are
                         not readily available.
 Lowering                Because developers and investors will typically not pursue a development
 expectations for        project if expected financial returns do not meet a particular threshold that
 financial returns       justifies the risk of the investment, there are limited situations where SDCs
                         will translate to lower return expectations. This is particularly true for
                         investors and lenders who operate nationally—if one area offers lower risk-
                         adjusted returns than other market areas, they will tend to place funds in
                         areas that offer higher returns relative to their risks. However, SDCs can
                          impact financial returns for market-rate housing development when they are
                         significantly different than initial expectations.

                         Most developers allow for some contingency funds to absorb unexpected
                         cost increases because there is uncertainty in development and costs and
                         revenues are often different from what is projected. However, once
                         development is underway, developers have fewer options for adjustments to
                         bring revenues and costs in line. Thus, when costs (including SDCs)
                         unexpectedly increase during a project, developers must absorb those costs
                         or make adjustments elsewhere if they still can.

                         If unexpected cost increases are attributable to a policy choice by a public
                         agency or local government, it can erode trust in that public agency, impact
                         the feasibility of subsequent phases of development, and in some cases
                         make developers less likely to build in that jurisdiction in the future.
 Delaying or             If developers are not able to balance the costs and revenues, the
 abandoning the          development may not move forward, or may be put on hold. If higher SDCs
 development              result in less or slower housing production, pushing up the overall price of
                          housing due to a supply/demand imbalance, its undesirable impact would be
                         shared among all prospective buyers and renters of housing, new or existing,
                         while existing homeowners would       benefit from the higher housing prices.



Findings From Developer Interviews
As captured in Appendix B, developers described a range of responses to SDC costs:

    =   Developers can rarely move a project forward that doesn’t meet investor and lender
        return expectations. If SDCs contribute to making a project financially infeasible, the
        project will not be able to attract funding to move forward to construction. (See
        additional discussion in Section 4.3.4.)
    =   Developers tend to specialize in certain types and forms of housing (e.g., single-family
        vs. multifamily, mixed-use infill vs. suburban garden apartments), and report that they
        primarily respond to the market when choosing what to build. SDCs are generally not a
        major factor in determining what housing type a given developer will build or what
        market segment they will target (e.g., entry-level vs. luxury homes) except where the
        difference in SDCs is substantial or where the developer is flexible and the market is
        similarly strong for multiple housing options. However, developers may adjust their
        offering at the margins in response to SDCs, such as by building somewhat larger or
        smaller homes. Over time, if certain housing types or products become easier to build

Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                    71
        (e.g., middle housing being authorized in many new areas) and/or more financially
        viable (e.g., increasing demand for walkable infill development), developers may adjust
        their business models to respond; SDCs can contribute to (or inhibit) those trends, but
        they are unlikely to be the sole reason for them.
    =   Land developers noted that SDCs are factored into homebuilders’ pro forma calculations
        when they purchase lots to build on, which means they can affect the price/value of
        finished lots. However, some other developers noted that they tend to build on land
        they have owned for many years, and SDC costs do not factor into the land value or
        price.
    =   Many developers and builders report that SDCs are one of several factors when
        considering where to build. (Others, which can outweigh the importance of SDCs,
        include market conditions, land costs, and permitting speed/staff responsiveness.) When
        SDC costs are out of line with market conditions (i.e., achievable rents or sales prices are
        too low to allow developers to recoup the cost of SDCs), developers may look elsewhere.
        If there are other options in the area with lower SDC costs and comparable market
        conditions and land costs, developers may choose those areas instead. However, when
        there are few good alternatives, developing somewhere else isn’t an option. In this
        situation, developers must find other ways to make development pencil or not pursue
        development at all.
    =   Most developers noted that the market determines what prices/rents are possible, but
        several gave examples where high SDCs caused them to push the upper limits of what
        the market would accept to achieve feasibility.
    =   Developers budget for SDCs and may plan for escalation to some extent and/or carry a
        contingency for increases, but dramatic and unexpected changes to SDCs, or lack of
        clarity about SDC rates up front, can mean money taken from other parts of the project
        or more total costs to cover.

    =   Because rents are fixed based on income for affordable (income-qualified, rent-
        restricted) housing development, developers of regulated affordable housing do not
        have the option to pass it on through rents. Costs are generally factored into funding
        applications to the extent they are known early. Affordable housing developers were
        more likely to rely on cost-savings and value engineering to balance SDC costs after
        funding is secured.




Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                              72
4.3 SDC Costs in Context:                                    SDCs as a Share of
Development Costs
SDCs are one cost among many that developers typically pay as part of building housing (e.g.,
land, construction labor and materials, design fees, financing costs, etc.). While most
development costs (e.g., raw materials, financing, and specialized labor) are determined by a
regional, national, or international markets, SDCs are determined at a local level through a
governmental process, and they do not necessarily track other development costs.

To understand what portion of development costs SDCs comprise, ECONorthwest considered
several different types of information:

    =   National data on costs to develop single-family and multifamily housing, including
        impact fees as one component of costs (Section 4.3.1)
    =   Oregon SDC rate data (from Section 3.1.1) compared to typical market-rate housing
        development costs in the state, accounting for variation by housing type and variation in
        other cost factors across several market areas in the state (Section 4.3.2)
    =   DataonSDCs and total development costs for example affordable housing
        developments in Oregon (Section 4.3.3)

4.3.1 National Data on Impact Fees Relative to Housing Costs
The National Association of Home Builders (NAHB) Construction Costs Surveys offer a
national summary of impact fees and other development costs for single-family housing. NAHB
collected construction cost data from builders since 1998 to understand the trends in various
cost components of single-family housing. The breakdown of costs includes finished lot cost,
total construction cost, financing cost, overhead and general expenses, marketing cost, and sales
commission. Impact fees are itemized as one component of the costs, specifically a component
of total construction cost. Impact fees were separated from other development fees, such as
building permit fees and water and sewer fees and inspection costs.

The NAHB survey data shows that impact fees alone are a very small portion of total costs for
single-family housing at the national level, 0.88 percent of total costs. Water and sewer fees
and inspection costs are about as large. Impact fees as a share of total costs ranged between 0.41
percent and 0.96 percent in past surveys. The average impact fee in 2019 was 1.30 percent of
construction costs (which do not include other development costs) and 0.80 percent of average
sales price (which includes all development costs and developers’ profit margin).

These findings, however, are underestimates of typical SDC share of total costs for three
reasons.




1 Carmel, Ford. Cost of Constructing a Home. NAHB Economics and Housing Policy Group. January 2, 2020.
Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                    73
    1.   The national average amount for impact fees reported in the NAHB survey may not be
         representative of a true national average. In addition to general issues related to
         sampling variability with anonrandom sample, the sample in the NAHB survey would
         have included communities with and without impact fees. Thus, the calculated estimate
         is likely weighted downward by many observations of communities without impact
         fees. In contrast, the average numbers cited elsewhere in this report are averages only of
         places that charge impact fees.
    2.   Itis unclear which impact fees are included in the self-reported SDC amounts. Some
         water and sewer impact fees may have been classified by respondents as water and
         sewer fees and inspection costs (a separate line item in the listed costs), some of which
         may capture water and sewer impact fees.
    3.   The estimate for SDC share of total costs is low because the reported average finished
         area of the home is 2,594 sq. ft., resulting in relatively high total costs. Impact fees would
         likely account for a larger share of the prices and costs for smaller units, which tend to
         have lower construction costs on a per-unit basis.
Another survey by NAHB and the National Multifamily Housing County (NMHC) in 2022
contains information on impact fees for multifamily projects. Fees charged when building
construction is authorized, which could include impact fees and other fees (e.g., building permit
fees), accounted for about 4.4 percent of total costs across all multifamily properties, on
average. This suggests that the impact fee share of total development costs is likely somewhat
less than 4.4 percent, on average, though no data is available to disaggregate these costs further
to identify the share specifically from impact fees, and the survey included another cost
category where impact fees may have been reported, making it more difficult to estimate the
share from impact fees specifically. In addition, like the NAHB single-family data, the data
behind this national average likely includes projects from communities both with and without
impact fees and may be lower as a result.

The two surveys provide reference points on impact fee share of development costs across the
U.S., but their limitations make them less useful to understand SDCs as a share of housing
development costs in Oregon.

4.3.2 SDCs and Development Costs in Oregon
Data Sources

SDC levels, other development costs, and housing prices vary by housing type and region.
There is no centralized data set that allows us to calculate SDCs as a percentage of development
costs across a representative sample of completed market-rate housing development projects
across Oregon. As a result, to understand the variation in SDC share of total development costs,




6 Paul Emrath and Caitlin Sugrue Walter. Regulation: 40.6 Percent of the Cost of Multifamily Development. NAHB
and NMHC. June 8, 2022.
Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                            74
ECONorthwest compared various SDC amounts to typical development costs across a range of
housing types and a range of market conditions in different parts of Oregon.

    =   SDC costs for single-family detached housing referenced in this section are based on the
        2022 data collected by FCS GROUP discussed in Section 1.4.1. The average SDC in the
        data was about $15,050. As described in Section 1.4.1, the estimated typical SDCs for
        multifamily units are roughly 66 percent of the single-family SDC amount. Due to
        insufficient data for townhouses, ECONorthwest estimated typical SDCs for townhouses
        at 90 percent of the single-family SDC amount, based on a review of several examples
        and the consultant team’s professional experience.
    =   Construction costs are based on interviews with housing developers primarily
        operating in the Portland Metro region and reflect differences based on housing type
        and unit sizes. They are adjusted for each market area using national publications that
        provide regional cost indices.!”
    =   Land costs are based on research of recent land transactions in each market area.

SDCs as a Share of Costs for a Typical Single-Family Dwelling in Oregon
ECONorthwest’s analysis suggests that the average SDC rate for single-family housing in
Oregon (roughly $15,050 according to the 2022 data by FCS GROUP) would make up about 3.0
percent of the total development costs of a typical, newly built, medium-sized single-family
dwelling in a moderate-cost region in the state (e.g., the mid-Willamette Valley) as shown in
Exhibit 32. 1° In comparison, land costs would make up an estimated 20.7 percent of total
development costs, construction “hard” costs (labor and materials) about 66.9 percent, and
other costs (e.g., financing, permit fees, design and engineering, survey, etc.) about 9.4 percent.




157 RSMeans City Cost Index and the 2022 National Building Cost Manual, 46'* Edition
8 The example “Medium Single-Family Dwelling” assumes a 2,000 square-foot (sq. ft.) unit, a two-car garage,
density of 6.7 units per acre, and development costs of $479,000 per unit, excluding the SDC amount.
Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                         75
Exhibit 32. Components of Development Costs of Medium Single-Family Dwelling in                   a Moderate-
Cost Area
Source:    ECONorthwest


           100.0%
     op)
     17)
    SO 80.0%
     je)



     ©                                                            m State Average SDCs
     S 60.0%  .     (eo)
                                                                   ($25,080)
    g                                                             = Typical Other Costs
    a
    w@      40.0%                                                 = Typical Hard Costs
    ©
     ©      50.0%                                                 = Typical Land Costs
    e
    oH
             0.0%
                           Medium Single-Family (2,000 sq. ft.)



Variation in SDC Share of Costs by Housing Type

This section focuses on how SDCs costs would vary as a percentage of total development costs
for a variety of housing types, using SDC and cost assumptions that approximate statewide
averages. However, costs and specific SDC rates vary by city, and the findings below do not
represent all communities.

To demonstrate how the SDC share of total development costs can vary across housing types,
ECONorthwest evaluated six different example housing types that are found commonly across
much of the state, as shown in Exhibit 33. These housing types illustrate the directional pattern
of the relationship between SDCs and other development costs. ECONorthwest approximated
typical construction and land costs for these housing types in different parts of the state. Among
the housing types included in this analysis, the cost to build each unit tends to be lower for
densely built housing types that require less land per unit and tend to have smaller unit sizes.'°
More detail on the example housing types and their typical development costs across markets
are available in Appendix F.




9 This pattern does not apply to high-rise multifamily construction in which higher-density multifamily housing can
have higher per-unit costs than lower-density multifamily housing due to higher construction costs associated with
materials used for high-rise buildings.
Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                            76
Exhibit 33. Evaluated Example Housing Types
Source: ECONorthwest
           Example Housing Type | Building Height                                Density         Average Unit Size              Parking
                                      (Floors)                              (Units per Acre)       (Square Feet)
           Low-Rise Apartment             3                                       55.0                  738               1.0 Stalls per Unit
                                                                                                                          (Surface parking)
          Garden Apartment                                     3                 30.0                      811            1.5 Stalls per Unit
                                                                                                                          (Surface parking)
         Townhouse                                             2                  18.2                 1,500              Single-Car Garage
         Small Single-Family                                   2                   9.1                 1,550              Single-Car Garage
         Medium Single-Family                                  2                   6.7                 2,000              Two-Car Garage
         Large Single-Family                                   2                   6.7                 2,650              Two-Car Garage


Exhibit 34 shows the share of total development costs that a given SDC amount could make up
across housing types of different densities. Even with the adjustments to assumed SDC rates to
reflect typical differences between single family, multifamily, and townhouse SDCs, SDCs
make up a greater portion of total development costs for housing types with lower per-unit
construction costs when they are applied per unit. For example, for the Low-Rise Apartment
housing type—the highest density housing type in Exhibit 34—a $9,933 per unit SDC would
make up about 5.5 percent of the total development cost. For the Large Single-Family housing
type—the lowest density example—a $15,050 per unit SDC would make up only about 2.6
percent of the total development cost. Thus, SDCs make up a greater portion of more densely
built housing types included in the analysis.

Other development costs range from 6.8 percent to 20.7 percent for land costs (a higher share for
lower-density housing types), from 66.2 percent to 75.6 percent for hard costs (a higher share for
higher-density housing types), and from 9.3 percent to 12.1 percent for other costs (generally
higher for higher-density housing types).

Exhibit 34. Components of Development Costs in a Moderate-Cost Area, by Housing Type
Source: ECONorthwest

                                              5.5%            4.7%            4.4%             4.1%                3.0%            2.6%
                                   100.0%
Share of Total Development Costs




                                    80.0%


                                    60.0%


                                    40.0%


                                    20.0%


                                     0.0%
                                             Low-Rise         Garden       Townhouse           Small            Medium            Large
                                            Apartment       Apartment                      Single-Family     Single-Family    Single-Family

                                                        MLandCost%      WHardCost%       mOtherCost%        MSDC    %

Notes: Assumes $15,050 per unit SDC for single-family, $13,545 per unit for townhouse, and $9,933 per unit for
apartments.



Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                                                           77
Variation in SDC Amounts in the Same Market

This section addresses how SDCs as a share of total development costs can vary for the same
housing type and in the same market when SDCs vary between communities.

A geographic region can share similar market conditions, construction costs, and typical land
costs, but different developments could be subject to different SDC rates when there are
multiple jurisdictions in the same market or when a given jurisdiction differentiates rates
geographically. For example, a city in a moderate-cost area could have an SDC amount close to
the state average ($15,050 per single-family unit), but another city in the same area could have
an SDC amount that is much lower or higher (e.g., as low as $10,000 or as high as $30,000 per
single-family unit, given the observed variation in the FCS GROUP data’).

Exhibit 35 illustrates the impact of these variations on the SDC share of total development costs.
The variation in SDC rates across cities within the same general market area means the SDC
share of total development costs can also vary widely. In the example shown in Exhibit 35, the
variation can be between 1.7 percent and 5.0 percent for a Large Single-Family housing type and
between 3.7 percent and 10.3 percent for a Low-Rise Apartment housing type.

Exhibit 35. SDC Share of Development Costs in a Moderate-Cost Area, By Housing Type, By SDC
Amount
Source:    ECONorthwest



  2B    12%
  p<"                             10.3%
  CO    10%                                         9.0%
  €2      8%                                                       8.4%                   7.8%
  S       6%               5.5%                                                                              5.9%                   ;
  @            °                             4.7%                                  4.1%                                          5.0%

  °2      4%                                                                2.3%
                                                                            e 0                  2.0% 3.0%          1 7042" 6%

  _
  K-


  Oo      0%                                                                                     ale                of
   c                     Low-Rise           Garden         Townhouse            Small               Medium              Large
  5                     Apartment         Apartment                         Single-Family        Single-Family      Single-Family
  S)
  a                = Low for the Market      ($10,000 for single-family, $9,000 for townhouse, $6,600 for multifamily)
  op)
                   m= Average for the Market ($15,050 for single-family, $13,545 for townhouse, $9,933 for multifamily)
                   m High for the Market     ($30,000 for single-family, $27,000 for townhouse, $19,800 for multifamily)


This illustrative example also shows that the difference in SDC rates has a more pronounced
effect on lower-cost housing types. For example, for the Large Single-Family housing type, SDC
share of development costs could be 5.0 percent with a high SDC and 2.6 percent with a low
SDC. In contrast, for the Low-Rise Apartment housing type, SDCs could be between 3.7 percent
and 10.3 percent of development costs.




160 These SDC amounts are based on the 2022 survey results by FCS GROUP, after further segmenting the data into
different market context areas.
Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                                                   78
Variation in SDC Structure

This section explores the importance of SDC structure. Specifically, it compares SDCs that are
applied per unit (adjusted by housing type) to SDCs that are scaled by unit size, as discussed in
“Characteristics Used to Scale SDCs Based on Development Size” on page 58.
Many SDC rates are applied on a per-unit basis, and their structure partly drives the variations
across housing types. When SDCs are applied per-unit, SDCs make up a smaller portion of total
costs for housing types with larger unit sizes and higher development costs.
In contrast, applying SDCs per square foot of building area can remove the relationship
between density and the share of costs that SDCs make up. (More on the scaling structure is
discussed in Section 1.5.3.) Exhibit 36 shows that if SDCs were applied linearly per square
foot,!*! it would produce a lower variation in SDC share of costs. Across the housing types,
SDCs as a share of development costs could range between 2.3 percent and 3.4 percent with a
linear per-square-foot SDC rate.
The per-square-foot SDC rate in Exhibit 36 is selected for illustrative purposes and is calculated
by dividing the $15,050 per unit fee by 2,000 sq. ft. unit size of the Medium Single-Family
housing type. The rate for Townhouse is 90 percent of the rate for single-family. The rate for
Low-Rise Apartment and Garden Apartment is 66 percent of the rate for single-family.
When SDCs are scaled to unit size, the SDC share of development costs is more consistent
across housing types. Compared to SDCs that are applied per unit, scaled SDCs result in lower
SDC share of development costs for lower-cost housing types with smaller units. This shows
that the variation in SDC share of total development costs can depend on not only the housing
type but also the SDC structure.
Exhibit 36. Comparison of SDC Structures and SDC Share of Development Costs in a Moderate-Cost
Area, by Housing Type
Source: ECONorthwest


  2      14%
  S      12%
   @     10%
   2.
   =
          8%ie)
  =                 ie)



  5                                aie               oO" 3 ay           41%                                         3.4%
  =       4%              2.4%
                                                                                  ie)

                                         a                                     S28        3.0% 3.0%          0.6%
  com
  So      0%              |                                 i                 | io | le |
   c               Low-Rise          Garden          Townhouse             Small             Medium             Large
  5               Apartment        Apartment                           Single-Family      Single-Family     Single-Family
  oO
  a
  (ep)
                    m Per Unit ($15,050 for singlefamily, $13,545 for townhouse, $9,933 for multifamily)
                    m Per Sq. Ft. ($7.53 for single-family, $6.78 for townhouse, $4.97 for multifamily)




161 It is unlikely that all SDCs would be appropriate to scale in this way, but it is presented here to illustrate the
general point about the impact of scaling by unit size compared to fixed per-unit SDC rates.
Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                                       79
Variation by Market Context

This section explores how SDC share of development costs can vary between market areas,
which have different SDC amounts and different development costs.

To illustrate the variation in SDC share of development costs across the state, ECONorthwest
estimated typical development costs in seven parts of the state and compared them to a typical
SDC amount in each region. The seven market context areas generalized market and cost
conditions based on geography, market factors, and development cost factors. They are broad
categories that reflect typical housing prices and construction costs across the cities that fall
within each geographic region. The values used for each geographic market are not intended to
represent a specific city, and average housing prices and costs vary by city. Rather, the values
are representations of likely values observed across many parts of the geographic market. The
market context areas are:

    1.   Willamette Valley: Larger cities along Interstate 5, with some similar housing options
         within a local housing market. Does not include cities in the Portland Metro area.
    2.   Small Cities: Smaller cities along Interstate 5 or remotely located in eastern Oregon.
         Relatively stagnant growth, lower demand, and lower land costs are observed in
         comparison to other market context areas.

    3.   Coast: Coastal cities with many vacation rentals and second homes.
    4.   Metro Low: Suburban cities and neighborhoods in the Portland Metro area with
         moderate demand for new housing and limited production of new housing.
    5.   Metro Mid: Suburban cities and neighborhoods in the Portland Metro area with
         relatively strong demand for new housing and, sometimes, large tracts of planned
         developments.
    6.   Metro High: More exclusive neighborhoods in the Portland Metro area with higher
         prices and relatively few options for new housing.
    7.   Cascades: Cities east of the Willamette Valley that experienced a strong level of housing
         demand and production in recent years.
For this section of the report, the findings from the analysis of the seven market context areas
are summarized into three market types that typify the lower, middle, and upper points of the
analyzed markets. A full analysis for all market areas is available in Appendix F. The three
market types presented in this section are:

    =    Low-Cost Market that typifies small cities in eastern Oregon with relatively stagnant
         growth, lower housing demand, and lower land costs in comparison to other markets.
    =    Moderate-Cost Market that typifies large cities along Interstate 5 and south of the
         Portland Metro area.

    =    High-Cost Market that typifies a subset of suburban cities in the Portland Metro area
         with strong demand for new housing.


Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                              80
Exhibit 37 shows the typical SDC amounts estimated for each market and for different housing
categories.!* The townhouse SDCs are assumed to be 90 percent of the single-family SDCs,
consistent with analysis above. The multifamily SDCs are assumed to be 66 percent of the
single-family SDCs, consistent with analysis above.

Exhibit 37. Selected SDC Rates for Analyzed Markets
Source: ECONorthwest
                                  Low-Cost Market           Moderate-Cost Market            High-Cost Market
 Single-Family SDC                     $8,600                       $15,050                      $48,800
 Townhouse SDC (90%)                   $7,740                       $13,545                      $43,920
 Multifamily SDC (66%)                 $5,676                        $9,933                      $32,208

Exhibit 38 illustrates the findings from analysis. Given the estimated SDCs and other
development costs, the analysis shows the variation in SDC share of total development costs
can also depend on the market.
     =    SDCs could make up between 1.8 percent of single-family development costs to 3.5
          percent of multifamily development costs in Low-Cost Market.
     =    SDCs could make up between 2.6 percent of single-family development costs to 5.5
          percent of multifamily development costs in Moderate-Cost Market.
     =    SDCs could make up between 5.2 percent of single-family development costs to 12.5
          percent of multifamily development costs in High-Cost Market.




162 The typical SDC amounts in Low-Cost and High-Cost Markets are rounded numbers of the average of reported
SDC amounts in the 2022 survey of SDCs by FCS GROUP for cities that typify the market contexts described. The
statewide average is used as the typical SDC amount for the Moderate-Cost Market, consistent with all analysis and
charts in this section.

Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                                81
Exhibit 38. SDC Share of Development Costs Across Housing Types and Markets
Source: ECONorthwest

                                                                       Low-Cost Market
                                        (SDC $8,600 for single-family, $7,740 for townhouse, $5,676 for multifamily)

                               $1,000,000
  Development Costs Per Unit




                                $800,000
                                $600,000                                                                                    SDCs: 1.8%

                                $400,000
                                $200,000
                                       $-    =                           ee                                                     i
                                              Low-Rise     Garden      Townhouse   Townhouse    Small Single-    Medium     Large Single-
                                             Apartment   Apartment       Rental    Ownership        Family    Single-Family     Family
                                                              m Other Development Costs     mSDCs

                                                                     Moderate-Cost Market
                                      (SDC $15,050 for single-family, $13,545 for townhouse, $9,933 for multifamily)

                               $1,000,000
  Development Costs Per Unit




                                $800,000                                                                                     SDCs: 2.6%
                                $600,000
                                $400,000
                                $200,000
                                       $-    =                           i                                        a             i
                                              Low-Rise     Garden      Townhouse   Townhouse    Small Single-    Medium     Large Single-
                                             Apartment   Apartment       Rental    Ownership        Family    Single-Family     Family
                                                              m Other Development Costs     |SDCs

                                                                       High-Cost Market
                                     (SDC $48,800 for single-family, $43,920 for townhouse, $32,208 for multifamily)
                                                                                                                             SDCs: 5.2%
                               $1,000,000
  Development Costs Per Unit




                                $800,000
                                $600,000
                                $400,000
                                $200,000
                                       $-   “                            a           a              -             -             ;
                                              Low-Rise     Garden      Townhouse   Townhouse    Small Single-    Medium     Large Single-
                                             Apartment   Apartment       Rental    Ownership        Family    Single-Family     Family
                                                              m Other Development Costs     mSDCs



4.3.3 SDCs as a Share of Affordable Housing Development Costs
Affordable Housing Costs in Oregon

ECONorthwest reviewed the Affordable Housing Cost Study prepared for OHCS in 2019 to
understand the relative cost of SDCs in comparison to other factors in affordable housing
development. The report analyzed project cost data from over 200 regulated affordable
multifamily housing projects built from 2001-2017, spread throughout urban and rural areas of
Oregon with a range of size, unit mix, and total project cost. The study used a regression model

Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                                                       82
to test the relationship between different variables in affordable housing development and total
project costs over this large sample.

In reviewing the breakdown of different cost factors associated with new affordable multifamily
development, the report’s data combines permit fees with SDCs as a single variable in many
cases. This does not allow for differentiation between other types of charges (like planning and
building permit fees) but does provide context for their relative importance in construction.
Exhibit 39 shows that overall, the permits and SDCs accounted for about 4 percent of
development costs (excluding land) on average. The report also notes that as of 2019, SDCs
average more than $8,000 per affordable housing unit on average across the state.!°

Exhibit 39. Breakdown of Affordable Housing Development Costs in Oregon (Excluding Land)
Source: Blue Sky Consulting Group, OHCS Affordable Housing Cost Study

                                           Affordable Housing New Construction Projects:
                                   Cost Components as % of Total Development Costs (Net of Land)

                  Construction Costs                                                                              68%

                      Developer Fees                    9%

               Demolition/Site Prep                5%

    Architect/Engineering/Surveys                 5%

      Permits/System Dev Charges                  4%

              Offsite Improvements         | 1%

                           Other Costs                  9%

  Average calculated by summing (real) cost measures across all affordable projects and dividing by total project costs excluding land.




Although permit fees and SDCs were estimated to account for a relatively low share of total
costs overall, the study also showed that these costs grew to a greater extent between 2000 and
2017 than any of the other components. Exhibit 40 shows that affordable housing costs
associated with permits and SDCs increased by an average 8.9 percent per year, more than
twice as much as any other cost category.




163 Blue Sky Consulting Group, “Affordable Housing Cost Study: Analysis of the Factors That Influence the Cost of
Building Affordable Housing in Oregon” (Oregon Housing and Community Services, June 27, 2019).
Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                                                     83
Exhibit 40. Growth in Cost Components for Affordable Housing Over Time
Source: Blue Sky Consulting Group, OHCS Affordable Housing Cost Study
                                   Avg Real Cost per Unit*    | Change     | Change          Annual
                                   2000-'03      2014-'17         ($)          (%)         Pct Change
 Construction Costs                   116,347       167,277       50,930             44%          2.6%
 Developer Fees                        14,413        23,927        9,514             66%          3.7%
 Demolition/ Site Prep                  9,871        13,876        4,005             41%          2.5%
 Architect/ Engineering/ Surveys        8,769        10,317        1,548             18%          1.2%
 Permits/ System   Dev Charges          3,659        12,020        8,361        228%              8.9%
 Other Costs                           16,902        20,718        3,816             23%          1.5%
 TOTAL COSTS NET OF LAND              169,962       248,137       78,175             46%          2.7%
 * Costs represent 4-year moving average and are converted to real (2019) dollars using CPI.



The report evaluates a range of possible cost factors influencing the cost of affordable housing
development. A regression analysis suggested that the key factors that drive development costs
for affordable multifamily housing include:!™

    =    Project characteristics including type and size, as larger buildings and units tend to
         drive up costs.
    =    Local factors like community opposition and low availability of labor, which can result
         in expenses for additional public meetings and competitive wages.
    =    Economies of scale, which can reduce the cost per unit, but are effectively limited for
         certain projects based on the cap on the amount of Low Income Housing Tax Credits
         (LIHTC) available.
    =    Building quality and durability can increase costs for high quality developments but
         can lower ongoing maintenance and repair costs.
    =    Land costs, which varied across the state and by local census tract characteristics like
         income level and population density.
This list does not call out local fees explicitly, though they may be encompassed within “local
factors.” While this might suggest that SDCs are not a major driver of affordable housing
development costs in Oregon compared to all the other factors evaluated, the report does call
out the pace of increases as a key finding.

Case Study: SDCs Paid by Affordable Housing Development in Hillsboro

ECONorthwest summarized the amount that affordable housing developments in the City of
Hillsboro have paid in SDCs over the past 10 years in a memorandum to the City of Hillsboro as
part of their consideration of SDC exemptions.'© The City does not offer SDC exemptions today,




164 Blue Sky Consulting Group, “Affordable Housing Cost Study: Analysis of the Factors That Influence the Cost of
Building Affordable Housing in Oregon” (Oregon Housing and Community Services, June 27, 2019).
16° ECONorthwest, “Progress Report of Hillsboro Affordable Housing Tools and Evaluation of Additional Tools,”
prepared for the City of Hillsboro, April 12, 2022.
Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                               84
nor do Washington County or Clean Water Services (CWS), which also charge SDCs for projects
in Hillsboro.

Exhibit 41: SDCs for Recent Affordable Housing Developments in Hillsboro
Source: ECONorthwest summary based on data provided by the City of Hillsboro; OHCS166.167
                   Willow Creek      |   Orchards at     Orchards at         Alma                 Nueva            Total
                      Crossing            Orenco Il       Orenco Ill        Gardens             Esperanza
 Year Funded                2018                2015            2017             2013                 2022
 Units                        120                 58                52               A5                150                  425
 Parks SDC             $644,410            $258,158         $267,748         $175,950            $958,800        $2,305,066
 (City of
 Hillsboro)
 Water SDCs                     $0          $54,430          $55,350          $45,380              $88,280        $243,440
 (City of
 Hillsboro)
 Sewer &               $663,084            $289,282         $283,104         $212,150            $912,750        $2,360,370
 Stormwater
 SDCs (CWS)
 TDT                   $663,960            $304,906         $281,580          $94,365            $944,400        $2,289,211
 (Washington
 County)
 SDC total           $1,971,454            $906,776         $887,782        $527,845        |   $2,904,230      $7,198,087
 Total SDCs             $16,429             $15,634          $17,073          $11,730              $19,362          $16,937
 per Unit
 Total             $31,523,563 | $13,547,334           | $14,860,640 | $9,273,520 | $53,954,156              | $123,159,213
 Development
 Costs
 SDCs asa %                  6.3%               6.7%              6.0%            5.7%                5.4%                 5.8%
 of Total
 Development
 Costs



In total, over $7 million of affordable housing funding has gone towards SDCs over the past 10
years for projects within the City of Hillsboro alone. This represents nearly 6 percent of the
total development costs on average.

Note that these example projects are located outside the South Hillsboro area, which has
additional area-specific SDCs. Apartment projects located in South Hillsboro, including
affordable housing development, are subject to over $17,800 in additional SDCs (as of 2022).168
Using Nueva Esperanza as an example, since it is currently under construction, the total SDC
cost if it had been located in South Hillsboro would have been over $5.5 million, or over $37,000




166 Oregon Housing and Community Services, https://www.oregon.gov/ohcs/development/Documents/applicants-
recipients/4-percent-lihtc-affordable-housing.
                                            pdf
167 Oregon Housing and Community Services, https://www.oregon.gov/ohcs/development/Documents/applicants-
recipients/LIHTC-Statewide-List.pdf
168 City of Hillsboro, “Citywide Fees and Charges,” August 2022, page 44-45. SDC rate assumes property is not part of
the Local Improvement District (LID) for the area, which applies some infrastructure costs in the form of an LID
assessment rather than a supplemental SDC.
Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                                85
per unit—close to 10 percent of the total costs (even after accounting for the increase in total
costs due to higher SDCs).

4.3.4SDCs Compared to Other Development-Related Costs
Overview

As noted previously, SDCs are just one of many costs of housing development. HB 3040
directed the study to include a comparison of SDCs to “other housing cost drivers, including,
but not limited to, the costs of land, labor and materials, utility rates, the costs of infrastructure
and costs associated with regulatory compliance.” In comparing other cost drivers to SDCs, it is
important to consider not only the magnitude of the costs but also the level of public sector
influence over those costs, which varies among the cost drivers listed. It is also important to
note that the total cost impact of a given input to housing development depends both on the
unit costs of that input and the amount needed (e.g., the cost of a given amount of land and the
amount of land required per unit). While it is beyond the scope of this report to conduct a
detailed analysis of how each of these cost factors has changed over time and the extent to
which the public sector can increase or decrease the costs or their impact on housing, this
section provides a high-level summary of how market forces and public-sector policies and
regulations can affect these costs and the available data on their relative contribution to the cost
of housing development or to housing costs more generally.

Land

Land Cost Factors

As illustrated in Exhibit 30 (page 67), the cost of land in the context of housing development is
affected by a combination of the supply of buildable land that is available and suitable for
residential development, and demand for land based on overall growth drivers. As discussed
further in Section 4.2.3, expected costs associated with developing the land (including providing
infrastructure) and projected revenues from development also affect the market price for land.
Local governments have an influence on land supply (e.g., through setting urban growth
boundaries), land use regulations, and infrastructure investments and requirements, all of
which can affect land cost to some extent. Local regulations also impact how much land is
required for a given housing development through minimum lot size, maximum density, and
other development standards.

Land Costs as a Share of Development Costs

Land costs are included in the estimates described in Section 4.3.2. ECONorthwest’s analysis
suggests that land costs likely account for roughly 7 to 21 percent of total development costs for
typical market-rate housing development in Oregon, depending on the housing type.

The 2019 study of affordable housing costs in Oregon referenced earlier found that “land costs
as a percent of total project cost ranged from as little as 2 percent to as much as 15 percent. On



Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                    86
average, land costs accounted for slightly less than 7 percent of total project costs.” This data
was drawn from a sample of affordable housing new construction projects with arms-length
land transactions. It cited an average of $17,000 in land costs per unit and a median of $14,000
per unit (in 2019 dollars).'”° The study noted that land costs were lower in rural areas than in
non-rural areas. !7!

This is generally somewhat higher than SDC’s share of development costs. However, this varies
by region and by community. In a recent opinion piece, Habitat for Humanity of Metro
Portland noted that “when Habitat for Humanity develops housing in [the Portland] region,
permitting fees plus ‘System Development Charges’ paid to local jurisdictions generally exceed
the market-rate cost for land.”1!”

Construction          Labor and Materials

Construction        Labor and Materials Cost Factors

The cost of construction labor is affected by labor supply factors (including availability of other
employment opportunities, availability of training programs to build relevant skills, and
licensing requirements), labor demand factors (including amount of construction taking place at
any one time), regional cost of living, and government regulations including minimum wage
standards and prevailing wage requirements. Government regulations can also affect the
amount of construction labor required through design standards, building codes, and worker
health/safety regulations.

The cost of construction materials (e.g., lumber, concrete, steel, but also plumbing fixtures and
appliances) is largely set through commodities markets based on broader supply and demand
trends, though limited availability of certain materials in smaller markets can increase materials
costs in specific areas. Local regulations have little impact on the unit cost of materials, but they
can affect the amount and type of materials required through design standards and building
codes.

Construction Labor and Materials as a Share of Development Costs

The costs of labor and materials (“hard costs”) are included in the estimates described in Section
4.3.2. ECONorthwest’s analysis suggests that hard costs likely account for two-thirds or more
(66 to 76 percent) of total development costs for typical market-rate housing development in
Oregon, depending on the housing type.




169 Blue Sky Consulting Group, “Affordable Housing Cost Study: Analysis of the Factors That Influence the Cost of
Building Affordable Housing in Oregon” (Oregon Housing and Community Services, June 27, 2019), page 37.
1 Ibid., page 34.
1 Ibid., page 38.
172 Sam Diaz, Kim McCarty and Steve Messinetti, “Opinion: Undoing urban growth boundary isn’t the answer to our
housing crisis,” The Oregonian, December 4, 2022. https://www.oregonlive.com/opinion/2022/12/opinion-undoing-
urban-growth-boundary-isnt-the-answer-to-our-housing-crisis.html.


Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                               87
In the 2019 study of affordable housing costs found that construction costs (including labor and
materials for building construction) accounted for 68 percent of total development costs
(excluding land), as shown in Exhibit 39 on page 83.

This is much higher than the cost of SDCs as a share of housing development costs, but the
degree to which the public sector can impact these costs is less (see Regulatory Costs beginning
on page 89).

Infrastructure Costs

Infrastructure Cost Factors

Infrastructure costs in this context refers to costs for improvements made directly by the
developer that are not eligible for SDC credits. This could include local streets and
water/wastewater lines within a subdivision, sidewalk improvements for an infill development,
or off-site improvements required as a condition of development (e.g., intersection
improvements, crosswalks, etc.). The factors driving the unit costs of infrastructure are
discussed in Section 2.1.2 beginning on page 22. Total direct infrastructure costs borne by a
given development are also driven by the availability and adequacy of infrastructure nearby,
local government standards related to infrastructure design and construction (e.g., required
street cross-sections and engineering specifications for streets and utilities), and local
government policies and regulations that determine what improvements are required for a
development (e.g., traffic impact assessments, frontage improvement requirements).

Infrastructure as a Share of Development Costs

There is no comprehensive data on these costs, and it is difficult to estimate “typical” costs for
residential development across the state, given that direct infrastructure costs are highly
variable between different developments depending on their context. Some infill projects may
have no infrastructure costs, while major greenfield developments or large-scale redevelopment
projects may require extensive new infrastructure construction and/or upgrades to existing
facilities. The extent to which infrastructure costs can be defrayed through SDC credits also
varies, as discussed further in Section 5.3.

As one way of estimating direct infrastructure costs for a simple single-family subdivision that
does not require major street extensions or off-site improvements, ECONorthwest analyzed
typical local street improvements costs using unit cost estimates used by various cities on recent
infrastructure funding and analysis projects.'” The estimated costs ranged from about $23,800
to $41,100 per unit. (The higher estimate is from a smaller city and includes extending utility
lines within the street.) In comparison, the average SDC per unit for single-family development
ranges from $8,600 in a low-cost market to $15,050 in a moderate-cost market to $48,800 in a
high-cost market, as shown in Exhibit 37 on page 79.



13 The analysis assumes 50-foot-wide lots on a double-loaded street meeting the narrowest street design for which
costs were available. Unit costs were derived from analysis related to Beaverton’s South Cooper Mountain, South
Hillsboro, and an analysis of infrastructure needs associated with vacant land in Newport.
Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                               88
The 2019 Affordable Housing Cost Study did not isolate the cost of infrastructure
improvements specifically, but it did estimate costs for “Offsite improvements” and for
“Demolition/Site Prep.” Given that the projects included in the analysis are all multifamily, for
which utility extensions and circulation from a main road are generally provided through the
site on private land rather than in public right-of-way, a portion of the cost of extending
infrastructure through the site may be included in the “Demolition/Site Prep” category. “Offsite
Improvements” is likely to be mostly attributable to infrastructure improvements, though this
category is not further defined in the report. As shown in Exhibit 39 on page 83, offsite
improvements were estimated at roughly 1 percent of total development costs (excluding land),
on average, for affordable housing new construction statewide.'4

ECONorthwest also reviewed several example pro formas provided by OHCS from recent
affordable housing projects. These pro formas showed off-site costs accounting for roughly 1 to
2 percent of total development costs (including land). The pro formas grouped on-site utility
extensions with other on-site and site preparation costs, but one included a note indicating a
specific amount for on-site utilities, which, for that specific project, accounted for roughly an
additional $11,000 per unit, and 4 percent of total development costs. (For that example project,
SDCs were just over $3,000 per unit and roughly 1 percent of total development costs.)

Taken together, the limited available data suggest wide variation in direct infrastructure costs
across different housing projects, which can be more or less than the costs of SDCs.

Regulatory Costs

Regulatory Cost Factors

The cost of regulatory compliance is difficult to measure for several reasons. First, there are
many ways to define the costs of regulations, some broader than others. Second, even if there is
a consensus on the categories of regulatory costs to track, measuring them can be challenging.
Potential categories within regulatory costs include:

    =   Permitting and compliance costs: There are costs directly attributable to demonstrating
        compliance with government regulations (e.g., permit fees, inspections, environmental
        testing or evaluations, the cost to prepare permit applications and special studies, the
        cost to prepare for and attend public meetings if required). Some of these are easy to
        measure (e.g., permit fees), while others may be a hidden component of other costs (e.g.,
        preparing permit applications may be included in an architect's fee).
    =   Delay-imposed costs: Regulations can increase the time it takes to complete a
        development, which can impact financing/interest costs and other development costs
        (e.g., costs associated with having adjacent streets closed or modified, the cost of having
        contractors or equipment on site). Delay due to permitting processes can also mean
        delayed cash flows or unproductive capital, although the time value of money can differ




74 Blue Sky Consulting Group, “Affordable Housing Cost Study: Analysis of the Factors That Influence the Cost of
Building Affordable Housing in Oregon” (Oregon Housing and Community Services, June 27, 2019).
Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                              89
        from person to person, developer to developer, and city to city. These costs are rarely
        itemized specifically, though they can be estimated.
    =   Standards-related costs: Regulations can also impact the cost of other inputs to
        development, including land, construction labor and materials, infrastructure, and
        engineering/design fees by setting minimum standards that a development must meet,
        as noted in the prior subsections. The extent to which regulations do impact the cost of
        other inputs depends on how different the requirements are from what developers
        would choose to do (or what lenders, investors, or end users would demand that they
        do) absent the regulations, which varies depending on the context and can be difficult to
        ascertain.
Like SDCs, in a full evaluation, the costs of these requirements should be weighed against the
benefits to public safety, health, environmental quality, and community well-being, but such an
evaluation of trade-offs is beyond the scope of this study.

Regulatory Costs as a Share of Development Costs

National Estimates of Regulatory Impacts on Multifamily Development Costs
A recent and oft-cited study of regulatory costs by NAHB and NMHC estimated that as much
as 40.6 percent of multifamily development costs are due to the cost of regulatory compliance,
based on a survey of 49 developers across the country. The survey asked respondents about
how much various factors contribute to total development costs for a typical project.!” A
breakdown of the specific cost components included in this total is shown in Exhibit 42.




1 Paul Emrath and Caitlin Sugrue Walter. Regulation: 40.6 Percent of the Cost of Multifamily Development. NAHB
and NMHC. June 8, 2022. https://www.nmhc.org/globalassets/research—-insight/research-reports/cost-of-
regulations/2022-nahb-nmhc-cost-of-regulations-report.pdf
Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                            90
Exhibit 42: Average Regulatory Costs as a Share of Total Multifamily Development Costs Nationally
Source: NAHB and NMHC176

                                                                                                               Regulation as a Percent of
                                                                                                                Total Development Cost
                                                                                  Share With the                            7
                                                                                  Regulatory Cost
                                                                                                            Average When         |   Average Across
                                                                                                              Present*               All Properties

 Cost of applying for zoning approval                                                               93.9%                3.4%                     3.2%

 Costs when site work begins (fees, required studies, etc.)                                     98.0%                    8.7%                     8.5%

 Dev. requirements (layout, mats, etc.) beyond the ordinary                                         91.8%                5.8%                     5.4%

 Cost of land dedicated to the goverment or left unbuilt                                            51.0%                47%                      2.4%

 Fees charged when building construction is authorized                                          959%                     4.6%                     4.4%

 Costs of affordability mandates (e.g., inclusionary zoning)                                        38.8%                69%                      2.7%

 Changes to building codes over the past 10 years                                              100.0%                    11.1%                    11.1%

 Complying with OSHA/other labor regulations                                                        93.9%                2.7%                     2.6%

 Pure cost of delay Cif regulation imposed no other cost)                                           95.9%                0.5%                     0.5%

 TOTAL COST OF REGULATION                                                                     100.0%                 40.6%                      40.6%

 * The base is different for every percentage in this column, so the line items are not additive.


      =    Permitting and compliance costs such as the cost of applying for zoning approval
           (including costs of traffic impact studies or other required studies), fees and required
           studies when site work begins (which can include hook-up or impact fees in some
           cases), and fees charged when building construction is authorized (though this can also
           include impact fees) total an estimated 16.1 percent of total development costs on
           average.’” (“Soft costs,” which include these costs as well as design, financing, legal, and
           insurance costs, typically account for 20 to 35 percent of total development costs.)
      =    Delay is estimated to account for 0.5 percent of total development costs based on typical
           construction timelines and loan terms combined with survey results regarding the
           typical timing associated with various stages of development.”
      =    Standards-related costs, including development requirements beyond the ordinary, the
           cost of land dedications, changes to building codes, and complying with labor
           regulations were estimated to total 21.5 percent of development costs, with building
           code changes representing the largest share of these costs.!”
The study also estimated cost impacts associated with inclusionary zoning/affordable housing
requirements, but it is unclear whether this reflects fee-in-lieu costs or other costs associated
with these programs.




1% Paul Emrath and Caitlin Sugrue Walter. Regulation: 40.6 Percent of the Cost of Multifamily Development. NAHB
and NMHC.       June 8, 2022. https://www.nmhc.org/globalassets/research--insight/research-reports/cost-of-
regulations/2022-nahb-nmhc-cost-of-regulations-report.pdf.
17 Ibid.
1% Ibid.
1 Ibid.
Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                                                                 91
Prevailing Wage
Governments can require its contractors and grant awardees to satisfy certain labor standards
and wage requirements. U.S. Department of Labor determines federal prevailing wage rates
and Oregon Bureau of Labor and Industries determines Oregon’s prevailing wage rates.

Estimates of the cost impact of prevailing wage requirements have largely focused on
affordable housing development. Some affordable housing developments are subject to
prevailing wage requirements while others are not, as described in the excerpt below.
According to a 2015 study by the Meyer Memorial Trust:

           Work Group experts generally agreed that meeting BOLI requirements added about
           10 percent to the hard costs of a project. However, in the case of a mixed-use project
           including ground floor commercial uses, BOLI typically holds the entire project to the
           significantly higher commercial BOLI wages (in effect, treating a three-story stick-
           built apartment building the same as a high-rise office building made of steel and
           concrete). Commercial BOLI rates can add as much as 20 percent to construction
           costs over a non-prevailing wage project.'®°

An academic study from 2005 found that prevailing wage requirements increase the costs of
constructing affordable housing by 9 to 37 percent.'®! Even if these cost increases are only on the
construction “hard costs,” they may exceed the cost impacts associated with SDCs in cases
where prevailing wage requirements apply.

Study of Cost Savings From Regulatory Changes
In an analysis for the City of Seattle, ECONorthwest developed a model that showed sensitivity
of housing affordability to various regulatory changes, including reducing permitting time,
removing a retail frontage requirement. The study estimated that reducing permitting time
from 24 to 12 months for multifamily development and from 18 to 9 months for townhouse
development could reduce the rents and sales prices required to make development feasible by
roughly 4 to 6 percent. It also showed potential for roughly a 1 percent reduction in rents and
sales prices from removing a ground-floor retail requirement. The study also considered
changes to impact fees and suggested that substantial reductions to permitting time could have
a greater impact than a $4,700 to $6,000 difference in impact fees.1®?

Comparison to SDCs
While the available data is limited and the cost impacts are harder to accurately measure, these
studies suggest that other permitting and compliance costs (e.g., fees, inspections, cost to
prepare applications, etc.) and certain development or labor regulations (e.g., prevailing wage
requirements) can impact total development costs by a similar order of magnitude as SDC costs,




180 Meyer Memorial Trust, The Cost of Affordable Housing Development in Oregon, Executive Summary, October 2015,
page 20.
181 Sarah Dunn, John M. Quigley, and Larry A. Rosenthal. (2005) "The Effects of Prevailing Wage Requirements on the
Cost of Low-Income Housing." ILR Review, 59(1), 141-157.
182 Seattle Affordable Middle-Income Housing Advisory Council: Policy Recommendations to Mayor Jenny A. Durkan, January
2020. Analysis by ECONorthwest.
Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                                 92
and that permitting speed can affect total costs, though the magnitude may be less or more than
the impact of SDCs.

Construction         Excise Tax

Jurisdictions in Oregon are allowed to assess a Construction Excise Tax (CET) on new
residential and non-residential developments as a means of funding affordable housing
strategies. Though a variety of CETs exist, a CET can be imposed at no greater than 1 percent of
a building's permit value for residential development. Permit value is typically an
approximation of construction hard costs and much less than the total development costs.
Therefore, CETs make up less than 1 percent of total development costs for residential
developments in jurisdictions that elect to adopt a CET, which will generally be less than the
impact of SDCs.

Utility Rates

Unlike the other cost factors identified in the legislative directive for this study, utility rates do
not affect the cost of housing development. Instead, they affect households’ on-going monthly
costs. Thus, while both SDCs and utility rates are related to funding for infrastructure and to
broader affordability concerns, their impacts are observed in different ways. Utility costs are
generally paid by residents directly (except in some cases with apartments that have shared
meters, where water costs are included in rent). SDCs are generally not paid by residents
directly and have more nuanced impacts on housing production and affordability including
how much new housing gets built, where it gets built, and what sizes/types of housing the
market can deliver.

Typical utility costs and the share that is attributable to capital improvement costs are discussed
in Section 2.1.4, and affordability impacts of utility cost increases are discussed in Section 2.2.4.

A 2021 survey of local jurisdictions by LOC offers a summary of the size of some utility rates
and how they vary across the state. Survey responses from 105 jurisdictions show that monthly
water and wastewater utility bills!** can add up to between $65.89 and $129.39, with the average
at $99.32. Utility rates vary less by region than SDCs do, and they do not follow the same
geographic patterns (see Section 3.1.1). The estimated utility bills in the survey data are higher
for coastal regions, for example, than they are for the Portland metropolitan area. In contrast,
the highest SDCs are generally observed in the Portland metropolitan area. '*

Over 20 years, water and wastewater utility bills can add up to about $17,000 to $33,000 in
today’s dollars, depending on the region.'® These values are somewhat higher than the



183 For a hypothetical customer who used 5,000 gallons (6.684 CCFs) of water and has a 94” meter size.
184 Aljets Consulting. 2021 Water Rates Survey Report. December 2021. League of Oregon Cities.
18 ECONorthwest calculated the present value using an assumed 5 percent annual inflation rate for utility expenses
(based on information from Section 2.1.4) and a 4 percent discount rate to account for time value of money. For
reference, the yield on U.S. 10 Year Treasury was about 3.8 percent and the yield on U.S. 20 Year Treasury was about
4.1 percent in the fall of 2022.
Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                              93
estimated median SDC amount (just over $15,000), though the 20-year value of water and
wastewater bills is not a perfect comparison to SDCs, and utility rates are largely covering the
cost of operations, maintenance, and system modernization, as discussed in Section 2.1.4, which
SDCs generally cannot pay for.




Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                              94
4.4 Impact of SDCs on Financial Feasibility of
Market-Rate Residential Development
4.4.1 Testing Impacts Across the State
Approach
To understand the financial impact SDCs can have on development feasibility and the
relationship between SDCs and development outcomes, ECONorthwest constructed pro forma
models that are sensitive to change in input costs. A more detailed methodology is included in
Appendix F.

The key measure of development financial feasibility used to demonstrate the marginal impact
of SDCs is expected returns of for-profit developers of market-rate housing. (Impacts of SDCs
on affordable housing developers are addressed in Section 5.2.2.) If a change in SDCs results in
a decrease in the expected returns, developments are less likely to occur.

Although there are many methods to calculate and measure investor returns, the metric selected
for this study is internal rate of return (IRR). IRR is a commonly used financial metric in the real
estate industry to estimate the profitability of real estate investments. Although expected IRR
can vary based on the type of development, location, market contexts, and investor-specific
considerations, it is typically between 15 percent and 25 percent. Therefore, a one percentage
point change in IRR may be within a margin of error and not impact development decisions,
but a change of five percentage points is likely to have an impact.

As noted above, the impact of SDCs on housing can vary across geographic markets and
housing types in Oregon. To isolate the potential impact of SDCs on housing development
feasibility, ECONorthwest used a pro forma analysis that reflects market and cost differences
across the state, using seven market context areas discussed in Section 4.3.2, beginning on page
80. The analysis measured the marginal impact of higher vs. lower SDC amounts on financial
feasibility, based on the sensitivity of developers’ expected returns to changes in SDCs. (More
detail on the analysis is discussed in Appendix F.)

Findings

Although specific site or economic conditions will influence development outcomes for any
given development, the analysis suggests some generalizable takeaways.

    =   The marginal impact of SDCs on development feasibility is greater for lower-cost and
        higher-density housing developments. Because SDCs often make up a greater portion of
        total development costs in a housing development that is less costly to build on a per-
        unit basis, a fixed change in SDCs has a greater marginal impact on lower-cost (and
        higher-density) housing types. This relationship is generally true across markets. For
        example:

Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                              95
         -   A $10,000 change in fee would have a greater marginal impact on the financial
             feasibility of Small Single-Family housing than on Large Single-Family housing (see
             Exhibit 43).
         -   A $6,600 change in fee would have a greater marginal impact on the financial
             feasibility of Low-Rise Apartment housing than on Garden Apartment housing (see
             Exhibit 43).
    =   Similarly, the marginal impact of SDCs is greater in markets where it is less costly to
        build. Because a fixed SDC amount makes up a greater portion of total development
        costs in markets with lower land costs, a change in SDCs has a greater marginal impact
        on the types of housing markets can deliver in markets with lower costs for land and
        construction.
         -   For example, a $10,000 change in fee for a single-family unit would have a greater
             marginal impact on financial feasibility in a small city outside a metropolitan area
             than inside a metropolitan area where land and housing prices are relatively
             expensive (see Exhibit 44).
A key limitation of the results shown in Exhibit 43 and Exhibit 44 is the simplifying assumption
that SDCs could vary by the same amount across all market context areas. While the
assumption is useful for demonstrating the directional relationship between SDCs and
development feasibility, it does not account for the fact that SDCs vary widely across markets.
For simplicity, the analysis uses a constant amount of change in SDCs across all market areas.




Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                               96
Exhibit 43. Marginal Impact of Change in SDCs on Development Feasibility by Housing Type and Market Context Area
Source: ECONorthwest
        _ 4.0%
  Percentage Point Change in Returns (IRR




                                            3.5%

                                            3.0%

                                            2.5%

                                            2.0%

                                            1.5%

                                            1.0%

                                            0.5%

                                            0.0%
                                                    Willamette Valley    Small Cities           Coast               Metro Low           Metro Mid             Metro High            Cascades

                                                   mLow-Rise Apartment     m Garden Apartment           = Small Single-Family     m Medium Single-Family          m Large Single-Family

Note: A $10,000 change is modeled for single-family housing types.                              A $6,600 change is modeled for apartment housing types. Section 1.4.1 explains multifamily SDCs are
about 66 percent of single-family SDCs, on average.




Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                                                                                                                 97
Exhibit 44. Marginal Impact of $10,000 Change in SDCs on Single-Family Development Feasibility by Unit Size and Market Context Area
Source: ECONorthwest
        _ 3.5%
  Percentage Point Change in Returns (IRR




                                            3.0%

                                            2.5%

                                            2.0%

                                            1.5%


                                            1.0%




                                            :
                                            0.0%
                                                      Small Single-Family
                                                                            |                                   TTR
                                                                                                   Medium Single-Family
                                                                                                                                                   ty
                                                                                                                                            Large Single-Family

                                                   m Willamette   Valley   mSmallCities   mCoast    mMetroLow      mMetroMid   mMetroHigh    mCascades




Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report
4.4.2 Findings From Developer Interviews
The patterns noted above are generally consistent with findings from developer interviews.

    =   Insome cases, SDCs are enough to make a project infeasible, especially for very cost
        sensitive housing types. Entry-level homes are cost-sensitive, including middle housing.
        Attached product can sometimes cost more to build than a single-family home and often
        sells for less relative to a detached house. Multifamily can also be affected by high SDCs
        if they are disproportionate to other costs.
    =   When SDCs are low compared to other costs, they have little impact on development
        feasibility.
SDCs are not typically an important factor for high end housing types, such as custom homes,
because they represent a small portion of the cost, and high-income/wealthy buyers tend not to
be cost-sensitive.




Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                            99
4.5 Relationship Between SDCs and Home
Prices
This section summarizes various sources of data and research regarding the relationship
between SDCs and home prices, including peer reviewed literature, Oregon-specific case
studies, and data on home prices compared to SDCs in communities across the state.

4.5.1 Evidence From Empirical Literature
Overview and Limitations

The effect of impact fees on various housing market outcomes has been analyzed empirically in
numerous studies within the context of specific cities and states in the U.S. However, findings
from the empirical research should be interpreted carefully for a few reasons:

    =   Although the empirical research utilized commonly used statistical models to
        understand the relationship between impact fees and cost incidence, they failed to
        establish a definitive causal relationship. Observed changes in prices or housing
        production in places with impact fees could be due to the impact fees increasing housing
        costs or other reasons, including reduced production of new entry-level homes, lower
        overall housing production, a higher level of amenities and services in places with
        higher SDCs, a greater willingness to impose high impact fees in places with strong
        housing markets, or other factors. Thus, the results of the studies mentioned are
        interpreted as correlations rather than definitively establishing causal relationships.
    =   None of the studies were conducted in Oregon, which has a unique growth
        management planning system that affects housing markets. While some places included
        in the research could resemble a city in Oregon, there is no generalizable takeaway from
        the empirical studies that would be applicable across Oregon.
    =   There are many variations in the outcome variables of the empirical research. While all
        studies on housing prices looked at the prices for newly constructed, single-family units,
        some also included the data for existing units or multifamily units. Other studies looked
        instead at land prices, which could be differentiated as either undeveloped (vacant) land
        or developed land. The applicability of each research’s findings depends on the data that
        is used.

Summary of Studies, Approach, and Findings

Exhibit 45 is a summary of key information presented in academic research that studied the
relationship between impact fees and the housing market. A more detailed summary is
available in Appendix G. The 15 summarized studies provide a snapshot of the existing range
of research that exists, but they are not a comprehensive list of impact fee studies. The key
takeaways are:



Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                             100
     =     Most studies measured the relationship between impact fees and housing prices (for
           new homes only or for all homes in an area). These studies consistently found higher
           home prices in areas with impact fees. The differential in housing prices ranged from 25
           percent to 300 percent of the value of the impact fee.
     = A     few studies analyzed the relationship between impact fees and land prices. While the
           economic theory discussed in Section 4.2.2 suggests that land prices should be lower in
           areas with impact fees, studies were mixed on this point.

     =    A few studies analyzed the relationship between impact fees and housing production.
           Most of these observed a negative relationship —higher impact fees were associated with
           less housing production —although one found the opposite.
     =     More recent studies that attempted to distinguish the effects of different types of impact
           fees found that not all impact fees have the same effect.
     =     There are no studies that measured the potential effect of removing impact fees,
           providing no direct evidence to suggest taking away existing impact fees could reduce
           housing prices.
Exhibit 45. Summary of Empirical Studies on Impact Fees
Source:   ECONorthwest
 Author(s)                                                   Observed          Observed            Observed
 (Publication Year)                                          Relationship to | Relationship to     Relationship
                                                             Housing Prices | Housing Production | to Land Values
 Delaney and Smith (1989)                                           (+)                       N/A                    N/A

 Singell and Lillydahl (1990)                                       (+)                       N/A                    N/A

 Skaburskis and Qadeer (1992)                                        N/A                      N/A                    (+)

 Dresch and Sheffrin (1997)                                         (+)                       N/A                    N/A

 Skidmore and Peddle (1998)                                          N/A                      (-)                    N/A

 Baden and Coursey (1999)                                           (+)                       N/A                    N/A

 Mayer and Somerville (2000)                                         N/A                      (-)                    N/A

 Mathur, Waddell, and Blanco (2004)                                 (+)                       N/A                    N/A

 lhlanfeldt and Shaughnessy (2004)                                  (+)                       N/A                    (-)

 Evans-Cowley,      Forget, and Rutherford (2005)                    N/A                      N/A                    (+)

 Burge and lIhlanfeldt (2006)                                        N/A                      (+)                    N/A

 Mathur (2013)                                                      (+)                       N/A                    N/A

 Burge (2014)                                                        N/A                      N/A                    (-)
 Bae, Kwon, Coutts, Park, and Feiock (2015)                          N/A                      N/A
                                                                                                                     (+)
Key: (+) = Positive correlation   between   impact fees and the variable in question;   (-) = Negative correlation between
impact fees and the variable in question.    N/A = variable not addressed   in study in question.




Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                                        101
While none of the studies can clearly establish causality, some authors assert that the observed
relationship between impact fees and housing prices primarily reflects the value of the
infrastructure funded by the impact fees: that the higher prices of new housing reflect the
desirability of the newly built infrastructure, rather than the cost of it. They posit that the added
cost of impact fees can be counterbalanced by the positive effect they have on infrastructure
services.'% 187 The added benefits are reflected in higher housing values through an economic
concept called “capitalization.”'** '* Thus, according to the view of capitalization theory, the
higher housing prices of dwellings with SDCs reflect a properly functioning economic market in
which the long-term benefits of impact fees are measured in today’s market prices.

Other studies focus more on costs being passed on to housing consumers, either directly or
indirectly.

4.5.2 Oregon Case Studies and Data
To evaluate whether the relationship observed consistently in the literature — showing higher
housing prices in areas with impact fees —holds in Oregon, ECONorthwest analyzed available
statewide data (at a simplified level) and more detailed data from two case studies. The first
case study compared trends in housing prices to trends in SDC fees in one community. The
second case study compared housing prices in similar areas but with different SDC rates. These
analyses are current and Oregon-specific, but they do not control for all variables that could
affect housing prices and they cannot establish causation.

SDC Rates vs. Average Housing Values by Community

ECONorthwest compared single-family SDC rates from the 2022 SDC rate data collected by FCS
GROUP to June 2022 single-family housing values from Zillow. The simplified approach did
not include other variables that could relate to SDC rates and/or housing values, such as
population, population growth rate, infrastructure quality, access to jobs or amenities, buildable
land supply, political attitudes towards growth, and other development costs. Moreover, the
housing value data includes all single-family units, so the data do not specifically identify a
relationship between SDCs and prices of new housing.

Exhibit 46 shows that higher SDCs tend to be associated with higher average housing values.
The relationship has a moderate correlation (R-squared of 0.3309), without controlling for other
variables. The observed correlation does not indicate causality. The relationship could reflect


186 Arthur C. Nelson and Mitch Moody. 2003. Paying for Prosperity: Impact Fees and Job Growth. Brookings
Institution Center on Urban and Metropolitan Policy.
187 Vicki Been. 2004. “Impact Fees and Housing Affordability.” Cityscape: A Journal of Policy Development and Research,
8(1): 139.
188 John Yinger. 1998. “The Incidence of Development Fees and Special Assessments.” National Tax Journal, 51(1): 23-
Al.
189 Jennifer 5S. Evans-Cowley and Larry L. Lawhon. 2003. “The Effects of Impact Fees on the Price of Housing and
Land: A Literature Review.” Journal of Planning Literature, 17: 351-359.


Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                                102
the impact of SDCs on housing development costs and development feasibility. It could also
reflect (a) a greater willingness to impose higher SDCs in areas with higher housing prices and
stronger housing markets, (b) higher infrastructure quality driving both higher SDCs and
higher housing values, or (c) other factors at play that happen to be related to both SDCs and
housing prices (e.g., higher land and construction costs). The relationship appears to be stronger
in areas with low and moderate housing values, and weaker in areas with high home values —
there is amuch greater range of SDC rates in communities with average housing values above
roughly $600,000 compared to the range for communities with lower housing values.

Exhibit 46. SDCs and Estimated Housing Values in Selected Oregon Cities
Source: ECONorthwest using data from FCS GROUP and Zillow Home Value Index (ZHVI) of Single-Family Units


                                   $50,000
                                                  Statistically, the relationship                                                           e        @
                                                  between SDCs and home
   2022 Single-Family SDC Rate




                                  $40,000     — values accounts for roughly                                                        >                                   R* = 0.3309
                                                  a third of the variation in the
                                                 data, without controlling for                                                                  e
                                   $30,000    ~— any other factors.                                       e ee                             e                 ee
                                                                                                          oO            O°
                                                                                                                             ie)
                                                                                                oO             ee


                                  $20,000                                                                                    ;
                                                                                    e                oe         A                      e
                                                                            e°     Oo            we                 °
                                                                                            ee                 e                                bd       °
                                   $10,000               °              .        ge             me ffm                                                            me
                                                                            wo @            e                                          ao
                                                                   age             B
                                                                   @    gee             °
                                        $0                     °                    °
                                             $0              $200,000              $400,000                         $600,000                             $800,000         $1,000,000
                                                  June 2022 Average Zillow Home Value Index of a Single-Famiy Unit



The data comparing SDC rates and housing values in Oregon also suggests implications for
how SDCs may affect housing development. ECONorthwest’s analyses in Section 4.3.4 and
developer input suggest that SDCs may have different impacts for communities that fall on
different parts of this chart. As illustrated in Exhibit 47:

                                 Communities with below-average home values and average to above-average SDC rates
                                 could see greater impacts of SDCs on development potential. There appear to be only a
                                 few communities among the sample set where this could be a concern.
                                 Communities with above-average home values and above-average SDCs may not be
                                 inhibiting all housing development, but may be exacerbating challenges for lower-cost
                                 housing, particularly in places where SDCs are the highest. These areas could also
                                 potentially see a greater share of SDC costs passed through to homebuyers given the
                                 strength of the market demand.




Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                                                                                                  103
         =   In communities with above-average home values and below-average SDCs, SDCs are
             probably not a major factor driving home values, and lower SDCs may not translate to
             lower home prices.
         =   Incommunities with below-average home values and below-average SDCs, SDCs may
             not be enough to substantially impact development feasibility, and market conditions
             may make development challenging with or without SDCs.
Exhibit 47. SDCs and Estimated Housing Value in Oregon Cities, By SDC Level
Source: ECONorthwest using data from FCS GROUP and Zillow Home Value Index (ZHVI) of Single-Family Units
             $50,000
                                                                                                                  e        @
                                                                                                                               Higher SDCs encourage
                                                                                                                               larger and more expensive
   £&©       $40,000                                                                                      ‘                    new housing
   =                         SDCs are more likely to
   a                         constrain development                                                                    °
   ”                                                                                     °                        e                    ®
   >         $30,000                                                             e                    >                            °
   _
                                                                                 e               e
   €
   £                                                                          oo.
    i                                                                                    _
   mm        $20,000
   a                                                      e                   ° o) “             “6           °
   a                         Market is              °°                               e           %
   a                               .                      °               °       ¢e
   Oo                        more likely                              oe                     8                        e        .           ‘
   “$10,000                  to constrain       ¢        Py ©             %       %°                                                            .
                             development                              a                                   ®e              Factors other than
                                                .°        <                                                               SDCs have a greater impact
                   $0                      -    0%            .   *                                                   on high home values
                        $0           $200,000             $400,000                               $600,000                      $800,000        $1,000,000
                             June 2022 Average Zillow Home Value Index of a Single-Famiy Unit

                                   © SDCs less than $5,000                                            @ SDCs $5,000 to $15,000
                                   @ SDCs $15,000 to $25,000                                          @ SDCs more than $25,000



Case Study: Trends in SDCs and Sales Prices in Bend, Oregon
To observe the potential relationship between SDCs and sales prices in Bend, Oregon,
ECONorthwest compiled data from various sources. Data from 2005 to 2019 comes from
previous work by Oregon’s Office of Economic Analysis to compare Bend’s Parks SDC rate and
total SDCs to typical prices of new construction units. ECONorthwest updated the data for
more recent years.

As shown in Exhibit 48, the total SDC in FY 2022 is about 220 percent higher than the level in FY
2005. During the same time, housing prices increased by about 190 percent.

However, and more importantly, the rate of change is different. The total SDC increased every
year, but it increased faster before FY 2010 and after FY 2018. In contrast, the median housing


Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                                                                       104
price in Bend is more cyclical and experiences greater swings. It increased at an even greater
pace than SDCs in FY 2006 and FY 2007, dipped for almost six years, recovered for seven years,
and then experienced a very large increase since FY 2020. The comparison shows housing prices
are more volatile and likely to be influenced by many other factors beyond SDCs.

Exhibit 48. Percent Change in Single-Family SDCs and Median Housing Price in Bend, Oregon, Since
Fiscal Year 2005
Source: ECONorthwest using data from Oregon Office of Economic Analysis, Central Oregon Association of Realtors, City of
Bend

  250%


  200%


  150%

  100%


    50%


     0%


   -50%




                   ——=Cumulative % Change in Total SDCs for Single-Family
                   -=——=Cumulative % Change        in Median Sales Price of New Construction




Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                                 105
Exhibit 49. Percent Change in Bend Single-Family SDCs, Bend Median Housing Price, ENR
Construction Cost Index, and Case-Shiller Index Since Fiscal Year 2005
Source: ECONorthwest using data from Oregon Office of Economic Analysis, Central Oregon Association of Realtors, City of
Bend, Engineering New-Record, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

 250%

 200%

 150%

 100%

   50%




  -50%




                  =——=Cumulative % Change          in Total SDCs for Single-Family

                  -=Cumulative        % Change     in Median Sales Price of New Construction

                  ——Cumulative        % Change     in ENR Seattle Construction Cost Index
                  Cumulative          % Change     in Case Shiller Index


Bend’s SDCs and median sales prices are more likely to be driven by regional or national
factors. Exhibit 49 shows Engineering News-Record (ENR) Construction Cost Index for
Seattle!” has a closer trend to Bend’s SDCs than the median sales price does; the SDCs and the
ENR Seattle Construction Cost Index move steadily upward without falling. It also shows that
the Case Shiller Index, a national benchmark for single-family housing prices, has a closer trend
to the median sales price than the SDCs do; the median sales price and the Case Shiller Index
fall from FY 2008 to FY 2012 before starting to recover.

The correlation coefficient between SDCs and median sales prices in Bend is 0.82. In contrast,
the correlation coefficient between SDCs and the ENR Seattle Construction Cost Index (CCI) is
0.98 (likely due to use of ENR CCI data for 20-cities to index SDC rates), and the correlation
coefficient between Bend new construction home prices and the Case Shiller Index is 0.96. This
suggests that within a given jurisdiction, home price trends are affected much more by broad
housing market trends than by changes in SDC rates.




1% Seattle is the closest city to Oregon in the markets tracked by ENR.


Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                                 106
Case Study: SDCs vs. Home Prices in Planned Developments in Oregon
ECONorthwest identified several recent developments in Washington County that provide an
opportunity to examine an example of the relationship between SDCs and housing prices at a
more granular level. Each development faced different SDC costs, but all compete within the
same subregional housing market. This analysis considered three areas that were recently
brought into the Portland Metro urban growth boundary (UGB): South Cooper Mountain in the
City of Beaverton, South Hillsboro in the City of Hillsboro, and River Terrace in the City of
Tigard. Within these areas, ECONorthwest collected data on sales transactions for newly built
homes and SDC rates to analyze whether there is a relationship between the SDC rates and
home prices. ECONorthwest also considered development in adjacent subdivisions that were
not part of these growth areas but were in one of the three jurisdictions and the same
subregional housing market. These “comparison” developments were built in a similar span of
time to the development in the growth areas, which allows for a statistical analysis of the impact
of SDC on development outcomes within a similar set of market conditions. Exhibit 50 shows
the locations of the three study areas and the analyzed properties. Appendix H includes more
detail on the three areas.

Exhibit 50. Washington County Urban Growth Areas and Housing Observations
Source: ECONorthwest using data from Metro RLIS, Redfin.

¢ Om),A                                                                                                            -
                                                                                                                   +   y
                                                                                                                                                       Be) te                        (>     igs       =
I         A                                                                                            |                                                          |                       f;               ~<
                                                                                                                                                              i                           .                     a
      :                                                      -                 »
                                                         Ci               rh                                                                      SW     latin                                    r                 )
                  e
                      1   ee           aia   =           @        S                                                                           ~               =       ——                                        .

                                                                                               :                                                  A                                                                         w
                                                     £                I
                                                                      =a                   Z                                                                                          -
                                                                                      Hillsboro                                                   ee
                                                                                                                                                                          edePSBe,
|                                                                                      Up

                                                                                                                                xo”
                                                                                                                                                  Ly
                                                                                                                                                  a"
                                                                                                                                                              Pere                                                        217,

                                                                                                                   yea           FO               HBOS
                                                                                                                                                                  my
———                                                                                                        I
                                                                                                           r                                             ry


                                                                                                               f                eri (pe                  #




                               :                                                                                                                       ¥
                                                                                                                                                                      -
     re                            G




                                                                      NN
                                                                                                                                      at)
                                                                                                                                        = il      a

PS                                                                                                                             SouthzGooperre
                                                                                                                                         —-'— ee                                                  y
                      City Limits
          D1          Urban Growth                               Boundary          (UGB)                                              Mou              ntain
                      Expansion Areas                                                              a                                      :                               fm. SS
          Sales Transactions
           © Comparison Area
              A       Growth Area                                                                                                                                              ‘ey                        (©

                                                             )                                                             |                  C                                                           .
     ° | | o\                                            : ae                                                                                                 Riverglenrace —                                       5")
              |                                  \                                                                                                      =                     aad                              aie

Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                                                                                                                                            107
Each of the urban growth areas has both standard citywide SDCs and supplemental area-
specific SDCs to support new infrastructure development needed for each growth area.
Additionally, developments in all three jurisdictions are subject to SDCs for sanitary sewer and
stormwater imposed by Clean Water Services (CWS) and SDCs for transportation imposed by
Washington County. Exhibit 51 summarizes the SDCs applied to single-family construction in
South Cooper Mountain, South Hillsboro, and River Terrace ("growth areas”) and the standard
citywide rates applicable to adjacent developments that are not part of the growth area.
Appendix H includes more detail on the SDCs.

Exhibit 51. System Development Charges for Detached Single-Family Housing, 2021
Source: ECONorthwest using data from City of Beaverton, City of Hillsboro, City of Tigard, and Washington County.
                                       Beaverton                       Hillsboro                         Tigard
                               Standard         South         Standard          South         Standard             River
                                                Cooper                        Hillsboro                           Terrace
                                               Mountain
 Total SDCs                    $37,940         $46,767         $33,905        $53,030         $43,809             $47,640
 Difference from                   —             +23%              —            +56%               —                +9%
 standard SDCs for
 Growth Areas


As shown in Exhibit 51, Hillsboro’s standard citywide SDCs are the lowest among the three
studied areas (about $34,000), but its supplemental SDCs are the largest (about $19,000). In
contrast, Tigard has the highest standard citywide charges (about $44,000), but it has the lowest
supplemental SDCs (about $4,000). Note that the supplemental SDCs were largely used to
distribute costs for area-specific facilities such as collector roads and local parks among
property owners within the growth area. Developers who made the improvements generally
received SDC credits for at least a share of those costs.

Using the data from sales transactions for new homes in these areas and the information on
SDC rates, ECONorthwest constructed a linear regression model to test for a relationship
between SDC rates and housing prices after controlling for other factors such as year built, year
sold, home size, and lot size that are available in the sales transaction data or the tax lot data.
(See Appendix H for methodology.)

The regression model showed that SDC rates are positively correlated with housing prices —
that is to say, that higher housing prices were observed in places with higher SDCs — after
controlling for building size, lot size, number of bedrooms and bathrooms, year built, and year
sold. The model suggests that the observed difference in housing prices is greater than the
difference in SDCs. Every $10,000 in SDCs was associated with about $7 greater per-square-foot
price of newly built housing — about $16,800 for a 2,400-square-foot single-family unit. This is
illustrated graphically in Exhibit 52 for different SDC amounts. For example, when comparing a
2,400-square-foot single-family unit with SDCs that total $35,000 to an identical unit with SDCs
that total $45,000, the $10,000 difference in SDCs is associated with $16,800 greater housing
price.




Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                                       108
Exhibit 52. Estimated Sale Prices of a Typical 2,400-Square-Foot Single-Family Housing Unit
Associated with Varying SDC Levels
Source: ECONorthwest
  $800,000
                                                                                    $735,420
                                                         $718,620
                          $701,820
  $700,000



  $600,000



  $500,000



  $400,000



  $300,000



  $200,000



  $100,000




                           $35,000                        $45,000                   $55,000
                                                    Example SDC Amounts

                               m Additional Price Difference Associated with SDCs
                               =m SDC Amount
                               m= Baseline Housing Price (Without SDCs)
                               O Predicted Sales Price


There are several important limitations to keep in mind with this finding:

    = A      linear model was applied, but many of the underlying factors affecting price likely
          have nonlinear effects on housing prices. For example, an additional 100 square feet of
          living area is more valuable for a small home than a large one. More complex (but still
          imperfect) models attempt to capture more of this nonlinearity.
    =     Actual SDC rates paid for each unit are not known; instead, ECONorthwest estimated
          the likely SDC amounts associated with each unit based on the jurisdiction, whether it


Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                               109
        was within a growth area with supplemental SDCs or not, and the year the home was
        built.
    =    As noted previously, a positive correlation does not mean that higher SDCs cause higher
         home prices. There are several other possible explanations for this relationship, which
         are discussed below.
    =    Many of the factors that influence home prices are not captured in the available data
         (e.g., finish quality and design, neighborhood features, views, etc.). If these factors are
         also correlated with SDCs, the model would be over-estimating the relevance of SDCs
        by capturing the influence of some of these factors instead. An alternative regression
        model that compared home prices in the expansion areas to those in the comparison
        areas (without controlling for differences in SDCs) showed a positive relationship
        between home prices and location in an expansion area, with a similar level of statiscal
        reliability as the SDC model. (See Appendix H for details.) Developer interviews also
        suggest this could be a factor, as discussed below.
While this case study does not show why SDCs correlate with higher housing prices, the
additional price effect beyond the amount of the SDCs themselves observed in this analysis
could support the interpretation that higher SDCs can increase costs beyond the direct cost of
the SDC itself. Financing costs are one possible explanation for this type of pattern, as discussed
in Section 5.1.3.

Findings From Developer Interviews
Interviews with developers involved in one or more of these areas suggest that some growth
areas needed more expensive amenities —from home features to streetscape materials and green
space design—to appeal to buyers and capture much of the demand for housing in this part of
the region at the higher prices that make development feasible. Adding value to the home with
these amenities offsets higher development costs due to SDCs and other infrastructure/land
development costs and may have contributed to a price premium beyond direct SDC costs.

Developers were also heavily involved in creating the infrastructure funding plans for each of
the growth areas. This allowed them to influence the supplemental SDC rates (to some extent)
and to anticipate in advance of development what the total SDC costs might be. Because the
amount of new infrastructure needed often makes land development in a new growth area
expensive, developers may have known early on that housing in these areas would need to
command some premium compared to other areas with lower infrastructure needs. This would
suggest that the total amount of infrastructure needed along with the need to capture
substantial demand from higher-income households may have driven a difference in housing
prices.




11 SDCs paid at time of development were estimated by adjusting FY 2021 rates to the year before the unit was
completed, using the Engineering News-Record’s Construction Cost Index for Seattle. This index is the method each of
these Washington County jurisdictions uses to adjust their SDC rates each year.


Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                             110
             Part 5: SDC Administrative Policy
                                   Implications

                                 Primary Contributors: Galardi Rothstein Group, ECONorthwest




Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                     111
5.1 Timing of SDC Assessment and Collection
5.1.1 Requirements and Current Practices
Issues related to timing include both the timing of the initial fee determination or assessment
and collection of payment. In some cases, fee assessment and collection occur at the same time;
however, collection policies may provide for deferral of payment to a later point in the
development process or financing the SDCs over a period of time.

Statutory Requirements

As part of the definition of an SDC, ORS 223.299(4)(a) provides that SDCs must be “assessed or
collected at the time of increased usage of a capital improvement or issuance of a development
permit, building permit or connection to the capital improvement.” This provision implies ten
distinct options for the timing of the assessment and collection of SDCs, as shown in Exhibit 53.
Taken together, the statutes provide a high degree of flexibility for local governments to choose
the timing for assessing and collecting SDCs.

Exhibit 53. Timing Options, Earliest to Latest
Source: FCS GROUP, based on ORS 223.299(4)(a)
 Option | Assess                                                     Collect
    1     Issuance of development permit                             Issuance of development permit
    2     Issuance of development permit                             Issuance of building permit
    3     Issuance of building permit                                Issuance of building permit
    4     Issuance of development permit                             Connection to the capital improvement
    5     Issuance of building permit                                Connection to the capital improvement
    6     Connection to the capital improvement                      Connection to the capital improvement
    {     Issuance of development permit                             Increased usage of a capital improvement
    8     Issuance of building permit                                Increased usage of a capital improvement
    9     Connection to the capital improvement                      Increased usage of a capital improvement
   10     Increased usage of a capital improvement |                 Increased usage of a capital improvement
Notes:   Reference to “increased   usage of a capital improvement”    is assumed   to occur at occupancy.


Oregon Revised Statutes 223.208 also authorizes (but does not compel) local governments to
provide financing of SDCs under the provisions of the Bancroft Bonding Act. These provisions
allow local governments to provide loan-like financing of SDCs. Provider financing programs
vary in terms of the type of development eligible, maximum financing term, interest rates
charged, and program application fees and other requirements.

Survey Responses and Testimony

As part of its most recent survey on SDCs, LOC asked its members to provide information on
any policies or practices related to “timing or payment accommodations.” Exhibit 54
summarizes cities’ responses.




Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                           112
Exhibit 54. Sample SDC Payment Timing Policies and Practices
Source: FCS GROUP, based on League of Oregon Cities, System Development Charges Survey Report (February 2020),
pages 119-128.
 City            SDC Payment Policy
 Cornelius       SDC payments “delayed until a later date, such as the time of occupancy.”
 Forest          “Payments delayed have been for non-profit housing developments to allow the project to
 Grove           occur. Delayed payments are due prior to the issuance of certificate of occupancy.”
 Lafayette       “Allowed a payment plan for SDCs as required by statute.”
 Madras          “We will allow deferrals on payments up to 9 months or Certificate of Occupancy
                 (whichever comes first).”
 Medford         SDC payments “delayed until a later date, such as the time of occupancy.” A payment
                 plan (“called bancrofting”) is also available.
 Milwaukie       “Bancroft financing over a ten-year period or less.”
 Newport         “Installment plan is an option to allow payment to be financed over time.”
 Pendleton     | SDC payments “delayed until a later date, such as the time of occupancy.”
 Redmond         “Delaying collection of SDCs to occupancy” is available in enterprise zones.
 Sherwood        SDCs can be deferred to occupancy if the transportation and/or parks SDC is greater
                than $50,000.
 Veneta          SDC payments “delayed until a later date, such as the time of occupancy” for affordable
                 housing.
 West Linn       SDCs can be financed under the provisions of the Bancroft Bonding Act.
 Wilsonville   | SDC payments “delayed until a later date, such as the time of occupancy.”
 Winston         SDCs can be financed over ten years with semi-annual payments.

In some cases, payment accommodations vary based on the type of development (for example,
multifamily and affordable housing).

5.1.2 Timing Implications for Service Providers
Much of the written testimony provided on House Bill 3040 responds specifically to the
proposed amendments that related to the timing of SDC payments. Many service providers
raised concerns about an increase in administrative costs and increased risk of nonpayment.
Some testimony points to particular concerns around the potential for deferring SDCs until time
of sale rather than certificate of occupancy, because local governments are not involved in the
sale transaction. (See Appendix I for a summary of relevant testimony.)

Focus groups echoed this. As noted in Oregon SDC Study: Summary of Service Providers
(Appendix A), the effort (and cost) required to collect SDCs varies with the public agency’s
leverage at different points in the development process. For most public agencies, their moment
of maximum leverage is when building permits are issued. If full payment of SDCs is a
requirement for obtaining building permits, the public agency need not worry about enforcing
payment, because developers are unlikely to begin work before building permits have been
issued. While development is required to obtain a certificate of occupancy when the building is
constructed prior to its use, some service providers expressed concern that the public agency’s
leverage is greatly reduced at this stage, out of concern that some developers may forego the
certificate of occupancy in order to avoid the fee. Other service providers noted that they make
scheduling a final inspection contingent on the SDCs being paid, which has avoided these
issues.



Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                            113
Based on follow-up correspondence with several jurisdictions that offer (or previously offered)
deferral to certificate of occupancy, deferral programs have had mixed results in different
communities. All noted an increase in administrative effort, but the magnitude ranged from less
than an hour of staff time per application to multiple hours for multiple staff, depending on
permitting systems and deferral program requirements. The most challenging non-payment
issues reported were linked to commercial development, though some reported needing to
follow up with residential developers when payment was due (e.g., if there was a time limit on
the deferral in addition to a trigger at certificate of occupancy). Several reported little use of the
program, while others see (or saw) substantial usage.

Some service providers are also concerned about the timing of revenues relative to the need for
expenditures. In many cases, infrastructure needs to be constructed and land acquired in
advance of when service to new development will be required. Delay in collection of SDC
payments to later in the process may impact service levels or require other upfront funding
sources. Focus groups with service providers suggest that the importance of timing of SDC
collection varies among service providers. Some types of projects (e.g., park land acquisition in
anew urban growth area) are highly sensitive to timing. Some agencies use SDC revenues to
pay a portion of debt service on prior capital improvements and expend revenue quickly after it
comes in. Others collect revenue for several years prior to funding projects and are less
impacted by collecting funds later. Several service providers noted that the uncertainty inherent
in SDC collections means that they cannot rely too heavily on revenue they have not yet
collected, regardless of when the fees are collected during the development process.

Public agencies can also maximize interest earnings (to be used for future project costs) and
minimize additional administrative costs by collecting SDCs early in the process. However, the
financial value of the added interest earnings may be inconsequential. Although SDC revenues
can be (and often are) used to help make debt payments, those payments must be made
regardless of SDC revenue, so there is no change in interest payments or earnings based on
when SDCs are received. However, for communities that are using SDC revenues for pay-as-
you-go projects, there could be short-term interest earnings. Assuming an annual interest rate of
3 to 4 percent in a money market account, the financial impact of deferring by 2 years would be
roughly 6 to 8 percent of the SDC amount.

5.1.3 Timing Implications for Developers
When a developer must pay SDCs can impact financial feasibility, because SDCs add costs
before the value of the development is fully realized. The earlier that SDCs are paid, the longer
the developer must “carry” the costs. The total cost of SDCs to developers includes not only the
SDC amount but also the added interest payments associated with it if it needs to be financed
over the construction period.

The size of the “carrying cost” of SDCs depends on loan terms and the duration of the
development. For a construction loan, which is taken out prior to the construction of the project
and paid back, refinanced, or converted to a long-term (“permanent”) loan after construction is



Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                              114
completed, interest rates are typically higher than they are for permanent loans on completed
buildings, because there is less collateral to secure a loan.

The carrying cost can be calculated as the compounded interest rate on a loan. Although the
carrying costs can vary based on specific project or developer characteristics and financing
opportunities, typical rates range from 8-10 percent and the construction loan can last for 1 to 3
years. For example, if a construction loan has an annual interest rate of 8 percent and the loan is
borrowed for 2 years of construction period, the monthly compounded interest cost is 16.64
percent of the SDC amount. If the entire SDC amount is financed, the total cost of SDCs to the
developer would be 116.64 percent of the SDC amount. The interest cost would rise to 21.00
percent if the annual interest rate is 10 percent (for 2 years), and it would rise to 25.97 percent if
the loan period is 3 years (at an 8 percent interest rate).

A delayed or deferred payment of SDCs would reduce the carrying costs and reduce the total
cost of housing development at the margin. The likely impact is greater for projects that take
longer to build and greater for developers that are less creditworthy and would borrow at a
higher interest rate.

For developers who opt to pay SDCs from working capital rather than adding them to the
construction loan, developer interviews suggest that there is still an opportunity cost associated
with tying up the developer’s available funds. Some suggested that this up-front cost means
less money is available to pay for other pre-development and early construction costs that can
accelerate project delivery.

While many developers pointed to timing of SDC payment as a factor that impacts their
developments, others expressed indifference at when the cost is paid and whether it is financed,
given that the construction loan is generally capped at a fixed percentage of total project costs,
and the same amount will need to be financed either way.




Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                               115
5.2 SDC Exemptions and Waivers
5.2.1 Requirements and Current Practices
SDCs may be exempted for certain developments or redevelopment in cases where system
impact is deemed negligible (in some cases of redevelopment or for specific development
types). Exemptions or waivers may also be provided because of local policy objectives.

Exemptions Based on Negligible Impact

Redevelopment is generally exempt from SDCs unless the new use is estimated to place greater
demand on the infrastructure system. System-specific exemptions may include:

    =    Parks — hospice or other end of life care facilities
    =    Water and sewer — ADUs that do not require an additional water meter

Exemptions or Waivers Based on Policy Objectives

Waivers (permanent or temporary) and exemptions have also been implemented by some local
governments for developments like childcare facilities, ADUs, and economic development
projects that are in enterprise zones or meet a target level of new job creation. Some
communities also offer exemptions or waivers for affordable housing development, which are
discussed in greater detail below.

Affordable Housing Exemptions or Waivers!”

There are differing views on the validity of SDC waivers or exemptions for any purpose that is
unrelated to a reduced demand for system capacity. Some experts are of the opinion that it is
inconsistent with ratemaking principles to grant SDC adjustments or exemptions for reasons
that are not cost-based. Others point to modern rate-making principles that integrate
affordability and equity considerations.'? Oregon’s SDC Act does not explicitly address
exemptions for affordable housing (or for any other class of development), as it says little about
how SDCs should be calculated for specific developments (see Section 1.2.2). Other parts of
state statute make clear that jurisdictions may offer whole or partial SDC waivers in exchange




12 Most communities that do not charge SDCs for affordable housing describe this as an “SDC Exemption”. Some
make a distinction between “waivers” given on a case-by-case basis and “exemptions” that are set in policy. Others
use these terms interchangeably. Throughout this document, when referring to programs that do not collect SDCs
from affordable housing, both terms are used to mean policy-based exclusions that are applied consistently to all
qualifying projects, unless a budgetary limit is set.
193 See for example, “Affordability and Equity Considerations for Rate-Setting” (Eric Rothstein, Stacey Isaac Berahzer,
Joe Crea, and Michael Matichich for Journal AWWA,     September 2021) which argues that water, wastewater, and
stormwater service providers have a social responsibility to ensure universal, affordable access to services, as part of
their rate-setting framework.


Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                                 116
for local affordability requirements,’ but some experts recommend that agencies should
“backfill” any foregone SDC revenue with resources external to the SDC fund to ensure the
agency can complete necessary infrastructure projects and avoid compromising equitable share
protection for other SDC payers. (Nationally, 14 of the 26 states that have explicit impact fee
enabling statutes require impact fees to be waived for qualifying affordable housing
developments. Five of these require fees to be paid from an unrelated funding source; nine
enable— and require— waivers without making up the lost revenue.!%5) A Construction Excise
Tax (CET) is one option available to local governments to backfill lost SDC revenue from
exemptions for affordable housing.”

Oregon communities that offer SDC exemptions for affordable housing include Portland, Bend,
Tigard, Eugene, Salem, Lake Oswego, Ashland, McMinnville, Florence, Newberg, and Forest
Grove. Most service providers that offer SDC exemptions/waivers for affordable housing limit it
to regulated/income-restricted affordable housing. Some cities and service providers have set a
cap on the amount of waivers (number of units or dollar amount) they will issue for a given
time period, but most do not backfill foregone revenue from other sources.'” (Section 5.2.2
describes specific example policies and their results.)

In communities that have not implemented affordable housing exemptions/waivers, staff
sometimes expressed concerns about monitoring and enforcement over time. Many raised
questions about where replacement funding would come from. In some cases, revenue from
construction excise taxes is used to offset lost SDC revenue from affordable housing
exemptions.




4 ORS 197.309 indicates that SDCs may be waived for qualifying affordable multi-family housing and lists such
waivers as one of several “incentives” that jurisdictions must choose among if they impose local affordable housing
set-aside requirements (“inclusionary zoning”).
% Newport Partners and Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, Impact fees G Housing Affordability: A
Guide for Practitioners, prepared for the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development Office of Policy
Development and Research, June 2008. https://www.huduser.gov/portal/publications/impactfees.     pdf
1% Construction Excise Taxes also increase the cost of housing development, but scale with permit value, making
them inherently more progressive than SDCs. Affordable housing is also automatically exempt from CETs under
Oregon law.
197 ECONorthwest research and City of Lake Oswego Council Report: Review of System Development Charge for
Affordable Housing, December 21, 2021, Agenda item Number 5.2.
https://www.ci.oswego.or.us/WebLink/DocView.aspx?id=1911236&dbid=0&repo=CityOfLakeOswego&cr=1



Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                                117
5.2.2 Impacts on Affordable and Lower-Cost Housing
Development
Benefits for Regulated Affordable Housing Development

Based on past interviews by ECONorthwest with affordable housing providers related to local
measures to support regulated affordable housing development, there are two main benefits of
SDC exemptions, based on their reduction to development costs:

    =   Less funding from state, federal, or local sources is needed to make a given affordable
        housing development financially feasible. This can mean less time and effort spent
        securing gap financing, particularly for smaller projects and those not using typical
        funding sources (see details below).

    =   Lower costs help projects score better for competitive funding opportunities, which
        often score projects based, in part, on costs per unit.
The impacts and benefits of exemptions vary somewhat depending on the specific funding
sources and project scale, as summarized below.!8

    =   Low Income Housing Tax Credit (LIHTC) projects: SDCs are included as an eligible
        cost in calculating tax credit equity for a given project, which means that waiving SDCs
        reduces development costs but also reduces the amount of equity available to the project
        to some extent. (Tax credit equity typically covers roughly 30-70 percent of project costs
        depending on the specific tax credit program, with the balance coming from loans or
        gap financing.) While exemptions are still beneficial, and interviews with affordable
        housing developers suggest that they can make a difference in making projects work,
        only a portion of the savings translates into reduced need for gap financing or debt.
        However, some LIHTC funding that is awarded competitively includes a scoring system
        related to a project’s cost-effectiveness relative to similar projects, so reducing or
        eliminating SDC costs can help achieve a higher score by reducing the cost per unit.!”
    =   Other competitive state funding sources: Many state funding programs for affordable
        housing have limits on the amount of funding per unit and projects needing less subsidy
        per unit are scored higher.?” For these projects, all cost reductions are helpful and
        benefit the project on a dollar-for-dollar basis.




1% ECONorthwest, “Progress Report of Hillsboro Affordable Housing Tools and Evaluation of Additional Tools,”
prepared for the City of Hillsboro, April 12, 2022.
1 Oregon Housing and Community Services, “NOTICE OF FUNDING AVAILABILITY (NOFA) #2022-5: Affordable
Rental Housing Projects with 9% Federal Low Income Housing Tax Credits,”
https://www.oregon.gov/ohcs/development/Documents/nofa/2022/LIHTC9-NOFA-2022-5-v1.1.pdf
200 Examples include the LIFT program (https://www.oregon.gov/ohcs/development/Documents/nofa/2022/2022-2-
LIFT-Rental-NOFA.pdf) and the General Housing Account Program
(https://www.oregon.gov/ohcs/development/Documents/nofa/2021/VETS-21/2021-Vets-NOFA.     pdf).


Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                          118
    =   Small projects and other funding sources: Smaller affordable projects that may have
        many smaller funding sources tend to be more sensitive to development cost per unit
        because of the difficulty of securing funding. This can include affordable middle
        housing development, some affordable homeownership projects, and other small,
        innovative projects. For these projects, the primary concern is closing the gap between
        project costs and what the affordable units will generate in revenue, and waiving SDCs
        can offer a substantial benefit.
From a statewide perspective, reducing cost per unit should mean the ability to fund more
housing units with the same pool of funds. This is likely true in practice at least to some extent,
though the total amount of affordable housing funds going towards SDCs is not being tracked
at present, and there are many other factors driving the cost of building affordable housing (see
Section 4.3.3). Given the estimates in Section 4.3.3, SDCs represent a small share of overall
affordable housing costs; however, given the number of new affordable housing units funded
by OHCS each year, the total SDC-related expenditures associated with affordable housing
development are likely substantial. From 2016 through the end of 2021, OHCS approved nearly
13,000 new construction affordable rental housing units for funding. Of these, roughly 7,100 are
located in 11 communities with known SDC exemption programs for affordable housing (see
list in Section 5.2.1).2°! While the SDCs charged for those projects have not been specifically
tracked, at the estimated average total SDC rate for multifamily housing statewide (close to
$10,000 per unit’), this would mean roughly $71 million in SDC savings (in today’s dollars)
from jurisdictions offering exemptions, and roughly $59 million (in today’s dollars) spent on
SDCs in jurisdictions that do not offer exemptions across six years of projects.

On the other hand, if the funding not provided for SDCs needs to be made up from other state,
federal, or local sources, then exemptions shift that cost from one funding source to another.
Funds for both affordable housing and local infrastructure investments are in short supply
relative to needs.

Case Studies: Impacts of SDC Exemption Programs
The case studies that follow offer evidence of strong participation by affordable housing
developers in local SDC exemption programs, and of cost savings for those developments. As
noted above, However, it is difficult to measure the extent to which the SDC exemptions have
changed the amount or type of affordable housing development that has occurred in those
communities.




01 Oregon Housing and Community Services, “Affordable Rental Housing Draft Dashboard,” updated December 4,
2022.
https://public.tableau.com/app/profile/oregon.housing.and.community.services/viz/AffordableRentalHousingDraftD
ashboard_16154170714140/Story1
202 While the Affordable Housing Cost Study estimated an average of $8,000 per affordable housing unit for SDCs
statewide, this includes projects with and without SDC exemptions.


Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                             119
In addition, sometimes SDC exemptions for affordable housing units can incent developers who
primarily build market-rate housing to build some units at a defined price point or income
affordability level to qualify for the exemption. Based on developer interviews and focus
groups, the SDC exemptions have been essential to market-rate developers’ ability to produce
housing at a lower price point, even if these units may not remain affordable over the long-term
to the same extent they generally do with more traditional affordable housing development.

Bend Exemptions for Affordable Housing

About the Program
Since December 2017, the City of Bend has offered SDC exemptions to all rental and for-sale
housing affordable to households making 80 percent or less of area median income (AMI)
through a deed restriction.”° The City’s Affordable Housing Advisory Committee has the
authority to approve exemptions on City water, sewer, and transportation SDCs, and can also
recommend exemptions for parks SDCs levied by the Bend Park and Recreation District. Upon
approval, the exemptions are structured as a forgivable loan at 3 percent annual interest, with
no payments due as long as the property remains affordable for at least five years. If the
affordability restrictions are removed within five years of the project’s completion, the SDCs
become payable, with interest, by the original applicant.”

Program Impacts
Between 2016 and 2021, Bend granted exemptions on 577 units of affordable housing, for a total
value of $5.2 million (Exhibit 55). Nearly all of these exemptions have been granted to nonprofit
developers of affordable housing.

Exhibit 55. City of Bend Affordable Housing SDC Exemptions, 2016-2021
Source: ECONorthwest, using data provided by City of Bend
       Housing Type              Units         City SDCs Exempted            Parks SDCs Exempted
 Single-Family                   140               $1,112,517                       $205,628
 Multifamily                     407               $3,731,480                      $2,017,896
 Other (incl. shelters)           30                $383,670                        $165,520
 Total                           577               $5,227,666                      $2,389,044

For the few projects by market-rate developers in Bend that have been granted SDC exemptions
to date, the program achieved only short-term affordability. One example is Revere Avenue
Renaissance, a 12-unit development of five market-rate townhomes, one affordable townhome,
and six one-bedroom rental apartments affordable at 60 percent of AMI. The seven affordable
units were granted SDC exemptions by the Bend City Council in 2015; the project also received
funding from the City’s Affordable Housing Fund.”® Three years after completion, the
affordable townhome and rental units were sold at market rate as an investment property.”


203 Prior to December 2017, the City Council granted SDC exemption requests on a case-by-case basis.
204 City of Bend, Municipal Code Chapter 12.10.120 (https://bend.municipal.codes/BC/12.10.120)
205 City of Bend, “Request for Proposals for System Development Charge Exemptions: Program Year 2015.”
https://bend.granicus.com/MetaViewer.php?view_id=9&clip id=359&meta_id=13633
206 Zillow sales listing (https://www.zillow.com/homedetails/135-NW-Revere-A   ve-Bend-OR-97703/250781754_zpid/)



Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                          120
Given City policies, the property owner would most likely have been required to repay both the
SDCs and Affordable Housing Funds with interest at that time.

Portland Exemptions for Affordable Homeownership

About the Program
The City of Portland offers SDC exemptions for affordable rental and for-sale housing through
several different programs. Exemptions are available for affordable rental units as part of the
City’s Inclusionary Housing policy, which applies to developments with 20 or more units.”°”
Another program grants exemptions for rental housing affordable at 60 percent of median
family income for developments not subject to Inclusionary Housing requirements.” Portland
also offers SDC exemptions for affordable homeownership, linked to the City’s Home
Ownership Limited Tax Exemption (HOLTE) program. The focus here is on the
homeownership SDC exemption because its link to a tax abatement program means that there is
more data available regarding its usage and to consider its potential as an incentive for market-
rate developers to build affordable homes.
For-sale homes qualify for the exemptions on water, sanitary sewer, transportation, and parks
SDCs if they are new construction, have at least three bedrooms, and have a sale price no more
than $430,000.27 Exemptions are applied at the time of permitting, before construction begins,
but must be verified when the house is sold. Qualifying buyers for affordable units must have
an income no greater than 100 percent of median family income, adjusted for household size. If
a project that applied for SDC exemptions is sold above the price cap, or to a non-qualifying
buyer, the SDCs must be paid, with interest and fees.*!°
Program Impacts
In addition to some City data on SDC exemptions for homeownership, the impact of these
exemptions can be approximated based on data from the HOLTE program, which has the same
income and sale requirements.*"! In practice, all HOLTE-eligible properties also receive SDC
exemptions.

In the most recent City report on HOLTE from fiscal year (FY) 2017-2018, 59 eligible properties
sold within the 2017 price limit of $350,000 or the 2018 limit of $375,000 (Exhibit 56). Among the




707 In Portland’s Central City, the SDC exemptions apply to all residential units when the Inclusionary Housing
requirements are met.
208 Portland Housing Bureau, “SDC Exemption Program for Rental Projects,” https://www.portland.gov/phb/sdc-
exemption/rentals.
209 Projects located within City-designated transit corridors qualify with two bedrooms. See:
https://www.portland.gov/phb/holte/property-eligibility#toc-two-bedroom-eligibility-areas
710 Portland Housing Bureau, “SDC Exemption for Home Ownership,” https://www.portland.gov/phb/sdc-
exemption/home-ownership; Portland Housing Bureau, “Homebuyer Opportunity Limited Tax Exemption (HOLTE)
Program,” https://www.portland.gov/phb/holte.
211 HOLTE is a 10-year tax abatement program. The City limits approvals to 100 units per year.


Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                             121
59 properties produced through the program in FY 2017-18, nearly half (29) were built by for-
profit builders.?”

Exhibit 56. Average Sale Price of HOLTE-Qualified Homes, 2017-2018
Source: ECONorthwest, using data from City of Portland213
     Geographic Area          Total       Average Sales Price        Units (For-      Average Sales Price
                              Units                                     Profit        (For-Profit Builders)
                                                                      Builders)
  North Portland                1               $349,950                   1                $349,950
  Northeast Portland           11               $357,625                  2                 $362,500
  Southeast Portland           AT               $316,295                 26                 $335,679
  Southwest Portland            -                   -                     -                     -
  Total                        59               $324,571                 29                 $338,021



By 2018, there were more than 1,200 active HOLTE properties in Portland, down from 1,346 the
prior tax year due to the tax exemption expiring. * This suggests that more than 1,300 units
were built under the program from its inception through 2018.

A more recent City report provides data on the units produced through the SDC exemption and
HOLTE program between 2016 and 2019 and the income levels of the buyers, as shown in
Exhibit 57. Participation increased in 2019, with the increase mostly in units purchased by
households earning over 80 percent of AMI.?'° These units are more likely to have been
produced by for-profit builders, and are not subject to lasting affordability restrictions, but must
meet the maximum sales price and buyer income requirements for the program.




712 Portland Housing Bureau, Residential Property Tax Exemption Programs 2017-18 Annual Report,
https://www.portlandoregon.gov/phb/article/739936
213 Ibid.
214 Ibid.
15 Portland Housing Bureau, City of Portland, “State of Housing 2020,” December 2020.
https://www.portland.gov/sites/default/files/2021/phb-soh-2020-web-part-4.pdf


Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                         122
Exhibit 57. Units Produced by Buyer Income as a Share of Area Median Income for Portland’s
Homeownership SDC Exemption, 2016-2019
Source: ECONorthwest, using data from City of Portland?216




                      20           40           60           80      100         120         140
            ©




                                               Units Produced

                mBelow50%AMI        51-80% AMI           ™&81%+AMI   AMI=Area Median Income




Between 2016 and 2019, the number of units built using HOLTE and SDC exemptions was less
than the City’s annual 100-unit cap,”!” despite the fact that the cap was reached within roughly 6
months in fiscal year 2017-18.2!8 This is likely because some properties approved for the
exemption are ultimately not sold to a qualified buyer or do not meet other transaction criteria
and do not receive the exemption. There is less data available on the units that are initially
approved for the program but ultimately do not qualify for the exemption, but some recent
sales transactions and input from developers familiar with the program suggests that some sell
for more than the maximum sale price under the program, though they may still be lower-cost
than other new homes.

There are a number of examples of homes built by market-rate developers under the HOLTE
program that have offered a lower price to qualifying buyers than to other buyers, passing on
the SDC savings directly.? This was also noted in developer focus groups. This shows that the




216 Portland Housing Bureau, City of Portland, “State of Housing 2020,” December 2020.
https://www.portland.gov/sites/default/files/2021/phb-soh-2020-web-part-4.pdf
217 Thid.
718 Portland Housing Bureau, Residential Property Tax Exemption Programs 2017-18 Annual Report,
https://www.portlandoregon.gov/phb/article/739936
719 Based on a review of recent sales transactions where the HOLTE program is mentioned in the listing.


Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                     123
SDC exemption is, at least some cases, directly translating to lower home prices and supporting
production of lower-cost housing that is affordable to moderate-income households.




Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                        124
5.3 SDC Credits

5.3.1 Statutory Requirements
As discussed in Section 1.2.2, the Oregon SDC statutes require local governments to provide
credits for “qualified public improvements” (QPIs). The required credit is only for the
improvement fee charged for the type of improvement being constructed. Furthermore, for
onsite OPIs*”, the required credit is only for the portion of cost that exceeds the local
government’s minimum standard facility size or capacity needed to serve the particular
development project or property.”?7!

The statutes provide flexibility to local governments to provide greater credits by providing
credit beyond the improvement fees that would have otherwise been imposed, allowing for the
transferability of credits, or providing credits for a capital improvement not identified in the
SDC capital project list.

5.3.2 Credit Implications for Service Providers
Credit policies differ across providers in terms of project eligibility, creditable costs, and
transferability. Service providers indicate that credits provide important incentives to construct
needed infrastructure, particularly in green field areas. Furthermore, developers may be able to
construct projects at lower costs than would be incurred by the local government. Local credit
policies reflect the need to balance infrastructure needs and project flexibility with revenue
sufficiency and capital project prioritization.

As discussed previously, some jurisdictions enact SDCs that are based on a fiscally-constrained
project list in order to keep the fee levels lower than they otherwise would be. Limiting credits
to projects on the adopted SDC project list may provide local governments with greater control
over the timing and prioritization of projects. The greatest risk to capital improvement project
control may result from extension of credits to projects that are not on a fiscally-constrained
project list, as there would be no disincentive to developers to build these projects. Foregoing
SDC revenue in exchange for a developer-constructed facility that is not included in the SDC
means that less funding for projects that are on the project list and may be higher priority.

For determination of the creditable amount, the statute differentiates between onsite and offsite
improvements, where the required credit for improvements on or contiguous to the
development property (onsite improvements) are limited to the portion of costs that exceed “the
local government’s minimum standard facility size or capacity needed to serve the particular




220 Improvements that are located in whole or in part, on or contiguous to property that is the subject of development
approval.
221 ORS 223.304(5)

Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                               125
development project or property.”?” This differentiation has potential implications for
development of the SDC project list and calculation of the SDC cost basis. If certain project types
(e.g., local streets and water utility mains sized for local needs or minimum standards only) are
assumed to be funded directly by developers without eligibility for SDC credits, then they are
excluded from the SDC calculations.

In cases where calculated credits do not fully compensate a developer for all eligible QPI costs,
the statutes provide for application of credits “against improvement fees that accrue in
subsequent phases of the original development project.” In some cases, local governments will
also allow developers to transfer credits to other developments or developers. However,
expansion of a credit program may require additional administrative costs owing to the need to
track projects and reimbursements over time and across developers.

5.3.3 Credit Implications for Developers
Like SDCs, infrastructure constructed as a condition of development approval is a cost to
developers that needs to be factored into calculations to determine project feasibility. To the
extent that the required infrastructure exceeds the capacity needed to serve the development,
SDC credits provide a mechanism to reimburse the developer for this additional cost.

SDC policies vary across local governments, and the level of specificity in published SDC and
credit policy information also varies, which may make it difficult for developers to have a clear
estimate up-front of the total cost burden. This is particularly the case when (as the statute
requires) credits are limited to the improvement fees levied on the new development, given the
complexities of some charge bases.

In conversations with developers, many noted the importance of SDC credits, and several
identified concerns or opportunities for improvement in how they are administered, as
summarized below (see Appendix B for details):

     =    Several developers expressed frustration with the lack of certainty regarding SDC
          credits, often due to lack of clarity about what share of costs are attributable to excess
          capacity.
     =   Carrying costs can erode the value of the credits, because the developer is paying for
         infrastructure up front and has to pay interest on those costs.
          -   Insome cases, jurisdictions require developers to pay SDCs up front even if they are
              building infrastructure that will qualify for credits, and then reimburse or refund the
              credit eligible share at the end. This particularly increases carrying costs.




222 ORS 223.304 (5)(a)


Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                  126
    =   Some noted that allowing SDC credits to be transferred to future development on other
        sites makes them more valuable and can allow developers to take on larger
        infrastructure projects.




Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                       127
5.4 Program Information and Transparency
5.4.1 Statutory Requirements
As discussed previously, prior to 2021, statutory requirements related to annual SDC program
accounting and information sharing were limited to annual revenue and expenditure
accounting and making the methodology available to interested parties 60 days in advance of a
public hearing. With respect to annual reporting, the specific requirements are as follows:

               The local government shall provide an annual accounting, to be completed by January
               1 of each year, for system development charges showing the total amount of system
              development charge revenues collected for each system and the projects that were
              funded in the previous fiscal year. The local government shall include in the annual
              accounting: (a) A list of the amount spent on each project funded, in whole or in part,
              with system development charge revenues; and (b) The amount of revenue collected by
               the local government from system development charges and attributed to the costs of
              complying with the provisions of ORS 223.297 to 223.316.

With the passage of House Bill 3040 in 2021, public agencies must now meet the additional
informational requirements codified in ORS 223.316. Specifically, any local government that
imposes one or more SDCs must publish on its website or by alternate accessible means (free of
charge), the following information:

     =       The current SDC fee rates for each type of development.
     =       Details of the methodology used to determine SDC fee rates.
     =   A     list of capital improvement projects that will receive funding from system
             development charge fee revenue.
     =       Contact information for a local official responsible for answering questions about system
             development charges.?*
Even before the most recent changes to the statutes, many local governments made significant
efforts to make information related to SDCs readily available and understandable. Service
providers use a wide variety of tools and practices, and the cost and level of effort required to
manage these programs similarly varies. Some local governments have dedicated staff that
manage one or more aspects of the SDC program, while others need to rely more heavily on
outside consultants.

As with other elements of the SDC program, a local government must balance the
administrative requirements and costs associated with the development of educational tools




223 ORS 223.316


Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                   128
and transparency measures— which may impact SDC fee levels by increasing program
compliance costs —with the desire for enhanced public understanding and transparency.

5.4.2 Common               Practices and Local Jurisdiction Perspectives
In considering program transparency best practices, it is important to consider points in the
process where information is developed and how that information may be shared most
efficiently and effectively to different audiences.

Methodology Development and Adoption

Service providers note that developing a SDC methodology is a significant undertaking. This is
particularly true for agencies that desire a high level of stakeholder engagement in the process.
Some providers indicate involvement of a standing or ad hoc committee in the development of
the SDC methodology and project list. Involvement of stakeholders in the process helps some
communities to evaluate the various methodological options to reflect local policy objectives
and priorities. A number of service providers noted the importance of stakeholder engagement
in the development of the SDC project list, to ensure investment in infrastructure is equitably
distributed across the service area.

As discussed previously, the statute has had a long-standing requirement that an SDC
methodology must be made available to interested parties at least 60 days in advance of the first
public hearing. Most service providers typically go beyond this requirement by making
methodology reports available more broadly on public websites and in public buildings (e.g.,
city hall or public library). Furthermore, because methodology reports are generally technical
documents, many jurisdictions provide summary information in the form of fact sheets,
frequently asked questions, and presentation graphics, in an effort to make the information
more accessible to the general public.

While the general public may best be served by information at a summary level in order to
understand the context of SDCs in infrastructure funding, it is critical that those paying the fees
have a more in-depth understanding of the basis for the charges and be able to estimate the
impact that the fees and other program policies will have on their development project. In this
case, best practices include providing detailed fee schedules and administrative policies and
procedure documents, and “SDC calculators” that help more accurately estimate SDC charges
based on specific development characteristics.?4




224 For example, see City of Gresham fee calculate (https://greshamoregon.gov/SDC-Calculator/#!/) that allows a
developer to enter data about a development project directly on the city’s webpage and then see the calculated
charges. The City of Corvallis (https://www.corvallisoregon.gov/ds/page/permit-fees) offers a similar tool.


Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                             129
Ongoing Reporting and Information Sharing

SDC Schedules

Once the SDC methodology and project list have been adopted, fee levels may change over time
due to application of inflationary indices, phase-in plans, or changes to project list costs.
Updated SDC schedules need to be readily available on the website through one or more
mechanisms such as a comprehensive agency-wide fee schedule, dedicated SDC portion of the
website, or on individual infrastructure department pages.

Project Lists

Project lists should be reviewed and updated periodically (e.g., in conjunction with capital
improvement plan updating) and any modifications documented. The SDC statutes allow for
the project list to be updated at any time, and formal notification of changes is only required if
the SDC is to be increased. It is not uncommon for changes to be made to the project list without
a need to increase the SDC (as in the case of replacing a lower priority project with a higher
priority project of similar cost). While not required by statute, some local governments will
formally adopt the new project list by resolution to increase transparency and facilitate internal
tracking.

Annual Accounting

The level of information included in annual SDC accounting varies across jurisdictions.
Generally, total annual SDC revenue is tracked and readily available by infrastructure system.
In some cases, revenues by SDC component (reimbursement, improvement, and compliance)
are accounted for individually, as each has different limitations on eligible expenditures.**

Service providers participating in focus groups indicate some reporting challenges with the
level of detail available for project expenses. While reporting of annual project expenses is
generally straightforward, projects that span multiple years are more complicated to report and
track due to differences in internal project numbers used for identifying a project as it moves
from SDC project list to the capital budget and then finally to a fixed asset.

Though not required by statute, some service providers prepare annual accounting reports and
send them to interested stakeholders.




225 Reimbursement fee revenue may be spent on any capital cost associated with the system for which it was
collected, while improvement fee revenue is limited to SDC-eligible costs on the project list, and compliance-related
expenditures must be accounted for separately.


Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                               130
5.4.3 Implications for Development and Developer Perspectives
SDC Rate Information and SDC Estimates for Specific Developments

As described in the developer focus group summary in Appendix B, many developers
highlighted the importance of knowing how much the SDCs would be in advance. Several
developers noted issues with major changes to SDCs during the pre-development and
development period. Some set money aside specifically to address fee increases, but there are
fewer options to adjust to cost-increases that occur later in the development process. Certainty
on SDCs is particularly important for affordable housing development. When SDC costs
increase unexpectedly, it can be very hard to find additional funding or cost-savings in other
areas at the last minute when funding amounts have been set in advance.

Multifamily developers also highlighted challenges with estimating SDCs early in the
development process because they can vary depending on the unit configurations (e.g., number
of bedrooms and bathrooms) and site layout (e.g., impervious surface), which may not be
known until late in the process. Developers who build middle housing (e.g., duplexes, triplexes,
fourplexes, townhouses, and cottage clusters) also noted that many jurisdictions do not have
separate SDC rates for middle housing. It can be difficult to determine which SDC rates should
apply to a middle housing development when housing type definitions are not clearly listed in
published SDC rate or methodology documents.




Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                              131
                                                        Part 6:Conclusions
This study responds to a legislative request for a comprehensive review of Oregon’s historical
and current policy and practice for implementing system development charges, with a
particular focus on their interaction with housing affordability. While it is beyond the scope of
the study to make recommendations, its findings can help inform future policy discussions.

For several decades, SDCs have provided a consistent mechanism for growth to pay for growth
in Oregon. Today, SDCs are an essential part of funding the infrastructure needed for growth
given limitations on other funding mechanisms and growing infrastructure needs and costs. A
shift away from SDCs at the local level could have unintended consequences by increasing
reliance on mechanisms like utility rates or user fees (which can burden low-income
households) and direct developer exactions (which can make it more difficult to allocate costs
among multiple parties), or by delaying needed infrastructure projects.

At the same time, the state faces a housing affordability crisis. It has become increasingly clear
that housing production is essential for keeping prices and rents from escalating out of reach of
most households. SDCs can be essential to funding the infrastructure needed to enable new
development, but also contribute to the cost of building housing. While SDCs are just one
among many cost drivers for housing development, they disproportionately impact lower-cost
housing, including entry-level homes, middle housing, and smaller housing units, exacerbating
other cost and market factors that make these types of housing harder to build. In communities
with demand for high-end housing, SDCs can tip the scales further in favor of higher-cost
housing development; in those without demand for high-end housing, they can create one more
barrier to housing production overall. SDCs also increase the amount of state, federal, or local
funding needed to make affordable housing development possible. It remains appropriate and
important for growth to contribute proportionately to growth-related costs. Designing and
using SDCs to accomplish this goal while balancing the need to build a broad range and
abundant supply of housing requires a nuanced approach.

Jurisdictions have —and value—the flexibility to establish SDCs that reflect their local cost
conditions, system needs, funding and policy priorities, and development context. They also
have options to design SDC rate structures that reflect differences in impacts by type or size of
housing unit, to allow SDCs to be paid later in the housing development process, and to offer
reductions or exemptions for affordable housing. Successful programs in some Oregon
communities suggest that these measures can benefit housing production and affordability to
some extent while retaining SDCs’ core function as a funding mechanism for the infrastructure
that enables growth to continue. Broader adoption would require overcoming common
concerns, such as revenue loss and legal uncertainties for exemptions, and administrative costs
and nonpayment risks associated with deferring SDC payments, some of which the state could
help address. At the local level, jurisdictions making updates to SDCs, housing policy, or
infrastructure funding strategies could consider some of these measures for implementation,
learning from the experience of other jurisdictions to craft successful programs. The magnitude


Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                           132
of the benefits from these programs can be hard to measure, but this report suggests they can
make a difference for some of the developments that are most sensitive to SDC costs.

Because there are legal limits to jurisdictions’ ability to align SDCs with housing cost, a bigger
shift in how SDCs affect housing production and affordability would require targeting
alternative funding sources towards SDC and infrastructure costs associated with affordable
and lower-cost housing development. If the alternative funding sources have less impact on
these housing types and on lower-income households generally, this could help level the
playing field for these types of housing without undermining the purpose and value of SDCs or
increasing cost burden on low-income households in other ways.




Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                           133
                      Acronyms and Glossary
Acronyms
ADUs - Accessory Dwelling Units

ARRA — American Recovery and Reinvestment Act

CAA - Clean Air Act 1970

CWA - Clean Water Act of 1972

CBO — Congressional Budget Office

CCI — Construction Cost Index

CPI — Consumer Price Index

ENR - Engineering News Record

ERUs — Equivalent Residential Units

FHA — Federal Housing Association

GO bonds — General Obligation bonds

HBA — Homebuilders Association

HOLTE — Home Ownership Limited Tax Emption Program

LOC - League of Oregon Cities

LIHTC — Low Income Housing Tax Credit

NAHB - National Association of Home Builders

NMHC - National Multifamily Housing County

OBOA -— Oregon Building Officials Association

OMB - Office of Management and Budget

ORS — Oregon Revised Statutes




Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report   134
Glossary
Adjudicative Exactions — exactions specific to an individual parcels determined through a
property-specific decision process

Affordable Housing — income and/or rent-restricted housing that is affordable to households
earning a certain income level

Area Median Income (AMI) — also known as Median Family Income (MFI), this is an estimate
of the median income for a given metropolitan area adjusted by household size, produced
annually by the U.S. Housing and Urban Development (HUD) as the basis for affordable
housing projects’ income limits, rent limits, and loans

Assessed Value — the taxable value of a property

Asset — facility or structure that is part of the infrastructure system

Capacity — the amount of demand that an infrastructure system or facility can accommodate

Capital Improvements — major improvements to public facilities (excluding routine
maintenance), including water supply, treatment, and distribution; wastewater collection,
transmission, treatment, and disposal; drainage and flood control, transportation; and/or parks
and recreation (see ORS 223.299 for the statutory definition)

Carrying Costs — costs of owning a property, including property taxes and interest financing
costs

Certificate of Occupancy — a document verifying that all inspections have been completed for a
new building and that the structure meets the applicable codes

Charge Basis — how SDC costs will be allocated across different development types, sizes, and
contexts

Compliance Costs — the costs of complying with SDC statutes, including the costs of
developing SDC methodologies and providing an annual accounting of SDC expenditures, and
potentially other costs related to SDC administration

Cost Basis — the pool of eligible infrastructure costs to be recovered from the SDC

Cost Incidence — which party or parties ultimately incur a given cost

Depreciation — reduction in value of an asset or structure over time

Equity (financial) — ownership investment in real estate; the difference between the value of an
asset and the debt on the asset

Equity (distributional) — fairness and justice in how costs and benefits are allocated


Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                           135
Essential Nexus — a concept established by the U.S. Supreme Court in Nollan v. California Coastal
Commission” as a test for the validity of an exaction: whatever is being required (exacted) as a
condition of development approval must be clearly and closely related to the impact of the
proposed development

Exaction — a requirement the local government for proposed development to provide some
form of contribution or payment as compensation for impacts of the development on
infrastructure systems or public goods

Excess Capacity — a share of the capacity of an infrastructure facility that exceeds the needs of a
given development

Financial Feasibility — a determination of whether a project’s value or revenues will justify the
costs to construct it, given the expected level of risk

Fixture Units — a unit of measure of plumbing (water or wastewater) demand, calculated based
on the plumbing code

Hard Costs — construction labor and material costs

Housing Affordability — households’ ability to find housing within their financial means, with
or without public support or restrictions in place, across a range of income levels. This is
commonly measured based on spending no more than 30 percent of gross income on housing
(rent or mortgage, plus utilities)?”

Housing Production — new housing development or other increases to the supply of housing
units

Impact Fees — legislative monetary exactions adopted by a governing body and applied
consistently to development applications

Improvement Fee — an SDC fee for costs associated with capital improvements to be
constructed

Infrastructure Systems Plans — master plans or public facility plans for a given infrastructure
system (e.g., parks master plans, transportation system plans, water or wastewater system
master plans, or stormwater         master plans)




26 Nollan v. California Coastal Commission, 483 U.S. 825, 837 (1987)
227 'The 30 percent standard is widely used but simplistic. See discussion and additional context related to defining
affordability and affordable housing in the following memorandum:
Nick Meltzer, Sadie DiNatale, Bob Parker & Rebecca Lewis, University of Oregon, “Definitions of Affordable
Housing,” to the Department of Land Conservation and Development and the HB 4079 Rulemaking Advisory
Committee (RAC), September 19, 2016. https://www.oregon.gov/led/UP/Documents/UO-Defining Affordability.pdf


Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                                   136
Internal Rate of Return (IRR) — a commonly used financial metric in the real estate industry to
estimate the profitability of real estate investments as discount rate measured in percentage
points

Level of Service (LOS) — a way of defining the quality or amount of service provided by a given
infrastructure system or facility

Local Jurisdictions — cities, counties, or special districts

Local Option Levies — a special voter-approved property tax levy outside the limitations on
permanent property tax rates under Oregon’s property tax system

Lower-Cost Housing — market-rate housing (without income or rent/price restrictions) that
offers lower sale prices or rents than most new housing in a given area and typically also has
lower development costs

Market Context Area — generalized geographies capturing differences across the state in
housing market factors and development cost factors

Market-Rate Development/Housing — housing in which prices or rents are (or can be) based on
market demand and willingness to pay rather than meeting a defined level of affordability

Measure 5 — an Oregon ballot measure from the early 1990s that introduced property tax rate
limits and cut tax rates

Measure 50 — an Oregon ballot measure from the late 1990s that cut taxes, introduced assessed
value growth limits, and replaced most tax levies with permanent tax rates

Middle Housing — duplexes, triplexes, quadplexes, townhouses, and cottage clusters

Monetary Exactions — requirements by local governments that developers pay money as a
condition of development approval

Multifamily Residence/Dwelling — a property with multiple dwelling units on a common lot,
excluding middle housing (the dwelling units may be occupied by families or nonfamily
households)

Nominal Dollars — dollar value based on the year of expenditure, unadjusted for inflation

Original Cost — the cost of building a facility at the time it was built

Pro Forma — a financial model that estimates the feasibility of a new real estate development
based on the building’s financial performance

Qualified Public Improvements (QPIs) — according to ORS 223.304(4): “Qualified public
improvements are improvements required as a condition of development approval, identified
in the SDC capital project list, and either: a) Not located on or contiguous to property that is the


Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                             137
subject of development approval; or b) Located in whole or in part on or contiguous to property
that is the subject of development approval and required to be built larger or with greater
capacity than is necessary for the particular development project to which the improvement fee
is related.”

Ratemaking Principles — not defined in statute, but generally considered to include
establishing fee levels consistent with the costs of providing the service and recovering costs
from system users in proportion to their use or impact; however, modern interpretations argue
that water, wastewater, and stormwater service providers have a social responsibility to ensure
universal, affordable access to services as part of their rate-setting framework

Rate-setting — methodology and policy decisions associated with establishing an SDC rate and
fee structure

Real Market Value — an estimate of the market value of a property in an arms-length sales
transaction

Reimbursement Fee — a fee for costs associated with capital improvements already constructed,
or under construction when the fee is established, for which the local government determines
that capacity exists?”

Replacement Cost — the cost to replace an existing asset with a similar asset at current
construction costs

Rough Proportionality — a concept established by the U.S. Supreme Court in Dolan v. City of
Tigard” as a test for the validity of an exaction: the amount of the exaction must be roughly
proportionate to the magnitude of the impact that the exaction is intended to address

Scaling Factors — development characteristics that relate to potential system impact used to set
SDC rate structures to account for those differences in impacts

Service Providers — local jurisdictions (cities, counties, or special districts) that build and
operate water, wastewater,          stormwater,    transportation,   or parks systems


Single-Family Residence/Dwelling — a single detached dwelling unit on its own lot (the
dwelling unit may be occupied by a family or a nonfamily household)

Soft Costs — development costs excluding the direct cost of construction, such as design and
engineering, project management, financing, permits, and fee costs

Special Districts — a form of local government that provides specific public services




228 ORS 223.299(3)
229 Dolan v. City of Tigard, 512 U.S. 374 (1994)



Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                             138
System Development Charges (SDCs) — impact fees established and administered consistent
with Oregon’s SDC Act

SDC Act — State statute (ORS 223.297 to 223.316) that regulates SDCs, first passed in 1989

SDC Credits — credits against SDC fees for construction of a qualified public improvement

SDC-eligible Projects — capacity-increasing projects that are included in an infrastructure
system plan project list

SDC Methodology — documentation of an SDC calculation in compliance with the SDC Act

SDC Exemptions or Waivers — policies to not to charge a certain type or category of
development an SDC. Most communities that do not charge SDCs for affordable housing
describe this as an “SDC Exemption”. Some make a distinction between “waivers” given on a
case-by-case basis and “exemptions” that are set in policy. Others use these terms
interchangeably. Throughout this document, when referring to programs that do not collect
SDCs from affordable housing, both terms are used to mean policy-based exclusions that are
applied consistently to all qualifying projects, unless a budgetary limit is set

Tax Levies — taxes established to provide a specific amount of tax revenue

Total Development Costs — the full cost of a development project, including construction labor
and material, land costs, and “soft costs” such as design and engineering, project management,
financing, permits, and fees

Townhouse — units that share common walls with each unit on an individual lot or parcel

Trip Ends — the beginning (origin) or end (destination) of a one-way trip

User Fees — fees local governments charge for the use or ongoing availability of government
services like parks, streets, public safety, and others

Water Resources — According to the Congressional Budget Office, water resources include
“water containment systems (dams, levees, reservoirs, and watersheds) and sources of
freshwater’?

Water Utilities — According to the Congressional Budget Office, water utilities include “supply
systems for distributing potable water as well as wastewater and sewage treatment systems and
plants” 73!




230 Congressional Budget Office, “Public Spending on Transportation and Water Infrastructure, 1956 to 2014,” March
2015, page 3.
331 Ibid., page 3.


Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                           139
Working Capital — the available financial resources that a company can readily use to pay near-
term costs




Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                        140
Appendices
Appendix A. Summary of Input from Service
  Providers
                            Contributors:      ECONorthwest,   Galardi Rothstein Group, FCS Group

ECONorthwest, along with consultants from the FCS Group and the Galardi Rothstein Group,
conducted seven focus groups for large cities and small cities, special districts, parks providers,
and the Portland Bureaus. The focus groups are important for understanding the varying
perspectives on the importance of SDCs for infrastructure funding, factors driving SDC setting,
timing of collection, and considerations related to measures to reduce the impact of SDCs on
housing.

Questions Asked
Below is the set of questions used to help guide the focus groups.

    1.   Role of SDCs in Funding Infrastructure: How important are SDCs to your
         jurisdiction/district?
    2.   SDC Rate Increases vs Cost Escalation: Are you indexing your SDCs based on changes
         in construction costs or other measures? Has that been enough for them to keep up with
         increases in actual project costs over time?
    3.   Actual Rates and Factors Influencing Rate Setting: Is your organization currently
         charging the maximum that your methodology supports? If not, why not? What are
         some of the top factors that influenced your organization’s most recent SDC setting
         decisions?
    4.   Equity Considerations: How and to what extent did equity considerations factor into
         your rate-setting decisions? If it did, how did you address equity in the rate-setting
         process and in evaluating equitable outcomes?
    5.   Strategies to reduce impacts of SDCs on housing: Some communities and districts are
         considering measures to reduce the impact of SDCs housing affordability. Does your
         organization currently have any affordable housing measures in place? If so, how are
         they working? If not, what concerns do you have about implementing them?
    6.   Timing: How does the timing of SDC collection compare to when you need to build
         facilities? To what extent does the specific timing within the development process (e.g.,
         certificate of occupancy vs. building permit) affect your organization's ability to build
         facilities when they are needed? Do you have other concerns related to the timing of
         when SDCs are paid?
    7.   Transparency Requirements: As you may know, HB 3040 also included a requirement
         to make information about SDCs including rates, methodology, and the project list
         available to the public via a website (unless the jurisdiction/district does not have a
         website). Has addressing this requirement been a challenge? Does your
         jurisdiction/district have any additional tools to provide information to the public
         regarding SDCs?

Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                            142
    8.     Questions for us / other thoughts (if time permits): Do you have questions for OHCS or
           the consultant team about the study? Are there other things you are concerned about
           related to SDC requirements?

Jurisdictions That Attended


 Wilsonville                  Newport                   Eugene                  Bend

 Lebanon                      Tigard                    Albany                  Forest Grove

 Redmond                      Wilsonville               Medford                 Beaverton

 Hillsboro                    Redmond                   Springfield             Falls City

 Lake Oswego                  Newberg                   Tualatin                Sherwood

 Sisters                      Gladstone                 Klamath Falls           Vale

 Cornelius                    North Bend                McMinnville             Ashland

 Warrenton                    Cannon Beach              Oregon City             Millersburg

 Sherwood                     Stayton                   Banks                   Banks

 Hood River                   Philomath                 Pendleton               Independence

 The Dalles


 Special Districts and Counties

 Tualatin Valley              Roseburg Urban            Clean Water Services    Washington County
 Water District               Sanitary Authority

 Twin Rocks Sanitary          Canby Utility             Sunrise Water           Oak Lodge Water
 District                                               Authority               Services

 Metropolitan                 Washington County         Rockwood Water          Harbor Sanitary
 Wastewater                                             People's Utility        District
 Management                                             District
 Commission

 Clackamas County             Jackson County Roads      Rogue Valley Sewer     = Housing Authority of
                                                        Services                 Clackamas County




Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                             143
 Clackamas Water               Hood River County        West Slope Water           Eugene Water &
 Environment                                            District                   Electric Board
 Services

 Parks and Recreation Districts

 Willamalane Park              North Clackamas          Hood River Valley          Wilsonville Parks and
 and Recreation                Parks and Recreation     Parks & Recreation         Recreation
 District                      District                 District

 Tualatin Hills Park     &     Bend Park and Rec        City of Albany Parks       Clackamas County
 Recreation District           District                 & Recreation               Parks

 Crook County Park           — Portland Parks &         Metro Parks and            Oregon Recreation &
 & Rec District -              Recreation               Nature                     Park Assoc
 Prineville, OR


 Clackamas County              Lane County Parks        Sunset Empire Park     &   Northern Wasco
                                                        Recreation District        County Parks and
                                                                                   Recreation District

 Corvallis Parks and           Medford Parks &
 Recreation                    Recreation
 Department



Summary of Stakeholder Feedback and Themes
The balance of this memorandum summarizes feedback from the focus groups by topic and
theme. Paraphrased statements from attendees are shown in italics. Where relevant, the type of
service provider making the statement in question is indicated in brackets (e.g., [small city]).




Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                    144
 Themes                         Stakeholder Feedback

 Role of SDCs in Funding Infrastructure
 Critical funding source            Some jurisdictions would not be able to make land available for development within the UGB without
 for infrastructure in              SDCs to extend infrastructure.
 communities                        Some Metro jurisdictions use specific SDCs or higher SDC rates in high-growth areas.
 experiencing growth                     o Inmany new growth areas, service providers have evaluated how the areas needed to be served
                                            from a parks and recreation standpoint and added area specific supplemental SDCs. This
                                            method has been successful, as developers see the market value in parks and recreation facilities.
                                    Several small cities noted they had not experienced a lot of growth occurring and little SDC revenue, but
                                    more recently there have been more developments that have brought in more SDCs and there’s more
                                    need for capacity-increasing projects to support growth.
                                    Some in larger cities feel there is a disconnect between for-profit developers and jurisdictions when
                                    developers want to reduce or waive the SDCs jurisdictions rely on to help pay for infrastructure
                                    investments that facilitate housing development.
 SDCs prevent over-                 Public utilities rely on political/public support for raising capital (unlike investor-owned utilities). SDCs
 reliance on user fees              are key to messaging that growth is paying for growth, and utility rate increases are for meeting other
 and utility rates to               capital and operating needs.
 cover cost of new
                                    Some believe user fees should only be used for maintenance and operations of existing facilities, as cities
 capacity
                                    do not want to burden existing users with helping to pay for new development (through an increase in
                                    user fees).
                                    Would need to replace revenue with large utility rate increases, new fees (transportation), and GO
                                    bonds (parks). Equity issues from redistribution of growth-related costs.
 Critical for funding               A number of water/sewer service providers noted the importance of SDCs in helping pay for major
 large infrastructure               projects, that may not have happened without them. While not the sole source, they often contributed a
 like major sewer                   meaningful amount or helped pay debt service.
 interceptor, water     and
 sewer plants


Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                                                           145
 Themes                         Stakeholder Feedback
 SDC credits for                e   For larger developments and greenfields, credits play an important role, especially in larger cities.
 improvements built by                  o Jurisdictions have seen a number of capacity expanding infrastructure projects being built by
 developers are an                          developers then getting SDC credits.
 important component                    o Some report not charging parks SDCs in expansion areas because developers typically opt to
 of SDC expenditures in                     build the park and get credits instead. Will also issue transportation credits for oversized
 some communities                           facilities. This is less common outside of expansion areas.
                                    SDC credits sometimes provide cost savings when developers build infrastructure.
                                        o Jurisdictions or providers (particularly parks districts) have worked more with developers to
                                            deliver infrastructure need for their developments at better rates with economies of scale, and
                                            then receive SDC credits.
 Revenues can be                °   Communities experiencing mostly infill may get less SDC revenue.
 limited in places with
                                         o   Most development consists of tear-down/rebuilds and no SDCs are collected because usually get credit for
 slow growth
                                             previous development.
                                         o   Would love to rely on SDCs for capital improvements but landlocked —little expansion room, no empty land
                                             in town, only comes from infill or teardown and build more housing.
 There are other                °    Tax limitations in Oregon have had particularly acute impact on parks and transportation funding.
 funding options                         o Areas with enterprise zones and Urban Renewal districts further limit revenue.
 beyond SDCs and                °    Urban renewal more and more relied on to fill gaps, capturing revenue from other districts
 utility rates, but they        °    Some jurisdictions use general fund allocations or special property tax levies to supplement SDCs
 are limited                             o Larger cities have supplemented SDCs with discretionary allocations from the General Fund, but
                                             very limitedly.
                                         o One county has a voter-approved tax they levy to help pay for county road projects on major
                                             arterials.
                                     One community with a tourism-based economy adopted a prepared food tax.
                                     A few communities have implemented utility fees for transportation and parks to pay for maintenance
                                     and improvements.



Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                                                               146
                                Stakeholder Feedback
                                         o    But for parks, this now gets stretched to cover things like ROW and greenways in addition to the
                                              parks
                                     State and federal funds are more limited now than in the past
                                     It can be a struggle to fund parks and transportation projects the most, because they often do not collect
                                    user fees like water, sewer, and stormwater
 SDCs are key to                    Parks providers noted they often leverage SDCs as grant matching dollars to close gaps and have few
 leveraging other funds             other sources available as a local match. Many jurisdictions also noted using SDCs as local match for
                                    transportation projects.


 SDC revenue is                     Portion of infrastructure funding from SDCs varies from year-to-year due to various factors including
 volatile year to year,             the rate of growth and the type of improvements being constructed.
 and varies as a share of
 capital funding

 Lack of funding for                SDCs cannot be used for maintenance or operations of existing facilities.
 operations and
                                    Hard to justify building more facilities when struggling to fund existing facilities
 maintenance can limit
 use of SDCs                             o   Some jurisdictions do not feel like it is feasible to expand without an adequate and stable source
                                             of revenue for maintenance and operation.
 Some small cities do               Reasons why small cities are not collecting SDCs:
 not charge SDCs at all                 o Little development (which requires less infrastructure development)
                                        o Political concerns
                                        o Developers required to install infrastructure
                                        o Voter approval required by local policy in some communities




Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                                                             147
 Themes                         Stakeholder Feedback

 Methodology Choices and Cost Allocation
 Infill and denser                  New density requirements create capacity issues with infill development, such that it may be more.
 developments are                   expensive to serve due to the need to upsize existing infrastructure in a developed area
 sometimes, but not                          o Waiving or reducing SDCs for higher density housing can be problematic since those
 always, less costly to                          housing types are more reliant on parks.
 serve                              Infill may have lower transportation impacts, so some jurisdictions offer discounts for denser
                                    developments or to areas with better access to transit or that are more walkable.
 Infill areas may need a            Some jurisdictions are changing approach to fund upgrades to existing facilities that expand capacity and
 different approach                 may also replace existing aging infrastructure.
                                           o Areas experiencing more infill development than greenfield development may need a different
                                             way of defining LOS and growth capacity      — specifically, improvements that increase capacity
                                             through more efficient use of existing facilities versus building new facilities.
 Some service providers             Tiered fees are typically based on local data showing reduced household size, trips, or other measures of
 have implemented or                impact.
 are working on a                         o Some researched how occupancy changes by square footage, showing there was less impact
 tiered approach for                         when fewer people lived in a unit.
 residential SDCs based             Others are considering making this shift, or in the process of working on it.
 on unit size

 Many expressed                     Service providers value local discretion in SDC methodology and policy.
 concerns about a “one                  o Some felt that the nuance of affordability and quality of life people get from infrastructure
 size can fit most”                         investments is best dealt with at the local level.
 approach




Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                                                      148
 Themes                         Stakeholder Feedback

 Cost Recovery
 Many are not charging          e¢   Many communities made policy choices to charge less than the full SDC determined by methodology
 the maximum amount                  and project list.
 supported by                            o   Some policy makers are hesitant to levy the maximum amount the methodology would support
 methodology                                 to stay competitive or support affordable housing development.
                                         o Decision-makers often want to see how proposed SDC rates compare to other jurisdictions in an
                                             effort to not be the highest.
                                e    Some small cities in particular have avoided setting SDCs rates at the maximum their methodology
                                     supports in order to remain competitive.
                                         o Needed to stay below “closest neighbor of similar size.”
                                         o More important not to create disincentives to development, remain competitive with other similar
                                             communities.
                                e    Some adjust project lists rather than reducing SDC rates from max to keep SDC rates lower.
                                         o Use of funded and unfunded project lists, or SDC project lists established based on viable SDC
                                             rate.
                                                     =
                                                    Not all projects made it onto funded list. Created kind of a target max SDC that they would
                                                    charge, prioritized project to that amount.
                                e    Some phase in SDC rate increases over multiple years to avoid making big jumps.
                                         o Large increases sometimes prompted phase-in periods.
 Other cities and               e    Some communities have a policy inclination that growth should pay for itself and charge max SDC rates.
 service providers              e    Others have caught up more recently (after keeping SDC rates artificially low for many years), and come
 charge the full amount              to recognize a greater/urgent need for infrastructure upgrades.
 or have made bigger
 increases




Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                                                         149
 Themes                         Stakeholder Feedback
 Most (but not all)             °   Many use Engineering News Record (ENR) Construction Cost Index (CCI), either the 20-City average or
 service providers                  the City of Seattle index, but the timeframes vary and this can change the outcome.
 index SDC rates                °   Parks providers often also account for changes in land costs.
                                    A few do not index SDC rates.
                                        o Some only increase SDC rates when they believe there’s a viable justification.
                                        o Calculate every year —effectively renew methodology every year, no cost escalator. Not that much work —
                                            have staff capacity [in a large city] to do it in house.
 SDCs not keeping pace          e   Inconsistent indexing.
 with rising costs due to       e   Some felt that available indices are not representative of local variations in costs (e.g., Seattle ENR not
 a variety of factors               representative of Portland construction market).
                                    Methodology for indexing can create lag.
                                        o Even when SDC rates are indexed year-to-year, they don’t appear to keep up because indexes tend lag on
                                            their own.
                                    Some infrastructure systems can lag more than others.
                                        o Index numbers for land cost (for parks) are based on assessed values rather than market values, so they
                                            continue to fall behind on top of the existing lag.
                                        o Transportation costs have the hardest time keeping up with construction cost escalations.
                                        o Park districts are experiencing the same cost increases as developers but are not able to recoup any costs.
                                    Many (though not all) are seeing actual costs rise faster than their index.
                                        o Not keeping up with cost of materials. Index only includes cost of construction (not land), falling further
                                            behind.
 Methodology updates            e   Methodologies and project lists are not updated regularly.
 are a substantial                      o Takes 5-10 years to update SDC. Hard to keep system plans fresh —spend increment on updating master
 undertaking                                plans, CIP, and methodology. [small city]
                                        o Methodology updates every 10 years. [large city]
 With SDC escalation            e    Districts haven’t been able to move capital projects forward due to stagnant SDCs (against costs).
 falling behind costs,                    o Have had to make some reductions to projects with costs increasing.


Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                                                                   150
 Themes                         Stakeholder Feedback
 some service providers                  o   It is becoming more common for sudden projects to come up, but funding hasn't been allocated for them.
 can fund less                           o   Falling behind on ability to expand capacity because of cost escalations of past 5 years or more. Far exceed
                                             ability to update methodology to keep pace. [small city]

 Equity and Affordability Considerations
 Varying perspectives           e   Some felt SDCs should only consider impact, not ability to pay (particularly in the context of affordable
 on what the relevant               housing waivers).
 equity issues are for                   o   SDCis based on the impact —equity    is more about reflecting differences in impacts.
 SDCs                           e   Some felt the key equity consideration is putting costs on development vs. existing users.
                                        o There’s substantial concern around over-burdening existing users/long-term residents if user-
                                           fees are increased.
                                e   Some emphasized supporting affordable housing regardless of impact.
                                        o Backfilling to support regulated affordable housing with guaranteed longevity. Very much an equity and
                                           need for affordable housing conversation, understanding that market won't deliver it.
                                e   Some focused on reflecting differences in impact for different housing types and larger vs. smaller
                                    homes.
                                        o Recognize equity piece related unit size.
                                e   Some focused on equitable expenditures of SDC revenue/provision of facilities
                                        o Access to walkable parks is an important element of the equity conversation.
                                        o Equity considerations on allocation side, how to decide what gets funded. Major factor in deciding where to
                                           spend the revenue.
                                        o Understanding who benefits from the investments is more important than where the money comes from
                                           (true equity impact ts at the backend, when investments are made).
                                e   Some focused on equity in the process
                                        o Existing residents often hold historic influence in investment decisions, so residents who might be
                                           disproportionately affected by reducing or eliminating SDCs might not be at the table.
                                        o Some communities use standing or ad hoc committees to help in the SDC-setting process.




Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                                                                       151
                                Stakeholder Feedback
 Increase in interest               Several cities and service providers have waiver policies in place for regulated affordable housing and
 in/use of affordable               more jurisdictions reported considering waivers.
 housing waivers                    But concerns about administration and enforcement for affordable housing waivers were raised.
                                        o Incommunities that have not implemented affordable housing waivers, staff sometimes
                                             expressed concerns about monitoring and enforcement over time:
                                                  = How to guarantee that rents stay low?
                                                  = What happens if owner changes rents? If rents do change to market-rate, is there a way to
                                                       get SDC payment?
                                                  # Major administrative tracking concerns.
                                    Most service providers that offer SDC waivers for affordable housing limit it to regulated / income-
                                    restricted affordable housing.
                                        oO Some use a deed restriction that requires them to pay back the SDCs if the property does not remain
                                             affordable.
                                        o Some noted waivers have increased admin costs because they must review for eligibility, other said it was
                                             minimal.
 Concerns about                     Some do not feel it is fair (or, in some cases, legal) to waive fees for affordable housing.
 implications of                             o  SDCs are charged based on infrastructure needs, and affordable housing still creates an impact on
 foregone revenue from                          infrastructure.
 eliminating or                     Some cities and service providers have set a cap on the amount of waivers they will issue.
 reducing SDCs for                  Many raised questions about where replacement funding would come from.
 affordable housing                        o When SDCs are waived on certain projects, the revenue will need to come from other sources so
                                               projects can be built.
                                           Oo User fees or general funds may be used to backfill whatever SDCs are waived.
                                           Oo Want to know that if SDCs are reduced or eliminated, how can they ensure investments are made in
                                                lower income areas?
                                           Oo If there was a policy to waive, would have to be a policy to backfill—that money has to come from
                                                somewhere. What do you backfill it with is the question, not whether to backfill.
                                           © Concerned that State will require SDCs be waived or reduced for certain types of development projects.
                                                If this becomes the case, state funding should be provided to help backfill.

Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                                                             152
 Themes                         Stakeholder Feedback

 Timing
 Most jurisdictions             e   Jurisdictions offering deferral to certificate of occupancy (C of O) often do so selectively, but each
 collect SDCs at                    jurisdiction is different in their approach and criteria.
 building permit                         o   Water SDCs are sometimes linked to meter placement, which typically occurs about 3/4 of the way
 issuance, but some                         through finishing the house, before C of O, but after BP (usually). Have leverage because the
 offer flexibility                          meter needs to be installed. Several indicated they won’t install the meter if SDCs haven't been
                                            paid.
 Concerns about                 e   Administratively, it’s easiest for jurisdictions to collect at building permit.
 administering                          o Easier to collect SDCs with Building Permit when applicant is already paying permit fee - more
 deferrals                                   efficient.
                                         o  When fees are not collected all at once, funding streams become disconnected and project
                                            execution can become uncertain.
                                e   At Certificate of Occupancy, service providers still have some leverage, though there were differing
                                    opinions about this.
                                        o Some said certificate of occupancy is fine, since there’s still a lever the jurisdiction has control
                                            over.
                                        o Some cities expressed that once permits are issued, they can't hold up C of O for any unmet
                                            conditions or unpaid fees.
                                                 = Pretty common opinion from building officials     —if don’t get fee up front, no hammer to collect any
                                                    more.
                                                 = Permitting system wouldn't allow carrying a balance—can’t call for inspection.
                                e   Many service providers are concerned about nonpayment and being in a difficult position with deferral
                                    to C of O. For example:
                                        o If ready for final inspection, ready to close and move in, and SDC payment holds it up, would look like
                                            City holding up final inspection. Creates perception issue.
                                e   Single-family development can be more challenging for deferrals.
                                        o SF permits all come in individually. Would have to monitor and track every unit individually.


Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                                                                   153
 Themes                         Stakeholder Feedback
                                         o Fora subdivision phased in over time can deferral create delays in implementing improvements.
                                e    Collecting at time of sale is especially concerning
                                         o Rental properties are not sold, there’s no trigger in place to collect SDCs
                                         o Large scale planned development that might be built out over several years with piecemeal sales, might not
                                             allow for SDCs to be collected in a timely manner.
                                         o Since cities are not involved in the sale of a property, there may be no trigger in place for collection (years
                                             down the road) and fees may never get paid.
                                         o Concerned about level of effort and staff time to track and make sure it happens.
                                         o City has no connection to sale, no involvement. Unless appropriately recorded —have to rely on someone
                                             else to trigger it, no guarantee it will show up.
 Most service providers         e¢   Most service providers are not utilizing SDC revenues for projects within the same year and would
 are not affected by a               generally not be greatly affected by a 6 or 12-month delay in collections. Projects are usually planned out
 small delay in                      several years through the CIP with current revenues funding projects in later years.
 receiving funds, but           e    For new parks in master planned areas, timing of SDC collection is important, especially for land
 there are a few cases               acquisition, since this needs to occur prior to development. Timing for developing the park land is less
                                     critical. Having parks and playgrounds before first homes come up isn’t necessarily as important.
 where timing is more
                                     However, others felt that people expect park and rec facilities when they move in.
 important
                                e    Insome cases, utility impacts are immediate (e.g., water use during construction).
                                e    Some service providers use SDCs to pay debt service on previously built projects and expend it in the
                                     year it is received.

 Transparency
 Basic ORS                      e    Most provide some info online, but amount and type vary.
 requirements are not a                  o Methodologies, project lists, fee schedules posted on website.
 problem for most                        o Funding can be tracked in budgets, CIP, and annual reports.
 agencies                       e    Some charge small administrative charges to recover a portion of the compliance requirements and
                                     include a part of master planning costs on the project list.



Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                                                                   154
                                Stakeholder Feedback
 Additional simpler             e   Cities that only post their methodology online without providing more user-friendly materials for
 explanations of SDCs               community members to navigate the methodology can create confusion and tie up staff time with
 are common                         fielding questions.
                                e   Many communities have at least a brief explanation online.
                                e   Larger agencies have staff dedicated to SDC program, so can provide more tools, such as
                                         .@) Dedicated webpage
                                             SDC calculators
                                        0
                                        0    Transportation SDC video
                                             Historical SDC tracking and comparisons
                                        0



                                             FAQs
                                        90




                                          Mail CIP reports to citizens
                                        0




                                          Training of front counter staff key to communication/understanding
                                        OO




                                          Public info campaign for projects that are funded with SDCs - want people to see how being
                                        Oo




                                          used
                                e   Some smaller service providers noted that simple explainers from the state that explain what SDCs are
                                    would be helpful.
 Providing information          e   Would have been concerned if had to clearly show what SDC are paying for specifically.
 on SDC expenditures                   .@) Gets complicated when multiple revenue sources are applied due to mix of project components (growth and
 is more complex                           maintenance).
                                           Small communities report it would be difficult to track at a subsystem (neighborhood) level.
                                           There is a lack of tracking where new dwelling units are being constructed relative to where funding is
                                           being spent.




Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                                                            155
Appendix B. Summary of Input from Developers
                                                                    Contributors:   ECONorthwest


ECONorthwest conducted seven interviews and focus groups with market rate and affordable
housing developers and home builders to gather insights on how SDCs affected developers’
choices and development outcomes.

Discussion Topics
While the interviews and focus groups varied depending on the developers’ experience and
expertise, the range of topics addressed in these conversations included:

    1.   How do SDCs affect your development decisions? Can you give examples of times when
         SDCs affected and or all of the following:
             Land negotiations
             Walking away from a potential project
             Changing what you would build / target price point
         How does the impact of SDCs on housing vary across different geographic areas?
         What are the implications of the timing of when SDCs are due within the development
         process?
         How important are the following factors related to SDCs:
             amount of the SDC relative to the strength of the local housing market;
             amount of the SDC compared to other similar communities;
             how the SDCs are used, and being able to see clear value from the SDCs; and

             certainty about how much the final SDC cost will be.
         Are there jurisdictions that you think are good models to look to for mitigating impacts
         of SDCs on housing?




Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                           156
Companies Represented
     Metropolitan Land Group                Killian Pacific         Seven Peaks Homes
     Polygon Northwest /                    Stoel Rives, LLP        Stonebridge Homes
          Taylor Morrison                   Hearthstone Homes       Venture Properties
     Pacific Crest Real Estate              Cornerstone Community   Hayden Homes
     CDC Management                           Housing               Goodwell Construction
     Hi-Valley Development                  NW Housing
     Arbor South                              Alternatives

     Columbia Gorge Capital


Summary of Stakeholder Feedback and Themes
Themes and stakeholder feedback from the interviews and focus groups are summarized on the
following pages by topic.




Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                       157
 Themes                         Stakeholder Feedback

 Do SDCs Affect Development Decisions?
 SDCs are part of                    e   Most developers, report that SDCs are included as a line item in the proforma as a development
 underwriting and                        cost. Some identified SDCs as a major cost category, along with land costs, hard costs, and off-site
 decision-making, as                     improvements.
 one of many costs that                       e Moves the needle for cost of housing across the board, combined with everything else.
 developers consider                          e Not only SDCs. One of the biggest costs though.
                                              e Have decided not to do maybe $20m of work because of how SDCs skewed proforma.

 How SDCs Can Affect Feasibility of Projects
 In some cases, SDCs                 e   Entry-level homes are often cost-sensitive because of the need to keep sale prices down.
 are enough to make a                        o Worked for a homebuilder that did entry-level homes for first-time buyers and it was a burden.
 project infeasible,                         o SDCs are $35-36k on an entry-level house. Sale price needs to be about another $45k just to break
 especially for very cost                        even.
 sensitive housing types                     o Try to build a home and SDC fees are almost $30k before building permits. Would have to build
                                                 something that nobody can afford. (Small coastal community)
                                             o If just barely pencils and SDC rates go up, they walk away if it’s entry-level. In the middle adjust up
                                                 or down, at bottom it’s go/no-go.
                                         Middle housing (attached product) tends to be cost-sensitive because it can cost more to build than a
                                         single-family home and sells for less relative to a single-family dwelling, but SDCs are not
                                         proportionately lower.
                                             o Jurisdictions often have just a multifamily and single-family SDC rate so middle housing doesn’t get
                                                  the same discount as you would for larger multifamily. Some SDC rates differentiate based on square
                                                 footage, but those often don't have a substantial discount and other SDCs don’t vary in the same way
                                                 so SDC rates don't change that much.
                                             o Had a half-acre of land on hold in [medium-sized mid-Willamette Valley city], waiting for HB
                                                 2001, but when they got the estimate back for SDCs for the 12-unit project it was about $200,000




Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                                                               158
 Themes                         Stakeholder Feedback
                                                (just for building SDCs). Doesn't include utility costs. Means 20 percent of unit costs going to soft
                                                costs outside of architecture & engineering. Considering bailing on it.
                                             o It’s ahard sell to propose middle housing when single family performs better. SDCs make up a larger
                                                percentage of the sale price for middle housing so they perform even worse.
                                     e   Multifamily can also be affected by high SDCs when rents won’t cover the costs.
                                             o SDC fees (plus other local fees, including building permit) made it prohibitive to underwrite project.
                                                Were about $40k per unit, and those areas had been more like $20-30k historically. If the fees for that
                                                  area were lower, it would still have been questionable, but would have helped.
                                              o  24-unit project in [medium-sized mid-Willamette Valley city]. [fit costs more than about $15k
                                                 per unit, it gets tough. Now getting closer to $20k per unit.
                                             o 12-unit project in [small city]. Did some napkin math, got SDC numbers from City up front and said
                                                 wouldn't work period. Didn't bother refining project. With SDCs in normal range would have been
                                                 tight anyway.
 Lower SDCs aren't                   e   When projects don't work, it's often about more than just SDCs—construction costs and market
 always enough to                        conditions are big drivers.
 make an infeasible                          o If it doesn’t pencil out, there are probably multiple drivers, not just SDCs.
 project feasible                            o Construction costs have gone up from around $200/sf. Now coming in around $250/sf. Not SDC
                                                 related, just market right now.
                                             o Deal-killer now is supply, labor, construction costs. SDCs have become a smaller factor.
                                             o Ifacommunity doesn’t have reliable growth, reliable rents won't get near it.
                                     e   Lower-cost housing types tend to face obstacles beyond SDCs.
                                             o ADUs are super expensive to build per SF basis and the return on them doesn’t align.
                                             o For middle housing, you're putting a product on a site that would otherwise have a single-family
                                                 home on it. Lenders always compare to what else could be built there. Have to justify that it performs
                                                 better than single-family dwelling, but middle housing often doesn’t. Attached product depending on
                                                 market particulars can cost 20 percent more to build than a single-family home (more complex to
                                                 build) and dramatically undersells relative to a single-family dwelling (30-50 percent of a sf dwelling).
                                             o Larger homes often perform better than smaller ones. Incentive is to build the largest marketable
                                                 product on the lot.

Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                                                                     159
 Themes                         Stakeholder Feedback
 Where SDCs are low                  e   When ajurisdiction’s fees are low, they may not be a source of concern.
 relative to other costs,                    o SDCs [for duplexes in a small coastal city] were about $6,000 per unit, that amount just doesn’t
 they have little impact                         move needle too much because rent growth in area 1s so high and the SDCs were low. Not significant
 on projects                                     relative to overall budget cost.
                                     e   Residential adaptive reuse projects can have low SDCs compared to new construction.
                                             o Adaptive reuse of a former senior care center that was 70 rooms, which resulted in a reduced fixture
                                                 count (ended up with about 56 units after completed). Resulted in less than 50k in SDCs on that
                                                 project, less than 1k per unit.
                                     e   SDCs are not typically an important factor for high end housing types, such as custom homes.
                                             o SDCs are just one other fee on a several-million-dollar house, just a small component. Not that
                                                 important to their business model.
                                             O   Property owner typically pays the SDC for custom homes.
                                             O   The bigger the home, the less impactful the SDCs are on the construction of the unit.
                                             O   For a second home or custom home it is what it is - nonissue.
                                             O   If high end subdivision and there’s enough price elasticity it’s part of the cost of doing business.

 How SDCs Can Affect the Type or Scale of Housing Developers Build
 In many cases, SDCs                 e   Developers tend to specialize in certain types and forms of housing.
 are not a factor in                         o Try to build relatively the same types of plans. Pretty standard finish, build all Earth Advantage
 determining what a                               houses. Everyone wants granite counter tops.
 given developer will                             Always build multifamily, not single-family or townhomes.
                                             O




 build.                                            Strictly infill builder, 99 percent in [one large jurisdiction].
                                             9




                                                   Custom homebuilder, mostly higher-end.
                                             OO




                                                   Target to 80-120 percent AMI projects with mission-centric landowners because land is the largest
                                             Oo




                                                  frontload on the cost. Often work with legacy employers. No lease-up, stabilized at occupancy, saves
                                                  money.




Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                                                                    160
 Themes                         Stakeholder Feedback
                                     e   Product is usually based on what aligns with the market. Many wouldn’t change what they build
                                         just because of SDCs. This is particularly true for multifamily, given that SDCs are often not known
                                         up front.
                                              o Trying to get the right combination of unit sizes for the market and pricing. Designing and building
                                                  to what works for the market and sense of place and what city wants it to look like. Then come up with
                                                 final product. SDCs aren't last calculated but not first either.
                                              Oo When underwriting a project, if we know a market, know what finishes make sense for the market -
                                                  that goes into the hard cost budget. We let the general contractor know what finishes we're targeting.
                                                  When we run the proforma if all doesn't pencil out it just doesn’t work.
                                              Oo Wouldn't change from entry-level to market because of SDCs, would deliver what's best for the
                                                  market regardless of SDCs.
                                              oO There are a lot more components than SDCs that go into deciding the form of multifamily.
 Sometimes developers                e   SDCs combined with high land costs sometimes push developers to build bigger, more expensive
 will adjust unit size in                homes to cover the costs. This is particularly true for single-family homes where SDCs are more
 response to SDCs and                    predictable in advance.
 other costs.                                 o If can’t make [SDC exemption program] work could be 1700 sf house to get to higher sales price
                                                  that makes the numbers work. Currently building 3 houses in a neighborhood that's nicer, know they
                                                  won t be under price cap [for SDC exemption]. Had to build 1800 sf house to justify higher sales
                                                 price and afford SDCs. End up building bigger more expensive house to cover the cost.
                                              o SDCs aren't really stopping things in [large Metro-area city] - pushing houses to be larger and
                                                  more expensive.
                                     e   Other developers may build smaller units to cut costs while keeping pricing aligned with the
                                         market.
                                              o One area had lots of expensive requirements and high fees. Can only charge so much for a house, still
                                                  have to the price house to be competitive. Think those units might be smaller, higher cost for those
                                                 features. Typically get a smaller lot, maybe a smaller house but it’s new.
                                              o =©Will change product offering, shrink product to what people will be able to pay. But will the market
                                                  accept that?
                                              o   Have seen house sizes reduced to counter-act increasing   costs.


Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                                                                  161
                                Stakeholder Feedback
                                             o For lower sales price, go for a smaller house. Might have to build a 1300 sf house.
 Sometimes when the                      In some instances, if SDCs are waived for homes that sell to income-qualified buyer (below 120
 difference in SDCs is                   percent AMI), market-rate developers will build a lower-cost home to qualify.
 based on product type                       o When working with the SDC waiver program, homes are priced at $430k to qualified buyer, $475k to
 or scale is substantial,                        nonqualified buyer. If SDC-qualified buyer, get the discount. Sold 3 to SDC-qualified buyer, 2 to
 developers will choose                          nonqualified. Like to sell at lower price point, but a wash either way.
 the option with the                     When SDCs are much lower for small units, this can have a big impact on some projects.
 substantially lower                         oO Were able to take advantage of building cottage homes, reduced SDC fees. City figured that cluster
 SDCs                                            code allowed them to put 4 units on one lot, and were only going to get one SDC if put a larger home
                                                 there, justified that still covering the impact of one larger home. Could build up to 4 units, 1 SDC
                                                 divided by 4. Were able to do 4 for-sale units, hadn't been an option before. Small fee for hook-up, but
                                                 not the full $35-40k.
 Other times, when SDC                   Scaled SDCs that do not vary substantially have less impact on what will get built.
 differences are minor,                      o In [one medium-sized mid-Willamette Valley city], City was reviewing parks fees as well as
 they are not enough to                          transportation and water fees. Had asked them to think about a tiered study, because of HB 2001
 change the unit size or                         regulations. There was a push by Council to ask staff to do it. Took about 18 months to come back with
 other features.                                 recommendation, tiered. It’s a little different from [other tiered approaches]. Based on Census
                                                 data—average square footage that are being permitted. Reduced amount on smaller square footage,
                                                 increased on larger. But doesn’t get to where you need to be—not aggressive enough to make it work.
                                                 When look at fixed cost of what it takes—land, building costs, SDCs, won't be able to get cost down
                                                 enough to meet area median income.

 How SDCs Affect Housing Prices & Rents
 The market determines                        e   Inasupply-constrained environment when other costs are inflexible, builders may try to
 what prices/rents are                            push sales prices to recoup at least some of the costs.
 possible, but SDCs can                               o If there’s lack of supply of land and SDCs are fixed and costs are pretty fixed, have to sell the
 influence whether                                       house for more—there’s not much else that can move. Seems like demand is strong enough
 developers need to                                      relative to supply that builders feel like they can push the market.


Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                                                                       162
 Themes                         Stakeholder Feedback
 push the upper limits                                  o  Cost typically goes down to buyer on for-sale products, which causes the buyer’s buying
 or not                                                   power to go down. If house was supposed to be $350k and city fees were $60k per home, that
                                                           does get passed on. Maybe have to increase to $375k.
                                              e   Multifamily developers generally indicated they have limited ability to push rents, unless
                                                  rents are already increasing anyway.
                                                       o Can't raise rents just to raise rents.
                                                       o Unsure if will need to increase rents—don’t want to be uncompetitive in pricing. Could lead
                                                           to longer lease up, might not hit the numbers.
                                                           Trying to get numbers down to make it work with market rents.
                                                          Fees increased for parks district during development. Pandemic helped because rents went
                                                           through the roof—allowed them to pass through the costs. Otherwise probably would have
                                                           been on pause until rents went up.

 How SDCs Can Affect Land Prices & Negotiations
 SDCs affect land                    e   SDCs are one of the factors that impact what landowners and land developers can sell finished lots
 negotiations and what                   for, as part of the builder's overall proforma.
 developers are willing                       o Trying to keep SDCs down generally speaking —keeps land values higher as a seller of land.
 to pay in some cases                         © Developers come back on the land, that’s where the haggling is. But in a supply-constrained
                                                  development, their business requires land, so maybe they can push on subs or see what else can give.
                                              © If one jurisdiction charging $30k, another is charging $75k that goes into the formula. Either try to
                                                  pay less for land or know that will have to sell homes for more.
                                              © For any deal that works, they have successfully addressed the impact fees as part of purchase price (for
                                                  the land).
                                     e   There are times where a seller’s expectation on the price of land and high SDC costs have kept
                                         projects from moving forward because seller won't take a lower price. This can be particularly true
                                         when land costs are already low and there is limited room to absorb SDC costs by lowering the land
                                         price.




Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                                                                  163
 Themes                         Stakeholder Feedback
                                              o    Expectation from seller that land would sell for similar price of recently sold parcel next door (parcel
                                                   next-door zoned for single-family units, whereas this one required attached housing, no single family).
                                                   This particular city had higher SDCs relative to neighboring jurisdictions (new growth area), so could
                                                   only offer about 35 percent of what the seller was looking for. SDCs were baked into the proposed
                                                   purchase price and so if they could have come to a deal, the SDCs would have been pushed onto the
                                                   landowner because they couldn’t be baked into the attached product.
                                              o SDCs were a factor in not being able to come to an agreement on land price
                                              o Have passed on projects in [large Metro-area city], and properties that are still for sale where
                                                   couldn’t make the numbers work. Some land people just won't sell if they're not going to make
                                                   enough.
                                              o Could pay SDCs but landowner needs to take less money —tried to negotiate but would've been $100k
                                                   on a $300k property.
 Other times, land                   e   Some developers build on land that has been held for a long time, and land price negotiations aren't
 prices or negotiations                  a factor.
 do not play a role                           oO Already own everything they will develop, not in an acquisitions mode to develop projects.
                                     e   Some developers are strictly infill builders, so they do not do any large land acquisitions.
                                              © Not much land acquisition negotiation, mostly buying older homes and demo or keep and add to it.

 How SDCs Can Affect Where Development Occurs
 SDCs can make                       e   Many developers and builders report that land costs and SDCs are differentials when considering
 developers choose one                   what adjacent jurisdiction to build in. When SDC costs are out of line with market conditions,
 area over another in                    developers may look elsewhere.
 some instances                              © In some communities SDCs have been part of decision —don't look at [one jurisdiction] because of
                                                 some of the SDCs there.
                                             © Particularly an issue in older cities that have a lot of infrastructure costs that need to be funded. May
                                                pay $500k in SDCs and still have to replace utility lines.
                                             © Won't build in [certain small towns] - too expensive. Build in places that have more reasonable SDC
                                                fees.


Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                                                                     164
 Themes                         Stakeholder Feedback
                                     e   If there are other options in the area with lower SDC costs and comparable market conditions and
                                         land costs, developers may choose those areas instead.
                                               o If SDC fees are $30k less somewhere (but markets are similar) will just go somewhere else. For
                                                  market-rate apartments almost the same. If can only do a certain number of deals, would choose the
                                                  lower-cost one (all else equal).
                                               o There are markets where rents or sales prices are similar —closer to urban usually higher, lower
                                                  further out. Similar housing markets, similar drive to core. Even with state income tax differences, it
                                                  was similar. There are markets where could get similar pricing with lower fees.
                                     e   Others said SDCs would generally not be enough for them to choose a different community to build
                                         in.
                                               oO Nearby communities are smaller, don’t have diversified economies. Generally wouldn't consider
                                                  building there. SDC difference would have to be a lot.
                                               © Not so concerned about that [comparison to other jurisdictions]. All have different priorities,
                                                  respect that.
                                               o Affects willingness to build in a given community, but not the only factor.
 Other jurisdiction-                 e   Insome instances, developers and builders said there were other costs that were more important
 specific factors can                    factors than SDCs, including permitting speed, ease of communicating with and getting clarity from
 have a bigger impact                    staff, and zoning regulations.
 than SDCs on where                            o If paying more in SDCs could equate to permit speed and consistency/more predictable way then that
 developers want to                               might make a difference. Build SDCs into proforma and they are predictable, but the permitting speed
 build.                                           is more of an unknown.
                                               o Very different permitting and SDC experience [between two small towns]. In one, permitting 1s
                                                  great, super fast: 5 weeks from plans to permits issued. Can call directly, very responsive. But a lot of
                                                  coastal cities have issues with retaining staff for city departments —people move on to bigger
                                                  communities after a few years. Hard to get timely responses to any questions —planning, land use,
                                                  permitting, or clear info from Public Works.
                                               o One new growth area had a whole other level of requirements on single-family home developers -
                                                  specific architectural design guidelines, sustainability requirements that all put a burden on the
                                                  developer. And municipal fees were high.

Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                                                                     165
 Themes                         Stakeholder Feedback
                                              o  When you get better service overall, it feels like city is working with you, but in other communities it
                                                feels like they don’t care if your project happens. It makes a difference. Time savings from a more
                                                 streamlined process can make up for some of the SDC cost.
 Ability to charge high              e   Many developers noted that small towns are more sensitive to SDC costs.
 SDCs varies by size of                      o Should ideally be some sensitivity that smaller communities won't be able to absorb big SDC fees.
 community and market                            More impact in smaller communities. Maybe can pass along in larger communities           — maybe a little
 demand                                          more expensive than wanted it to be. Almost like gas prices.
                                                 Smaller fees can make a big difference in a small town.
                                                 Less room for error, less variability in cost in emerging markets. Any cost increases would put more
                                                 strain on the project. Less flexibility to maneuver.
                                             o In other parts of the state [outside the Portland region], price points are lower that you can sell
                                                 homes for. Jurisdictions have a harder time raising SDCs, haven't seen them as aggressive as they are
                                                 in Portland region. Market is softer. Not pushing as hard on the amenity side as Portland metro
                                                 jurisdictions  — that keeps costs down.
                                     e   Affluent and high-demand, supply-constrained communities may be able to charge higher SDCs.
                                             o Small affluent jurisdiction in Portland Metro region, strong market, strong school system. SDCs are
                                                 considerably higher than other jurisdictions. Higher SDCs tend to correlate with communities that are
                                                 more difficult to work in and more affluent communities.
                                             o An area with higher income might be able to afford a higher SDC package than a [medium-sized
                                                 mid-Willamette Valley city].
                                                 Portland metro jurisdictions know that developers have less options, think they can pay more.
                                                 [SDCs for one greenfield development project in the Portland metro region] were highly
                                                 negotiated with City and 3 primary developers. They had kind of a line in the sand on how high they
                                                 could go. Knew what product mix they were anticipating. They intended to have some executive
                                                 housing —street of dreams, job proximity, golf course proximity. Were banking on being able to charge
                                                 a premium for new community with parks, schools, amenities. Had come up with a mix of products
                                                 that would allow them to absorb some cost.




Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                                                                   166
 Themes                         Stakeholder Feedback

 Whether Developers & Investors Accept Lower Returns When SDCs Are Higher
 Developers can rarely               e   Pro forma needs to work before moving forward (noted above). Lenders and investors have their
 move a project forward                  requirements / expectations.
 that doesn’t meet                           o Work the proforma backwards. Think they can get X in rent for the units. If they build this many
 investor and lender                            units with those rents, what is NOI [net operating income]. Have to make 6.5 percent return on
 return expectations just                       investment or won't loan on it—if can’t hit that they walk away. If developer puts $1m in, they want
                                                 to make sure they are getting a return on that.
 because SDCs are
                                             o Buyers [of finished lots] generally build a proforma on all the costs of building a home for sale, look
 higher, but sometimes
                                                at what their margins need to be—usually deal with national homebuilders. They look at what SDCs
 project-specific
                                                are going to be.
 circumstances can
                                     e   Very rarely, for a major development, investors may intentionally accept lower returns in some
 mean the developer                      phases if later phases will make up for the lower returns.
 absorbs a portion of the                    o Did an apartment complex in [a master planned area]. Fees were a burden on the project. Developer
 cost.                                          was tied into the equity investors in the overall development. They were asked by the equity partner to
                                                do the deal with lower returns to be the first in. Couldn’t negotiate on land to make it lower, couldn't
                                                raise rents, so took lower returns on the investment. Didn't meet company requirements, but equity
                                                partner needed the master plan to get up and going to get homebuilders to sign contracts. Would not
                                                have done that deal otherwise. Was kind of a loss leader.
                                     e   Developers that hold projects long-term in areas with strong market conditions may be able to pay
                                         more up front and still achieve returns over the longer-term.
                                             o Depends on who’s building the project      — 20-year hold vs. 5-year hold and sell to institutional equity.
                                                Different metrics. Longer view can afford to amortize costs over a longer basis.
                                     e   Once budgets and financing are locked in, changes to SDCs or other fees can affect financial returns
                                         based on how much contingency is needed
                                             o Build in escalation into municipal fees. Sometimes they don’t go up and it’s a win. Other times they
                                                go up more and do the best they can.




Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                                                                    167
                                Stakeholder Feedback

 How SDCs Can Affect Affordable Housing Developments
 SDCs have to be                         When SDC costs are known early, they can be incorporated into funding applications.
 covered by the                              o Have to know costs early and with precision before you get your funding, especially if not using a
 combination of rents                            conventional lender.
 (limited based on                           o When applied for funding had about $80k plugged in for SDCs after conversation with Public Works
 incomes) and other                               —rough math.
 sources of funds that                   For Low Income Housing Tax Credit (LIHTC) projects, the tax credit equity covers a share of the
 help make the project                   SDC costs when financing closes (project completion), but not all.
 feasible.                                   o 4 percent LIHTC—getting about 36 cents back on the dollar —some offset for basis eligible costs. Get
                                                 about 1/3rd of it back. Doesnt make you whole but helps a little.
 SDC waivers can make                    Waived SDCs or exemptions can help close funding gaps.
 a substantial difference                    o Hada site for affordable housing development. Original developer couldn't make it work because
 to affordable housing                           infrastructure costs were so expensive, including Parks portion of the site. City was trying to come up
 developments, but they                          with an alternative. Reduced number of affordable units, but the only reason they could make it work
 can also introduce                              was because SDC fees were waived or reduced for affordable units.
                                             o Saved almost 900k in SDCs on a 140-unit project. Huge savings.
 complexity.
                                         Requirements from the jurisdictions for qualifying projects can be challenging to meet.
                                              o City wants to see a 99-year cash flow projection and you're agreeing to a 99-year affordability
                                                 covenant that runs with the land. City wants to be in top lien position —they were negotiating with
                                                 OHCS and the permanent lender for position. Some lenders are flexible, others would walk away
                                                 before giving up first lien position. The end result is good, but the mechanics are problem. Probably
                                                 cost another $50k in lawyer fees.
 Certainty on SDCs is                    When SDC costs increase unexpectedly, it can be very hard to find additional funding or cost-
 particularly important                  savings in other areas at the last minute when funding amounts have been set in advance.
 for affordable housing                      Oo On one project, spent about 3 months with architects and engineers to try to get an SDC fee estimate.
 development.                                    No one at the City was willing to have back of napkin conversation. Needed to be ready to issue
                                                 building permits to calculate the SDC fee. Had SDC fee calculator online, but those are always wrong,


Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                                                                  168
 Themes                         Stakeholder Feedback
                                                   often by a lot, even if you get an engineer involved. Staff was difficult to get ahold of—had a line in the
                                                   proforma from a conversation a year and a half ago where someone gave a rough guess, which ended
                                                   up being $150k short. Had to take it out of the building. Then a week from closing got a note from
                                                   Public Works that said they needed another permit that was another $5k that they hadn't planned on.
                                                   Can't weather those types of surprise costs today. Had to make hard decisions —playground equipment
                                                   cost cut, landscaping, and site amenities cut. When get close to closing and have been doing
                                                   everything to keep construction scope in place things are down to very fine margins. At one point
                                                   almost had to eliminate a floor to make the budget work.

 How SDCs Timing of Payment Can Affect Development
 Paying SDCs at                      e   When SDCs are financed on a construction loan, the developer has to carry interest on that cost
 building permit                         throughout the whole development process, so it increases the overall cost of SDCs.
 increases financing                          ©O   Often pay out of construction loan. Would be nice not to have to add hundreds of thousands to
 costs and impacts                                construction loan on day 1, especially with interest rates rising. Have to carry SDC fee debt.
 availability of capital                          $40k in SDCs could become $50k with construction interest.
                                                  If include with bank loan on the very front end, might take 6 months to completion plus time to sell,
                                                  could be 9 months interest.
                                             Oo Payment at final inspection —a big cost-saver. Pay a set amount on any payment of fees. Savings
                                                  there is very beneficial. Essentially lowers the cost of the SDC. Have to make fee payment before
                                                  they'll send an inspector out.
                                     e   Developers of multifamily projects may have higher carrying costs due to longer development
                                         periods.
                                             © Should be due at certificate of occupancy instead of permit, especially if 100+ unit multifamily or large
                                                  industrial project —it’s a lot to carry for the development. An 8 percent construction loan for 24
                                                  months on $600k SDC fee = $48k in interest. [market-rate multifamily developer]
                                             Oo It’s just cash flow —when money is coming in. Typically don’t get a construction loan until have the
                                                  building permit. To get the building permit have to pay the SDC. Can be 2 years before delivering the
                                                  product. If can offset for a few years, it helps with cash flow. [market-rate multifamily developer]



Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                                                                       169
 Themes                         Stakeholder Feedback
                                              ©  Not cheap to service debt on something that large that early in a project. [affordable multifamily
                                                 developer]
                                         Paying SDCs before construction takes away from the resources available to pay for pre-
                                         construction work and early stages such as site preparation.
                                             oO If use cash on hand, if its $35k per house, could be $700k in SDCs —reduces working capital to build
                                                 more units.
                                             Oo Allows putting that money to other parts of the project, e.g. early buy-outs for construction, getting
                                                 sitework done early —allows getting started on construction before construction loan is in place. First
                                                 draw is typically like $2m. Instead of paying those fees can get construction started.
                                             © Developers are putting in a lot more cash up front, loans are decreasing (e.g. 60 percent) so might be
                                                 just equity contribution before construction loan kicks in. Would rather put up-front costs to
                                                 something more tangible.
 Not all developers                      Some developers are indifferent to when they pay the SDC cost, since they have to pay it eventually.
 agree that deferring to                     oO If it’s a$100m project and will have $60m construction loan, nothing says SDC fees have to go in
 Certificate of                                  construction loan. Financing same amount either way.
 Occupancy is helpful                        oO Deferrals haven't made sense —just delaying the inevitable. Have to pay either way.

 Some developers                         Some builders noted that paying at time of sale would be preferable.
 expressed a desire to                       oO If tie to occupancy —what happens if a small builder is over budget and don’t have the funds, can’t get
 defer SDCs past                                 final, can’t pay the city. Could be a mess. At transfer of title, have the funds to pay it off.
 Certificate of                              o For build to sell, payable at closing, or at least at C of O so not paying interest on the SDC.
 Occupancy                               For rental, some suggested delaying or financing for longer.
                                             © Having SDCs payable upon stabilization for rental - equity bump when property is built and
                                                  stabilized. Could be a lien that gets attached to the property to pay once stabilized.
 Timing of payment vs.                   Some developers feel that paying later is more appropriate based on when SDCs are used or when
 timing of impact                        impacts occur.
 matters to some                             © Cost for essentially nothing —they’re designed to offset impacts to systems but impact doesn’t start
 developers                                       until there’s a buyer.



Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                                                                  170
 Themes                         Stakeholder Feedback
                                              o   Jurisdictions (especially large ones) don’t need those dollars for a long time.
                                              o   Think should be later —at occupancy. Should be tied to when the impact starts.

 How Important Certainty/Predictability in SDC Costs is to Developers
 Many developers                     e   Several developers noted issues with major changes to SDCs during the pre-development and
 highlighted the                         development period. Some set money aside specifically to address fee increases, but there are fewer
 importance of knowing                   options to adjust to cost-increases that occur later in the development process.
 how much the SDCs                           Oo Update fees in April/May, check in with cities on whether and how much they're going up.
 would be in advance.                            Occasionally there can be significant changes. But none have ever caused backing out of a deal, just
                                                 reforecast and reallocating costs. Also carry a municipal fee contingency —pull from that. Try to avoid
                                                 using soft-cost contingency.
                                             Oo Relied on numbers from city that accounted for SDC credit. When had final approvals to HUD and
                                                 couldn’t change it got a letter that they ran out of credits. Had baked SDCs into proforma for
                                                 construction loan for HUD. Immediate hit to contingency before starting.
                                     e   Estimating fees is typically more challenging for multifamily development.
                                             o Typically find out SDCs later in the process on the multifamily side. When you have your unit mix,
                                                 then you have the parking ratio, then figure out impervious surface, trying to make it fit and make
                                                 numbers work at the same time. Can be 6-12 months into project before you know that, and you can’t
                                                 get a great estimate of SDCs before that.
                                             © Certainty is important to developers—timing, amount, etc. [multifamily developer]


 How Important the Usage of SDCs is to Developers
 Many developers see                 e   Parks and lack of traffic congestion were identified as factors that particularly offer benefits for
 value in the                            housing demand, which supports development.
 infrastructure that                         © Parks are necessary, great amenity for dense urban projects
 SDCs fund.




Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                                                                  171
 Themes                         Stakeholder Feedback
                                              O  Developers like parks, trees, open spaces. If they can see that a community is proactively spending in a
                                                 beneficial way, it would be a more beneficial offering for housing. If people can see that have the
                                                 amenities and open space, services, lack of traffic congestion, they will make their decision.
                                             © Projects need to be done. They’re necessary. But existing residents aren't paying today’s prices for the
                                                 infrastructure they have.
                                         Some developers noted the importance of funding needed infrastructure to allow development to
                                         move forward.
                                             Oo The biggest benefit of SDCs in Oregon is that they provide a mechanism so Jurisdictions can’t place
                                                 moratoriums on development. In other parts of the Country, if they don’t have infrastructure and
                                                 don't have SDCs in place, you end up with moratoriums and can’t get things built.
 Developers like to                      Many placed value on accountability and transparency generally.
 know that SDCs are                          © Important to see the benefit. Any taxpayer or investor wants to see where their money is going. Goes
 being put to good use                           to government accountability.
 generally, and many                         © Don’t look at what they get for each penny, but do look at governance quality, SDCs are part of that.
 would like more                                 How much crumbling infrastructure, will there be population flight because tax burden too high or
                                                 services are poor. Look for great long-term governance.
 transparency about
                                             © Care about overall business environment. What is city charging and how is it being used.
 how funds are being
                                         Some would like to see a more direct and tangible connection between the SDCs paid and the
 used.
                                         projects they build.
                                             © People should know where the dollars are working for them, and may be more willing to pay if they’re
                                                 presented with a project list of where the money will be spent. The area where the money is generated
                                                 should see the investment.
                                         Some pointed out that the way SDCs are used varies between infill and suburban contexts, and that
                                         suburban projects can be more visible.
                                             © Don’t build in [suburban Portland region community], but hear from other builders that they feel
                                                 like they’re getting value for their parks SDCs — they use the funds. [Urban jurisdiction] can’t go
                                                 out and build new parks, they use funds mostly to increase parks capacity (e.g. converting grass field
                                                 to turf with lights to increase how much of the time it can be used). In more suburban jurisdictions
                                                 you can see them using the funds.

Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                                                                   172
 Themes                         Stakeholder Feedback
                                              oO
                                               In [urban jurisdiction] you rarely see something close that’s a direct impact funded by SDCs.
                                               Mostly larger capital projects (e.g. major roads). Wish they would put up signs saying “this was paid
                                               by X.”
                                         Some developers expressed concern that projects included in SDCs may not get built.
                                            Oo Park fees are challenging because they vary so widely. Sometimes they encompass projects that are
                                               unlikely to get built but inflate the fees. No requirement that what they put in the plans actually gets
                                               built.
                                            O Have experienced where collecting SDCs for parks but not being used because couldn't afford to
                                                   maintain them, do the construction, etc.
                                              © Looking at a small community —high parks SDC but talking about decommissioning parks. Where are
                                                fees going?
                                         Some expressed particular concerns about paying for administrative costs.
                                             o In informal conversations some have had with city staff, staff say a lot of the SDCs go to admin costs
                                                for things like benefits and personnel.
                                             Oo Are the admin charges really proportional to the service/mechanics received?
 SDC credit policy is as             °   Developers generally like being able to get SDC credits for building needed infrastructure.
 important to some                           o Love it when can take advantage—it’s a win / win. Jurisdiction gets infrastructure built at lower cost
 developers as the SDC                           than if they had to build it. Not money directly coming out of their coffers. Developer gets localized
 rate.                                           benefit rather than SDCs going to a project that might be across town. Helps if a needed improvement
                                                 might not be proportional to the project.
                                         Some noted that the credit-eligible portion of infrastructure improvement costs can be more
                                         ambiguous than the SDC fee itself.
                                             o If projects are on-site or contiguous, only get credit for excess capacity —lots of negotiations on what
                                                 that means. Often developer gets negotiated down a lot. More clarity on what that means would be
                                                 helpful.
                                             o City is judge, jury, and executioner. They decide how credits work, what’s oversizing, etc. Could sue
                                                 in theory, but not going to do that. Devil is in the details. Time is money, want to get project done.
                                             o Having to put in a park within a certain distance—city may require that but not getting credit for
                                                putting in those parks.

Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                                                                     173
 Themes                         Stakeholder Feedback
                                     e   Some said financing cost reduces the value of the credits, particularly if developers are required to
                                         pay SDCs and be reimbursed for credit-eligible portion of improvements.
                                              o Had an experience where developer was building infrastructure that will earn them credits, but at the
                                                   same time as the project. Had to pay SDCs and then reimburse at the end —city wanted the money for
                                                  free, still wanted to charge interest to defer the SDCs.
                                              o Deferred because getting credit for significant off-site improvements. Instead of paying fees and then
                                                   City paying the developer back, defer and reconcile at the end.
                                              o People sometimes think it’s 1:1, but builder has to finance it, carrying costs can erode the value of the
                                                   credit.
                                     e   Some noted that provisions allowing transfer of SDC credits are helpful so that developers can get
                                         the full benefit of the credit.
                                              o Have successfully received credits and sold to other developers.
                                     e   [One large city] made SDC credits not transferrable to other projects, imposed limits geographically. Think
                                         that’s a mistake. That would further incentivize developers to take on larger improvements and could
                                         monetize by selling credits.




Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                                                                   174
Appendix C. Key Oregon SDC Court Cases
                                                 Contributors: Galardi Rothstein Group, FCS Group

The cases listed in this section are not an exhaustive list of Oregon case law, however, they
highlight and provide clarity on some key issues associated with implementing an SDC
program in Oregon.

Key Case: Home     Builders Association (HBA) of Metropolitan Portland v. Tualatin Hills PRD
The Portland HBA brought suit against Tualatin Hills Park and Recreation District (District),
essentially claiming that the park SDCs the District adopted constituted an illegal “taking.” The
Oregon Court of Appeals ruled with the District in 2003 that its SDC met applicable tests of
constitutionality as a quasi-legislative exaction. In its ruling, the Court reviewed the District’s
methodology and stated the following:

          Plaintiffs (HBA) do not suggest that the SDC is unrelated to the resolution’s stated
          objective of providing parks and recreational facilities, nor do they provide any
          argument, analysis, or information indicating that the amount of the fees that the
          resolution imposes is, as a matter of law, unreasonable or arbitrary. Such arguments
          would not be successful.

The Court further stated that “The SDC methodology here meets the ‘reasonable relationship’
standard. That being the case, it also meets, a fortiori, the Due Process ‘rational basis’ test.” The
effect of this ruling was to clarify and affirm that a reasonable approach to proportionality
would generally be upheld.

Key Case: Portland Metropolitan Association of Realtors, et al v. City of Portland, Multnomah
County Circuit Court Case No. 15CV19696
The plaintiffs in this case brought suit against the City of Portland after adoption of anew
(2015) park SDC methodology. The Portland Metropolitan Association of Realtors argued a
number of points, with one found to have merit. In its project list, the city grouped planned
projects into categories and noted the total category cost and SDC eligibility. In its ruling, the
Court stated the following:

          The sheer number of projects aggregated, and the loose descriptions do not provide
          sufficient evidence to demonstrate to the detail contemplated by the statutes.

The Court remanded the supporting project list to the city “for greater specificity in the costs,
timing and percentage of costs eligible for SDCs for capital improvements needed to increase
capacity.” This ruling provided additional clarity as to the level of detail required in an SDC
project list, as delineated in ORS 223.309.




Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                175
Another key outcome of the decision was upholding the city’s methodology to change the level
of service from a traditional acres of park land per 1000 people to current investment per
person. As noted by the Court:

          The level of service becomes the current investment per person in park land and
          improvements. What exists has been acquired for the use and benefit of the current
          population. With every new person added, the investment becomes diluted. Capital
          improvements return the investment to the existing level of service per person. In that
          sense, there is equilibrium, and the starting point remains static.
Key Case: Home Builders Association of Lane County, an Oregon Non-Profit Corporation, and Home
Builders Construction Company, an Oregon Corporation v. City of Springfield, a Municipal
Corporation and Metropolitan Wastewater Management Commission, Lane County Circuit Court
Case No. 16-04-15534 and 16-04-15996
In June 2005, the Circuit Court of Lane County upheld a wastewater SDC methodology adopted
by the Metropolitan Wastewater Management Commission of Eugene Springfield IMWMC)
that was challenged by the Home Builders Association of Lane County. The methodology and
project list were challenged on a variety of technical as well as procedural issues. Ultimately, the
circuit court ruling upheld MWMC’s SDC methodology and project list. Key issues highlighted
in the decision included:

    1.   SDC statute requires that the SDC methodology provide a framework for imposition of
         SDCs but does not mandate a particular type of methodology.
    2.   Inconsideration of what determines an equitable and proportionate share of costs
         allocated to growth, the standard of review is substantial evidence and reliance on
         expert opinions and recommendations constitutes substantial evidence.

          The SDC statute simply directs that the allocation of fees is done equitably and
          proportionately —concepts that are not rooted in any legal test but are dependent
          wholly upon the facts of a given situation. Given the purely factual nature of this
          assignment of error, it will be reviewed by this court under the substantial evidence
          standard (1.e., whether a reasonable person could accept the finding as adequate to
          support a conclusion)

    3.   Establishment of an SDC is not a land use decision and the statue does not require
         projects to be included in a land use plan prior to their inclusion on the SDC project list
         requirement by ORS 223.309.
Key Case: HBA of Metropolitan Portland v. City of West Linn (2003, 2006)
This matter first came to the Clackamas County Circuit Court as a Writ of Review, and the
Court ruled that only one of their claims had merit. The City of West Linn was found to have
included open space in its park inventory which did not qualify as parks and recreation
facilities. The effect of the larger inventory was to increase the existing level of service provided
by the city, and the resulting SDC. In 2003, the Court remanded the matter back to the city,
which removed nonqualifying open space and recalculated the fee. The HBA appealed. In 2006,
the Court of Appeals of the State of Oregon sided with the city, acknowledging that the city had
fixed the only meritorious issue.


Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                               176
Key Case: COBA v. City of Redmond, Deschutes County Circuit Court Case No. 02-CV-0528 ST
The Central Oregon Builders Association (COBA) brought suit against the City of Redmond,
claiming that the city had improperly modified its transportation SDC methodology because the
City did not provide a 90-day notice to interested parties, as specified in ORS 223.304(6) and (7).
In the judgment, the Court found that eliminating pass-by trips from the calculation was in fact
a methodology change and that the City “did not provide notice to COBA at least 90 days prior
to the first public hearing conducted to consider the transportation SDC as required.”

The suit and the resulting 2004 judgment served to elevate the importance of the noticing
requirements in ORS 223.304.




Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                            177
Appendix D. Other Potential Infrastructure
  Funding Sources
State and Federal Funding Programs Available for Local
Infrastructure Projects
There are many specific grant programs at the state and federal level that are available to fund
certain types of local infrastructure projects. These generally fall into one of the following
categories:

    =   Discretionary grant programs (e.g., Water Wastewater Fund and many federal grant
        programs’), which are allocated on a competitive basis and often require local
        matching funds.
    =   Formula grant programs (e.g., Community Development Block Grants), some of which
        are allocated to states or regions and distributed based on state or regional priorities
        (e.g., Congestion Mitigation and Air Quality Improvement Program).
    =   Low-interest loans and Revolving Loan Funds (e.g., Safe Drinking Water Revolving
        Loan Fund, U.S. Department of Transportation loan financing programs) that offer
        low-interest financing but are repaid by local sources over time.

Other Local or Regional Funding Mechanisms
Beyond SDCs, there are other funding mechanisms available at a local level that can contribute
to funding infrastructure. Some derive funding from property taxes, others from user fees,
specific developers/property owners, or broader economic activity. Not all of these options are
equally viable, effective, or appropriate for funding infrastructure capital projects, and not all
are available or suitable for every community. All have impacts on whichever entities are
bearing the costs or competing for revenues, though the nature and extent of the impacts vary.

Property tax-based tools

These tools allocate property tax revenue to infrastructure, either by dedicating existing
revenues or (in some cases) establishing additional dedicated taxes. Most apply across all
properties within a particular jurisdiction or district.

Options to raise revenue through additional property taxes:




32 For examples and details see https://www.fhwa.dot.gov/bipartisan-infrastructure-law/grant programs.cfm.
33 For other federal water and wastewater grant and loan programs, see
https://www.epa.gov/waterfinancecenter/effective-funding-frameworks-water-infrastructure.


Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                        178
         General obligation bonds increase property taxes throughout a jurisdiction or district
         over a long period of time (e.g., 20-30 years) to repay debt issued to fund capital projects
         and require voter approval.
         Local option levies also increase property taxes for up to 10 years (though they are
         subject to limitations on property taxes discussed in Section 2.1.3) and require voter
         approval.
         Special districts (e.g., the North Bethany County Service District for Roads, Tualatin
         Hills Parks and Recreation District) can establish their own tax rates to generate
         dedicated property tax revenue for infrastructure construction and/or maintenance
         within the district boundary but are subject to limitations on property taxes discussed in
         Section 2.1.3 and require voter approval.
Options to allocate existing tax revenue or revenue growth from increasing property value
without increasing tax rates:

         General fund?*4/property tax revenue allocation (e.g., Washington County’s Major
         Streets Improvement Program) does not require new property tax revenue but competes
         with other local priorities and is subject to limitations on property taxes discussed in
         Section 2.1.3.
         Urban Renewal/Tax Increment Financing diverts property tax revenues from increases
         in assessed value inside a specific area for investment in capital projects that improve
         the area; it does not increase property taxes within the boundary but reduces revenue
         growth for existing taxing districts.

Development-Based Funding
Contributions from developers can take several forms, including:

         Exactions (improvements required as a condition of development approval), which can
         include on-site and/or off-site improvements. As discussed in Section 1.2.1, exactions are
         subject to constitutional limitations of rational nexus and rough proportionality.
         Development agreements or annexation agreements, which are generally voluntary,
         negotiated agreements between the jurisdiction and the developer that establish what
         each party will contribute and be responsible for.
         Improvements in exchange for additional development rights (e.g., planned
         development options that provide regulatory flexibility and/or additional density linked
         to providing public open space), which depend on there being demand for the
         additional development rights.




234 The general fund is technically not a funding mechanism, but an account that all local governments have, where a
variety of unrestricted revenue sources are collected.


Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                             179
There are other mechanisms where project costs are paid up front by either a developer or the
jurisdiction and recovered from subsequent development or property owners within a specific
area that benefits from a specific improvement(s). Examples include:

    =   Reimbursement districts allow the jurisdiction or a developer to recoup a proportionate
        share of capital investments that benefit multiple properties from subsequent
        development on those properties.
    =   Local improvement districts (LIDs) establish a special assessment on properties within a
        defined area that benefit from a specific capital improvement based on their degree of
        benefit (rather than the value of the property); a majority of affected property owners
        must support formation of the district.
These are often used to fund projects with a geographically-defined benefit, but they may have
limited revenue capacity, especially within smaller areas.

User-Based Funding
There are a number of fees and taxes that derive funding from specific users and activities
related to the infrastructure systems themselves. Examples include:

    =   Broad-based user fees:
         -   Utility rates (e.g., water and sewer rates)
         -   System-wide user fees (e.g., monthly or annual charges for all residents and/or
             businesses or fees for use of specific facilities)
    =   Facility-specific use charges:
         -   Parking fees (e.g., permit parking or metered on-street parking revenue)
         »   Tolls
         -   Facility rental fees
The allowed uses vary by the type of fee or tax, but some can be used for infrastructure funding
in whole or in part. Utility rates are commonly used to fund infrastructure improvements for
water and sewer, and other types of user fees are becoming more common-—see discussion in
Section 2.1.4.

Taxes and Fees on Economic Activity

Taxes and fees on economic activity that is relevant to a given infrastructure system (e.g.,
transportation) can sometimes provide funding to support infrastructure investments.
Examples include:

    =   Franchise fees (fees on utility company/service providers for use of public rights-of-way)
    =   Fuel (or gas) taxes
    =   Vehicle registration fees (county level)


Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                           180
Taxes and user fees unrelated to infrastructure can also sometimes generate revenue that can be
used flexibly (at least in part) and can be applied to infrastructure among other purposes. These
include:

    =   Targeted sales tax (e.g., prepared food and beverage tax)
    =   Transient lodging tax




Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                          181
Appendix E. SDC Fees by Jurisdiction, 2007
  and 2022
                            Contributors: FCS Group, Galardi Rothstein Group, ECONorthwest

Exhibit 58: SDC Rates by Jurisdiction and Infrastructure System, 2007
Source: FCS GROUP based on data from League of Oregon Cities, System Development Charges Survey Report (February
2020)
 City                  Parks          Sewer          Water     Transportation      Stormwater            Total
 Aurora                 $2,205 |       $2,032]        $4,153             $2,095              $159 | $10,644
 Banks                                                $2,103             $3,020                           $5,123
 Beaverton                             $2,700    |    $3,144             $3,020              $900]        $9,764
 Bend                                  $1,973    |    $3,385             $4,217                           $9,575
 Boardman                              $1,189    |    $1,392                                              $2,581
 Brownsville                           $5,160 | $2,093                                     $1,968]        $9,221
 Cannon Beach                          $1,448 | $1,407                                       $815]        $3,670
 Carlton                $1,794 |}      $5,062 |       $2,892                               $1,029 | $10,777
 Cave Junction                         $2,985 | $2,150                                                    $5,135
 Central Point          $2,944                        $1,255             $4,033              $410]        $8,642
 Columbia City          $1,438    |    $1,561]        $4,127             $4,399              $250 | $11,775
 Cornelius              $2,143 |       $1,000 |       $1,032             $3,020              $500 |       $7,695
 Corvallis              $4,746 |       $3,028 |       $1,008             $2,046              $148 | $10,976
 Cottage Grove            $234           $692           $775               $776            $1,255 |       $3,732
 Creswell               $1,539    |    $4,520]        $5,026               $597                          $11,682
 Culver                                $4,148                                              $1,750]        $5,898
 Dayton                   $100]        $1,265]        $3,633             $1,126                           $6,124
 Detroit                                              $7,943                                              $7,943
 Donald                                $2,250    |    $2,250                                              $4,500
 Drain                                                                                                           $0
 Dufur                                   $950}        $1,215                                              $2,165
 Eugene                 $2,624           $508    |    $2,276             $1,582              $493 |       $7,483
 Florence                              $3,354    |    $2,838               $692            $1,636]        $8,520
 Garibaldi              $1,000    |    $2,001}        $2,262             $3,145            $2,475 | $10,883
 Gladstone                               $216 |       $1,448             $1,171                           $2,835
 Glendale                                                                                                        $0
 Grants Pass            $2,552 |       $2,463 |       $2,366             $5,656              $412 | $13,449
 Gresham                $3,185    |    $4,923]        $4,043             $2,748              $802    | $15,701
 Halsey                                  $523           $646                               $1,060    |    $2,229
 Hermiston                               $678 | $1,404                                                    $2,082
 Hood      River                       $1,408    |    $2,585               $705                           $4,698
 Jefferson                             $7,960    | $1,206                                                 $9,166
 Junction City          $1,090}        $6,669 |       $1,100             $1,116                           $9,975
 Klamath Falls            $898 | $1,955}              $2,533                                              $5,386
 Lakeside                        $1,827                                                                   $1,827


Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                                 182
 City                  Parks          Sewer          Water     Transportation     Stormwater      Total
 Lakeview                   $25          $578           $177                $39                       $819
 Lincoln City           $1,528    |    $4,725]        $2,263               $531            $25]    $9,072
 Lowell                   $889}        $1,187    |    $6,268               $618           $400]    $9,362
 Madras                 $1,780    |    $3,000           $838             $2,303           $210]    $8,131
 Manzanita                                            $3,700                                       $3,700
 Maupin                                                                                                 $0
 Milton-                  $525]          $930]          $870                                       $2,325
 Freewater
 Monmouth               $1,484 |       $2,753 |       $1,413               $394           $247]    $6,291
 Mosier                 $1,495 |       $3,759]        $4,499                                       $9,753
 Nehalem                                              $2,367                                       $2,367
 Newberg                $1,471}        $1,469]        $3,533             $2,388           $258]    $9,119
 North Plains           $4,941                        $5,791             $3,513                   $14,245
 Oakland                               $2,995    |    $2,933                                       $5,928
 Ontario                                                                                                $0
 Pendleton                                                               $1,050                    $1,050
 Philomath                $684 |       $5,719]        $6,228             $3,488         $1,080 | $17,199
 Port Orford                           $3,568    | $6,412                                          $9,980
 Portland               $3,053 |       $2,995 |       $2,496             $1,883           $585 | $11,012
 Prineville                            $4,089    | $2,477                $2,801                    $9,367
 Redmond                  $834 |       $2,105]        $2,092             $2,877                    $7,908
 Riddle                                $3,000 |       $1,827                                       $4,827
 Sandy                  $2,000]        $1,834]        $1,525             $1,943                    $7,302
 Scotts Mills                                   $7,843                                             $7,843
 Seaside                  $325           $675 | $2,873                     $444                    $4,317
 Silverton              $1,205]        $4,392]        $3,987             $3,705         $1,375 | $14,664
 Stayton                $2,254 |       $3,528 |       $2,670             $2,512                   $10,964
 Tangent                  $875 |       $3,285                              $354           $124]    $4,638
 The Dalles                            $1,789    |    $2,317                                       $4,106
 Tigard                 $4,812                        $2,041             $3,020                    $9,873
 Turner                   $850 |       $5,000}        $2,400               $400                    $8,650
 Umatilla                                $743    |    $1,029                                       $1,772
 Veneta                 $3,197    |    $3,250]        $1,937             $1,694           $142 | $10,220
 Waldport                 $379 |       $3,037    |    $2,505                                       $5,921
 West Linn              $8,029 |       $2,539 |       $6,698             $4,721           $439 | $22,426
 Westfir                               $5,318    |    $3,225                                       $8,543
 Wilsonville            $2,451}        $4,068]        $4,345             $3,082           $482 | $14,428
 Winston                  $150}        $1,913                              $589                    $2,652
 Wood Village                          $6,688 |       $1,877                                       $8,565
 Woodburn               $1,448    |    $2,977    |    $2,024             $3,286           $275 | $10,010
 Yachats                               $4,650 | $3,003                                             $7,653
 Yamhill                $3,023    |    $1,697    |    $3,295               $300                    $8,315




Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                        183
Exhibit 59: SDC Rates by Jurisdiction and Infrastructure System, 2022
Source: FCS GROUP based on data from jurisdictions, with contributions from Galardi Rothstein Group and ECONorthwest
 City                   Parks             Sewer          Water     Transportation      Stormwater            Total
 Aurora                  $2,205       |    $2,032]        $5,543             $2,740              $160 | $12,680
 Banks                   $2,535 |          $6,625    |    $4,999           $17,920               $585 | $32,664
 Beaverton              $11,787       |    $6,625)        $9,354             $9,998            $1,252    | $39,016
 Bend                    $9,544       |    $5,667    |    $6,355             $9,269                          $30,835
 Boardman                         $1,783 | $2,087                                                       $3,870
 Brownsville                      $5,160 | $2,093                                              $1,968 | $9,221
 Cannon Beach            $1,116 | $4,849]  $2,034                                                $424]  $8,423
 Carlton                 $2,142       |    $8,832    |    $8,740             $4,210            $2,295 | $26,219
 Cave Junction                             $2,985 | $2,150                                                    $5,135
 Central Point           $2,445 |          $3,142    |    $3,267             $2,326              $514 | $11,695
 Columbia City           $2,019       |    $5,764]        $4,292             $4,575              $388 | $17,038
 Cornelius               $4,471       |    $5,732]        $9,449             $9,998            $1,910 | $31,560
 Corvallis               $7,755 |          $4,963    |    $1,573             $3,357              $226 | $17,874
 Cottage Grove           $2,476              $996    |    $4,938             $2,166              $904 | $11,481
 Creswell                $3,439       |    $6,898    |    $2,405             $3,749              $295 | $16,786
 Culver                                    $4,088                                              $1,750]        $5,838
 Dayton                     $100]          $7,564)        $4,242             $1,125                          $13,031
 Detroit                    $506                          $6,187                               $1,977    |    $8,670
 Donald                  $1,509       | $22,275      |    $2,835             $3,031              $806 | $30,456
 Drain                                     $1,619           1650                                              $3,269
 Dufur                                     $5,000    |    $5,000                                             $10,000
 Eugene                  $5,424 |          $2,553    |    $2,276             $3,489              $733 | $14,475
 Florence                                  $5,507    |    $4,396             $1,063            $2,527 | $13,493
 Garibaldi                  $816      |    $2,755)        $1,980             $1,650            $2,000]        $9,201
 Gladstone               $9,027       |    $6,495 |       $9,040                               $3,477 | $28,039
 Glendale                                                 $2,040                                              $2,040
 Grants Pass                $941 |         $3,869]        $2,863             $1,204              $710]        $9,586
 Gresham                 $4,694 |          $7,055    |    $5,305             $4,589            $1,344 | $22,987
 Halsey                                      $641           $783                               $1,416    |    $2,840
 Hermiston                  $450             $251           $294                $99                           $1,094
 Hood      River         $5,064       |    $1,056    |    $1,786             $3,703              $756 | $12,365
 Jefferson               $4,262       |    $3,971    |    $4,979                $75              $105 | $13,392
 Junction City           $2,044 |          $9,083    |    $1,100             $1,052                          $13,279
 Klamath      Falls      $1,748       |    $6,691    |    $3,304             $3,590                          $15,333
 Lakeside                                  $2,274    |    $5,477                                              $7,751
 Lakeview                       $25          $578           $177                $39                              $819
 Lincoln City            $2,446 |          $4,475    |    $2,423               $850                $75 | $10,269
 Lowell                  $1,032       |    $1,689    |    $4,575               $696              $673 |       $8,665
 Madras                  $2,200       |    $6,063    |    $1,591             $4,315              $259 | $14,427
 Manzanita                      $60 |      $4,258}        $6,900                                 $174 | $11,392
 Maupin                     $500      |    $3,000;        $1,000                                              $4,500
 Milton-                    $525      |    $1,125    |    $1,050                                              $2,700
 Freewater


Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                                184
 City                  Parks    Sewer                 Water     Transportation     Stormwater     Total
 Monmouth               $2,142 | $3,542)               $1,819             $4,020           $447 | $11,970
 Mosier                 $1,495 | $4,104]               $3,866             $4,154         $1,499 | $15,118
 Nehalem                                $4,258 | $3,235                                               $7,493
 Newberg                $8,432 |        $7,984]   $6,444                 $7,618            $438 | $30,916
 North Plains           $8,823 |        $6,625 | $11,615                $19,621            $585 | $47,269
 Oakland                                $3,795 | $2,933                                            $6,728
 Ontario                                  $481           $975            $1,288                       $2,744
 Pendleton                                                               $1,775                       $1,775
 Philomath              $5,150 | $6,846)               $8,855            $5,396          $1,801 | $28,048
 Port Orford                     $4,962           |    $8,919                                     $13,881
 Portland              $10,927 | $8,299]               $5,548            $5,694          $1,251 | $31,719
 Prineville             $3,600 | $2,629)               $5,141            $4,848                   $16,218
 Redmond                $5,818 | $4,669           |    $2,992            $4,678                   $18,157
 Riddle                          $3,000           |    $2,327                                      $5,327
 Sandy                  $3,717 | $5,480           |    $3,844            $4,317                   $17,354
 Scotts Mills                                          $7,843                                         $7,843
 Seaside                $1,699     |    $4,882)        $2,873              $444                       $9,898
 Silverton              $6,240     |}   $4,653    |    $8,285            $3,760            $877    | $23,815
 Stayton                $3,478     |    $2,697    |    $3,620            $2,927          $3,216    | $15,938
 Tangent                $3,239      |   $6,996                           $1,315            $127    | $11,677
 The Dalles                             $1,789    | $2,317               $1,500            $342]      $5,948
 Tigard                $11,225 |        $6,625    | $10,853             $18,206            $641    | $47,550
 Turner                 $1,969 |        $3,094]      $3,682              $2,122                      $10,867
 Umatilla                               $1,858    | $1,544                                            $3,402
 Veneta                 $5,949 |        $6,903    | $7,895               $3,994            $224    | $24,966
 Waldport                 $648 |        $4,448    | $4,590                                            $9,686
 West Linn             $12,943 |        $4,243    | $10,576              $1,964          $1,479    | $31,205
 Westfir                                $5,298    | $3,225                                            $8,523
 Wilsonville            $6,969     |    $6,289    | $16,455             $15,264          $2,112    | $47,089
 Winston                   $150}        $3,874                           $1,194                       $5,218
 Wood Village           $3,119 |        $3,565 |       $3,819                                     $10,503
 Woodburn               $4,188 |        $2,977 |       $3,944            $6,988            $330 | $18,427
 Yachats                                $7,648 | $4,939                                  $1,642 | $14,229
 Yamhill                $3,348 |        $3,867 |       $6,496            $2,136          $1,781 | $17,628




Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                      185
Appendix F. Pro Forma Model Methodology
                                                                     Contributors:    ECONorthwest


ECONorthwest used a pro forma analysis to analyze SDC share of total development costs and
the impacts of SDCs on the financial feasibility of new developments. This work typically
involves researching market data based on past transactions, gathering inputs from the local
development community, and understanding zoning and other regulatory requirements. A
more robust research of input data helps build a more accurate model of development
feasibility within local contexts.

However, many simplifying assumptions are made to develop
                                                                     To test the effects of different
a consistent approach that can capture different economic            levels and structures of SDCs
conditions across Oregon. The assumptions result in a few            across housing markets and
development examples called prototypes whose exact physical          types, ECONorthwest used a
                                                                     pro forma analysis, which is a
and financial characteristics are unlikely to be observed in all
                                                                     financial model that estimates
markets. Instead, the prototypes serve as representative             the feasibility of a new real
examples of the categories of housing developments that are          estate development based on
possible in Oregon. Analyzing the difference in model results        the building’s financial
                                                                     performance. Real estate
generates key findings that are applicable across all housing
                                                                     professionals regularly use pro
types, beyond the few specific ones modeled through the              forma analysis to model the
prototypes.                                                          revenues and costs of
                                                                     potential developments,
It is not easy to create a single model for a statewide study that   evaluate their returns, and
                                                                     understand sources of funding
involves many varieties of housing markets. There are many           needed for a project to move
geographic markets, and within each are markets for housing          forward. For the purposes of
types. Some markets resemble each other, but unique                  this study, pro forma analysis
                                                                     is an economic model that can
circumstances of some markets are difficult to generalize or
                                                                     demonstrate the impact of
summarize with other markets. Although many variations and           SDCs on potential business
combinations of geographic markets and housing types are             decisions that housing
possible, seven geographic markets and seven housing types           developers could face.
are selected for analysis.

Geographic Markets
ECONorthwest modeled seven geographic categories of housing markets in Oregon. They are
broad categories that reflect typical housing prices and construction costs across the cities that
fall within each geographic region. The market context areas are:

    1.   Willamette Valley: Larger cities along Interstate 5, with some similar housing options
         within a local housing market. Does not include cities in the Portland Metro area.




Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                  186
       2.   Small Cities: Smaller cities along Interstate 5 or remotely located in eastern Oregon.
            Relatively stagnant growth, lower demand, and lower land costs are observed in
            comparison to other market context areas.

       3.   Coast: Coastal cities with many vacation rentals and second homes.
       4.   Metro Low: Suburban cities and neighborhoods in the Portland Metro area with
            moderate demand for new housing and limited production of new housing.
       5.   Metro Mid: Suburban cities and neighborhoods in the Portland Metro area with
            relatively strong demand for new housing and, sometimes, large tracts of planned
            developments.
       6.   Metro High: More exclusive neighborhoods in the Portland Metro area with higher
            prices and relatively few options for new housing.
       7.   Cascades: Cities east of the Willamette Valley that experienced a strong level of housing
            demand and production in recent years.
The values used for each geographic market are not intended to represent a specific city, and
average housing prices and costs vary by city. Rather, the values are representations of likely
values observed across many parts of the geographic market. Moreover, specific economic
conditions in some cities or neighborhoods could mean that they resemble the market
conditions of a geographic market category that is outside the geographic location. Therefore,
the presented data should be interpreted as data “commonly observed in a city like cities in X
market.”

ECONorthwest defined the geographic markets based both on
their geography and on economic factors including relative size                   |e evaluation of factors —
                                                                                  that defined the geographic
of market for new housing, competitiveness or tightness of                        markets were based on a
housing market, substitutability of new housing, and price of                     relative comparison of cities
vacant parcels that could be developed with new housing.                          within Oregon. While some
Market size is related to the population of a city or a few                       cities are producing more
   .          was    h                  .                                          housing than others, housing
adjacent cities where a potential homebuyer or renter could                       production across the state
consider relocating to. Substitutability is related to the presence               generally does not match the
(and production) of similar alternatives for new housing within                   “mand and contributes to
                                                                                  the lack of housing
a market, as previously described in the review of academic                       affordability.
literature. Exhibit 60 and Exhibit 61 summarize the factors and
the markets.

Exhibit 60. Characteristics of Geographic Markets in Oregon
Source: ECONorthwest
                           Willamette   |     Small      Coast        Metro         Metro       Metro   | Cascades
                              Valley          Cities                   Low           Mid         High
 Market Size               Large            Small      Small        Medium       Large        Small       Medium
 Competitiveness         | Moderate         Low        Moderate   | Moderate   | High         Very        High
 (Demand)                                                                                     High
 Substitutability         Moderate          Low        Low         Low           High         Low         Moderate
 (Production)
 Land Price               Moderate          Low        Low         Moderate    | Moderate   | High        High



Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                              187
Exhibit 61. Comparison of Competitiveness and Substitutability in Oregon’s Geographic Markets
Source: ECONorthwest


  High
                               Metro High
                                                        Cascades                 Metro Mid
   / Demand




                               Metro Low            Willamette Valley
   Competitiveness




                                 Coast




                               Small Cities


  Low                }


                         Low                   Substitutability   / Production                   High



Housing Types
ECONorthwest modeled seven housing types: two scales of a three-story apartment building,
two townhouses, and three different sizes of detached single-family units. These housing types
are based on new housing types that are likely to occur in all or most of the geographic markets.
They do not include taller apartments because they are unlikely to be built in less populated
cities, and they do not include single-family dwellings on larger lots because they are unlikely
to be built in urban areas where buildable land is scarcer.

Physical Assumptions by Housing Type

The following is a more detailed description of the prototypes, and a summaty is provided in
Exhibit 62.

                     Low-Rise Apartment is a three-story building with 55 units on an acre. Landscape
                     covers 20 percent of the lot. The average leasable unit size is 738 sq. ft. It has 55 surface
                     parking stalls.
                     Garden Apartment is a three-story building with 120 units on four acres. Landscape
                     covers 42 percent of the lot. The average leasable unit size is 811 sq. ft. It has 180 surface
                     parking stalls.
                     Townhouse prototypes are 1,500-sq.-ft. units with 2,400 sq. ft. of site area per unit. They
                     are two-story structures with a one-car garage for each unit. One prototype is a rental
                     unit, and the other is an ownership unit.




Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                                188
    =   Small Single-Family is a 1,550-sq.-ft. unit on a lot measuring 4,800 sq. ft. It has a one-car
        garage.
    =   Medium Single-Family is a 2,000-sq.-ft. unit on a lot measuring 6,500 sq. ft. It has a two-
        car garage.
    =   Large Single-Family is a 2,650-sq.-ft. unit on a lot measuring 6,500 sq. ft. It has a two-car
        garage and a higher finish quality.
Exhibit 62. Summary of Physical Features of Prototypes
Source: ECONorthwest
 Example Housing Type | Building Height                Density       Average Unit Size         Parking
                            (Floors)              (Units per Acre)     (Square Feet)
 Low-Rise Apartment             3                       55.0                738          1.0 Stalls per Unit
                                                                                         (Surface parking)
 Garden Apartment                    3                  30.0               811           1.5 Stalls per Unit
                                                                                         (Surface parking)
 Townhouse                           2                  18.2              1,500          Single-Car Garage
 Small Single-Family                 2                   9.1              1,550          Single-Car Garage
 Medium Single-Family                2                   6.7              2,000          Two-Car Garage
 Large Single-Family                 2                   6.7              2,650          Two-Car Garage


Two scales of apartments    — Low-Rise Apartment and Garden Apartment        — are included to
demonstrate how the impact of SDCs on development feasibility vary by residential density.
The review of academic literature revealed that developers of apartments are unlikely to
increase unit sizes to spread out the fixed cost of SDCs that are applied per unit. The notion is
tested with two housing types that have the same land cost and building height but a different
unit mix, residential density, and parking ratio. The average unit size in Low-Rise Apartment is
smaller, but it has more units than Garden Apartment. Low-Rise Apartment allows for 1.0
parking stall per unit, whereas Garden Apartment allows for 1.5 parking stalls per unit.

Two versions of townhouses demonstrate the relationship between SDCs and tenure. The two
modeled buildings have the same physical form (thus the same development costs), but their
tenure is different (i.e., Townhouse Rental and Townhouse Ownership).

Three different sizes of detached single-family units demonstrate how the impact of SDCs vary
with unit size and lot size. All are ownership units. Medium Single-Family serves as a
reference point. Small Single-Family has a smaller unit size and lot size. Because it has a higher
residential density, it is effectively the same test as the test for apartments. Large Single-Family
has a large unit size on the same lot (thus no change in residential density). It tests the assertion
made in the review of academic literature that spreading SDCs over a larger unit size is
preferred because it reduces cost per square foot.

Financial Assumptions by Housing Type

Exhibit 63 summarizes the total development costs for each geographic market and housing
type used in the model (rounded to the nearest thousand). Total development costs include
construction labor and material (called “hard costs”), land costs, and “soft costs” such as design
and engineering, project management, financing, permits, and fees. They do not include SDCs


Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                      189
or profit margins (investor returns) since those are key variable inputs and outputs of the
analysis. Land costs are based on recent transactions of small, vacant lots recorded on Redfin.
Cost indices from RSMeans and 2022 National Building Cost Manual?*® are used to differentiate
the construction costs across markets. Within each market, the construction costs of all
prototypes are based the same kitchen, bathroom, and bedroom costs per square foot of
building area; garage cost; surface parking cost; parking ratio; driveway cost; and landscape
cost.


Exhibit 63. Total Development Cost Per Unit, Excluding SDCs
Source: ECONorthwest
                     Willamette    Small      Coast                 Metro     Metro Mid     Metro          Cascades
                        Valley     Cities                            Low                     High
 Low-Rise             $172,000 | $155,000 | $170,000            | $191,000   | $199,000 | $226,000      | $200,000
 Apartment
 Garden               $200,000        | $175,000 | $194,000     | $219,000   | $233,000 | $283,000      | $255,000
 Apartment
 Townhouse            $293,000        | $253,000 | $282,000     | $317,000   | $341,000 | $424,000 | $384,000
 Rental
 Townhouse            $293,000        | $253,000 | $282,000     | $317,000   | $341,000 | $424,000 | $384,000
 Ownership
 Small Single-     | $353,000         | $385,000 | $325,000     | $371,000   | $419,000 | $583,000 | $544,000
 Family
 Medium               $479,000        | $387,000 | $442,000 | $503,000 | $568,000 | $791,000            | $737,000
 Single-Family
 Large Single-     | $570,000         | $474,000 | $535,000     | $607,000   | $672,000 | $895,000 | $826,000
 Family


Typical SDCs in each market used in the analysis are summarized in Exhibit 64. The single-
family SDCs are determined by calculating the average SDC rate in the 2022 SDC rate data
collected by FCS GROUP. Townhouse SDCs are 90 percent of single-family SDCs. Multifamily
SDCs are 66 percent of single-family SDCs.

Exhibit 64. Typical SDCs
Source:   ECONorthwest,   FSC GROUP
                          Willamette        Small       Coast      Metro        Metro        Metro       Cascades
                             Valley         Cities                  Low          Mid          High
 Low-Rise                  $13,002         $5,676    $6,930     | $16,500    | $29,304    | $32,208    | $12,144
 Apartment
 Garden                    $13,002         $5,676    $6,930     | $16,500    | $29,304    | $32,208    | $12,144
 Apartment
 Townhouse                 $17,730         $7,740    $9,450     | $22,500    | $39,960    | $43,920    | $16,560
 Rental

 Townhouse                 $17,730         $7,740    $9,450     | $22,500    | $39,960    | $43,920    | $16,560
 Ownership




35 Moselle, Ben. 2022 National Building Cost Manual. 46'" Edition. Carlsbad, CA: Craftsman Book Company, 2022.


Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                            190
                          Willamette          Small        Coast        Metro         Metro        Metro     Cascades
                             Valley           Cities                     Low           Mid          High
 Small Single-             $19,700           $8,600     | $10,500    | $25,000     | $44,400    | $48,800   | $18,400
 Family
 Medium      Single-       $19,700           $8,600     | $10,500    | $25,000     | $44,400   | $48,800    | $18,400
 Family
 Large Single-             $19,700           $8,600     | $10,500    | $25,000     | $44,400   | $48,800    | $18,400
 Family


To reflect the realities of each housing market, the model uses different prices, rents, and costs
for each market and prototype. ECONorthwest collected price and rent data as well as some
data on the physical dimensions of the prototypes from CoStar and Redfin using representative
samples of recently built and transacted housing. Exhibit 65 summarizes the monthly rents
(rounded to nearest ten) and sales prices (rounded to nearest thousand) for each geographic
market and housing type used in the model. A consistent vacancy rate and operating expense
ratio (as a percentage of rent) are used for rental prototypes.

Exhibit 65. Market Rents and Prices
Source:   ECONorthwest
                  Willamette            Small          Coast          Metro       Metro Mid       Metro      Cascades
                     Valley             Cities                         Low                         High
 Low-Rise           $1,500             $1,030          $1,110        $1,660        $1,770        $2,040       $1,900
 Apartment
 Garden                $1,570          $1,090          $1,170        $1,770        $1,870        $2,180       $1,980
 Apartment
 Townhouse             $2,090          $1,610          $1,860        $2,760        $2,780        $3,500       $2,900
 Rental

 Townhouse       | $384,000     | $278,000       | $390,000 | $389,000           | $512,000    | $675,000 | $558,000
 Ownership
 Small             $448,000     | $334,000       | $454,000        | $488,000    | $641,000    | $854,000 | $675,000
 Single-
 Family
 Medium            $558,000     | $418,000       | $612,000        | $597,000 | $742,000          $1.04      $831,000
 Single-                                                                                          million
 Family
 Large             $727,000     | $524,000       | $797,000 | $678,000 | $897,000                 $1.35       $1.09
 Single-                                                                                          million     million
 Family




Full Results for SDC Share of Total Development Costs
Section 4.3.2 presented the variation in SDC share of development costs across the state for
three markets with different levels of development costs. The three markets are a shorter list of
seven market context areas that were analyzed for this report. Exhibit 66 compares the typical
development costs and per-unit SDC amounts in the seven markets.




Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                                   191
For each market context area, ECONorthwest calculated an average of single-family SDC rates
reported in the 2022 LOC survey by FCS GROUP. The townhouse SDC rates are 90 percent of
the single-family SDC rates. The multifamily SDC rates are 66 percent of the single-family SDC
rates.

Exhibit 67 shows the SDC share of development costs. Depending on the housing type and the
market, the SDC share of development costs can range from 1.8 percent to 12.8 percent in
Oregon.




Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                        192
Exhibit 66. SDCs and Other Development Costs, By Market Context Area and Housing Type
Source: ECONorthwest

                                                                       Development Costs Per Unit
                                              $        $200,000        $400,000         $600,000    $800,000   $1,000,000




                                                  oO
                       Low-Rise Apartment
 Willamette Valley




                         Garden Apartment
                         Townhouse Rental
                     Townhouse Ownership
                       Small Single-Family
                     Medium Single-Family
                        Large Single-Family


                       Low-Rise Apartment
                         Garden Apartment
 Small Cities




                         Townhouse Rental
                     Townhouse Ownership
                       Small Single-Family
                     Medium Single-Family
                        Large Single-Family


                       Low-Rise Apartment
                         Garden Apartment
                         Townhouse Rental
 Coast




                     Townhouse Ownership
                       Small Single-Family
                     Medium Single-Family
                        Large Single-Family


                       Low-Rise Apartment
                         Garden Apartment
 Metro Low




                         Townhouse Rental
                     Townhouse Ownership
                       Small Single-Family
                     Medium Single-Family
                        Large Single-Family


                       Low-Rise Apartment
                         Garden Apartment
 Metro Mid




                         Townhouse Rental
                     Townhouse Ownership
                       Small Single-Family
                     Medium Single-Family
                        Large Single-Family


                       Low-Rise Apartment
                         Garden Apartment
 Metro High




                         Townhouse Rental
                     Townhouse Ownership
                       Small Single-Family
                     Medium Single-Family
                        Large Single-Family


                       Low-Rise Apartment
                         Garden Apartment
 Cascades




                         Townhouse Rental
                     Townhouse Ownership
                       Small Single-Family
                     Medium Single-Family
                        Large Single-Family



                                                         m Other Development Costs   mSDCs




Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                                   193
Exhibit 67. SDCs Share of Total Development Costs, by Market Context Area and Housing Type
Source:                ECONorthwest

                                                               SDC Share of Development Costs
                                                   2%   A%              6%         8%           10%   12%   14%




                                             io)
                                             aS
                       Low-Rise Apartment
 Willamette Valley




                         Garden Apartment
                         Townhouse Rental
                     Townhouse Ownership
                       Small Single-Family
                     Medium Single-Family
                       Large Single-Family


                       Low-Rise Apartment
                         Garden Apartment
 Small Cities




                         Townhouse Rental
                     Townhouse Ownership
                       Small Single-Family
                     Medium Single-Family
                       Large Single-Family


                       Low-Rise Apartment
                         Garden Apartment
                         Townhouse Rental
 Coast




                     Townhouse Ownership
                       Small Single-Family
                     Medium Single-Family
                       Large Single-Family


                       Low-Rise Apartment
                         Garden Apartment
 Metro Low




                         Townhouse Rental
                     Townhouse Ownership
                       Small Single-Family
                     Medium Single-Family
                       Large Single-Family


                       Low-Rise Apartment
                         Garden Apartment
 Metro Mid




                         Townhouse Rental
                     Townhouse Ownership
                       Small Single-Family
                     Medium Single-Family
                       Large Single-Family


                       Low-Rise Apartment
                         Garden Apartment
 Metro High




                         Townhouse Rental
                     Townhouse Ownership
                       Small Single-Family
                     Medium Single-Family
                       Large Single-Family


                       Low-Rise Apartment
                         Garden Apartment
 Cascades




                         Townhouse Rental
                     Townhouse Ownership
                       Small Single-Family
                     Medium Single-Family
                       Large Single-Family



                                                             m= SDC Share




Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                         194
Key Assumptions for Feasibility Evaluation
The key output of the pro forma model is investor returns, and how they change with the
amount or structure of SDCs. Although there are many methods to calculate and measure
investor returns, the metric selected for this study is internal rate of return (IRR). IRR is a
commonly used financial metric in the real estate industry to estimate the profitability of real
estate investments. It is a form of discount rate and measured in percentage points. The
feasibility analysis includes a cash flow model with expenses and sales related to housing
construction occurring at different points in time. A 3 percent annual escalation is assumed for
costs, rents, and prices. A 2 percent annual escalation for operating expenses. All units are
assumed to be fully occupied at the end of the analysis period.

To estimate the impact of SDCs on development feasibility, ECONorthwest estimated the
change in IRR resulting from fixed changes in SDC amounts. The amounts are $10,000 for
single-family, $9,000 for townhouse, and $6,600 for multifamily across all markets. More
specifically, ECONorthwest measured the percentage point change in IRR when the modeled
per-unit SDC amount for a single-family unit is reduced from $15,050 to $5,050 or increased
from $15,050 to $25,050, and when then SDC amount for townhouse and multifamily units are
adjusted accordingly.

Exhibit 68 illustrates the results of the feasibility calculations. The sizes of the bars indicate the
IRR with a $15,050 SDC per single-family unit, a $13,545 SDC per townhouse unit, and $9,933
SDC per multifamily unit. The error bars indicate the difference in IRR from the specified
change in SDC amount, all else equal. The absolute change in IRR, or about half of the size of
the error bars, is the estimates represented in Exhibit 43 and Exhibit 44 (Section 4.4.1).

The wide range of the IRR estimates are partly due to the simplifying assumptions made to
develop a consistent approach that can capture different economic conditions across Oregon.
Realistically, the types and specific characteristics of housing units that market-rate developers
would pursue differ by geographic markets and site-specific conditions. Moreover, the $15,050
baseline for the single-family SDC amount and the $10,000 change are also simplifying
assumptions designed to produce analytical results rather than predict market activity.




Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                    195
                                                                                                       AMlWe4-a|SuUlS esse]
                                                                                                                                                       196




                                                                                                       A\lwie4-2/SUls LUNIpey||
                                                                                                       A\lWe4-2/8Uls ||eWS
                                                                                                                                  Cascades




                                                                                                       diysiaumQ esnoyumMoL
                                                                                                       je.Uay SesNnoyUMo]L
                                                                                                       juowyedy uapsey
                                                                                                       juowpedy osiy-mo7
                                                                                                       AMlWe4-a|SuUlS esse]
                                                                                                       A\lwie4-2/SUls LUNIpey||
                                                                                                                                  Metro High




                                                                                                       A\lWe4-2/8Uls ||eWS
                                                                                                       diysiaumQ esnoyumMoL
                                                                                                       je.Uay SesNnoyUMo]L
                                                                                                       juowyedy uapsey
                                                                                                       juowpedy osiy-mo7
                                                                                                       AMlWe4-a|SuUlS esse]
                                                                                                       A\lwie4-2/SUls LUNIpey||
                                                                                                       A\lWe4-2/8Uls ||eWS
                                                                                                                                  Metro Mid




                                                                                                       diysiaumQ esnoyumMoL
                                                                                                       je.Uay SesNnoyUMo]L
                                                                                                       juowyedy uapsey
                                                                                                       juowpedy osiy-mo7
                                                                                                       AMlWe4-a|SuUlS esse]
                                                                                                       A\lwie4-2/SUls LUNIpey||
                                                                                                       A\lWe4-2/8Uls ||eWS
                                                                                                                                  Metro Low




                                                                                                       diysiaumQ esnoyumMoL
                                                                                                       je.Uay SesNnoyUMo]L
                                                                                                       juowyedy uapsey
                                                                                                       juowpedy osiy-mo7
                                                                                                       AMlWe4-a|SuUlS esse]
                                                                                                       A\lwie4-2/SUls LUNIpey||
                                                                                                       A\lWe4-2/8Uls ||eWS
                                                                                                                                  Coast




                                                                                                       diysiaumQ esnoyumMoL
                                                                                                       je.Uay SesNnoyUMo]L
                                                                                  Tat




                                                                                                       juowyedy uapsey
                                                                                                       juowpedy osiy-mo7




                                                                                                                                                       Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report
                                                                                                       AMlWe4-a|SuUlS esse]
                                                                                  _B.a




                                                                                                       A\lwie4-2/SUls LUNIpey||
                                                                                   rr




                                                                                                                                  Small Cities
                                                                                                       A\lWe4-2/8Uls ||eWS
                                                                                                       diysiaumQ esnoyumMoL
                                                                                   rr
Exhibit 68. Feasibility Analysis Results




                                                                                                       je.Uay SesNnoyUMo]L
                                                                                                       juowyedy uapsey
                                                                                                       juowpedy osiy-mo7
                                                                                                       AMlWe4-a|SuUlS esse]




                                                                                                                                   Willamette Valley
                                                                                                       A\lwie4-2/SUls LUNIpey||
                                                                                                       A\lWe4-2/8Uls ||eWS
                                                                                                       diysiaumQ esnoyumMoL
                                                                                                       je.Uay SesNnoyUMo]L
                                           ECONorthwest




                                                                                                       juowyedy uapsey
                                                                                                       juowpedy osiy-mo7




                                                                                         -10%
                                                                                                -20%
                                                                                  0%
                                                                            10%
                                                          40%

                                                                30%

                                                                      20%
                                           Source:
                                                                      (Yul) Suunjey
Appendix G. Literature Review
                                                                     Contributors:   ECONorthwest


ECONorthwest reviewed the following list of peer-reviewed and published academic literature
for this report.

Baden, Brett M., and Don L. Coursey. An Examination of the Effects of Impact Fees on Chicago's
       Suburbs. University of Chicago, Irving B. Harris Graduate School of Public Policy
        Studies, 1999.

Burge, Gregory. “The Capitalization Effects of School, Residential, and Commercial Impact Fees
       on Undeveloped Land Values.” Regional Science and Urban Economics 44 (2014): 1-13.

Burge, Gregory, and Keith Ihlanfeldt. “Impact fees and single-family home
        construction.” Journal of Urban Economics 60, no. 2 (2006): 284-306.

Coutts, Christopher, Sang-Seok Bae, Sung-Wook Kwon, Sang-Chul Park, and Richard Feiock.
        “Development Impact Fees: A Vehicle or Restraint for Land Development?.” Journal of
        Local Self-Government (2015): 1047-1065.

Delaney, Charles J., and Marc T. Smith. “Impact Fees and the Price of New Housing: An
        Empirical Study.” Real Estate Economics 17, no. 1 (1989): 41-54.

Dresch, Marla, and Steven M. Sheffrin. Who Pays for Development Fees and Exactions?. Public
        Policy Institute of CA, 1997.

Evans-Cowley, Jennifer 5., Fred A. Forgey, and Ronald C. Rutherford. “The Effect of
        Development Impact Fees on Land Values.” Growth and Change 36, no. 1 (2005): 100-112.

Thlanfeldt, Keith R., and Timothy M. Shaughnessy. “An Empirical Investigation of the Effects of
         Impact Fees on Housing and Land Markets.” Regional Science and Urban Economics 34, no.
         6 (2004): 639-661.

Lawhon, Larry L. “Overcoming Potential Exclusivity Associated With Impact Fees: Loveland,
       Colorado’s 30-Year Experience in Development Impact Fees.” Journal of Architectural and
        Planning Research (2015): 217-233.

Mathur, Shishir. “Do All Impact Fees Affect Housing Prices the Same?.” Journal of Planning
        Education and Research 33, no. 4 (2013): 442-455.

Mathur, Shishir, Paul Waddell, and Hilda Blanco. “The Effect of Impact Fees on the Price of
        New Single-family Housing.” Urban Studies 41, no. 7 (2004): 1303-1312.



Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                            197
Mayer, Christopher J., and C. Tsuriel Somerville. “Land Use Regulation and New
        Construction.” Regional Science and Urban Economics 30, no. 6 (2000): 639-662.

Singell, Larry D., and Jane H. Lillydahl. “An Empirical Examination of the Effect of Impact Fees
        on the Housing Market.” Land Economics 66, no. 1 (1990): 82-92.

Skaburskis, Andrejs, and Mohammad Qadeer. “An Empirical Estimation of the Price Effects of
        Development Impact Fees.” Urban Studies 29, no. 5 (1992): 653-667.

Skidmore, Mark, and Michael Peddle. “Do Development Impact Fees Reduce the Rate of
       Residential Development?” Growth and Change 29, no. 4 (1998): 383-400.

Exhibit 69 is a summary of ECONorthwest’s review of the literature.




Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                         198
Exhibit 69. Summary of Empirical Studies on Impact Fees
Source:   ECONorthwest
 Author(s)                 Data      Location           Context                       Outcome Variable and           Results
 (Publication              Year                                                       Methodology
 Year)
 Delaney and               1971    | Dunedin, FL        Coastal city near Tampa _ | Housing price (new               Increase in housing prices was greater
 Smith (1989)              to                                                       single-family) in Dunedin |      than in nearby cities with no or
                           1982                                                     compared to three other          minimal impact fees. Suggests the
                                                                                    cities in the same county |      total cost of fee is passed on to new
                                                                                    before and after fee             homebuyers.
                                                                                    adoption
 Singell and               1983    | Loveland, CO       Fast economic growth          Housing price (new and         New housing prices were higher by 3
 Lillydahl (1990)        | to                           during 1970s. Impact          existing units) before and   | times the fee for new housing and 6
                           1985                         fee in adopted in 1984        after fee adoption             times the fee for existing housing.
 Dresch and                1992    | Contra Costa       Declining economic            Housing price (new and         Impact fee is associated with higher
 Sheffrin (1997)           to        County, CA         conditions, particularly      existing units) across the   | housing prices—by 25% of fee in
                           1996                         in eastern county             county leveraging within-    | eastern county and 188% of fee in
                                                                                      county variation in fee        western county.
                                                                                      amount
 Baden and                 1995    | 8 suburb cities    Fast economic growth          Housing price (new and         Price of new housing is higher by 70-
 Coursey (1999)            to        near Chicago, IL   during 1980s                  existing units) in             120% of the impact fee.
                           1997                                                       suburban cities. Impact
                                                                                      fee amounts vary across
                                                                                      the cities
 Mathur, Waddell,         | 1991   | King County, WA    Period of rapid               Housing price (new             166% of the fee amount is reflected in
 and Blanco                 to                          economic growth. Cities     | single-family) in cities       prices of new units.
 (2004)                     2000                        with impact fees grew         with different fee
                                                        from 2 in 1994 to 14 in     | amounts, controlling for
                                                        2000                          year sold and other
                                                                                      factors
 Mathur (2013)             1991    | King County, WA    Period of rapid               Housing price (single-         Impact fee is positively correlated with
                           to                           economic growth. Cities     | family), correlation with      single-family housing prices.
                           2000                         with impact fees grew         impact fees
                                                        from   2 in 1994 to 14 in
                                                        2000




Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                                                                        199
 Author(s)            Data       Location               Context                       Outcome Variable and        Results
 (Publication         Year                                                            Methodology
 Year)
 Skidmore and         1977    | DuPage County,          Fast growing suburb of        New residential             Impact fee is correlated with 25%
 Peddle (1998)        to        IL                      Chicago                       construction (single-       reduction in residential development.
                      1992                                                            family and multifamily),
                                                                                      comparing cities with and
                                                                                      without impact fees
 Mayer and            1985    | 44U.S.      metro       Urban cities across U.S.    | New residential             Up to 45% less construction starts
 Somerville           to        areas                                                 construction (single-       observed in metro areas with more
 (2000)               1996                                                            family), correlation with   regulations.
                                                                                      presence of impact fees
 Burge and           1993     | FL (statewide)          Nearly two-thirds of          New residential             Impact fee for public services
 Ihlanfeldt (2006) | to                                 Florida’s counties have       construction, correlation   (excluding water and sewer) is
                     2003                               impact fees.                  with presence of impact     correlated with increase in residential
                                                                                      fees in a given year        construction.
 Skaburskis and       1977    | Toronto                 City’s growth period          Land price of vacant        Impact fee is associated with higher
 Qadeer (1992)        to                                varied during the study       subdivision lots,           land prices for vacant Subdivision lots
                      1986                              period.                       correlation with impact     by 120% of the fee.
                                                                                      fees
 Ihlanfeldt and       1985    | Dade County, FL         Impact fee since 1989         Undeveloped land price      Housing prices are higher by 160% of
 Shaughnessy          to                                                              (new and existing units),   the fee. Land prices are lower by 100%
 (2004)               2000                                                            correlation with impact     of the fee.
                                                                                      fees
 Evans-Cowley,         1997   | Texas                   Cities of various sizes in | Land price (Vacant and       1.3% higher lot values for each $1,000
 Forget, and                    (43 cities in           Texas that have impact | developed lots),                 of impact fees.
 Rutherford                     Austin, Dallas,         fees                         correlation with impact
 (2005)                         Fort Worth, and                                      fees, controlling for
                                Houston metro                                        population growth among
                                areas)                                               other factors
 Burge (2014)         1994    | FL (statewide)          Impact fees for different   | Value of developable land | School impact fee is negatively
                      to                                kinds of infrastructure       parcels, correlation with   correlated with value of residentially
                      2009                                                            impact fees                 zoned land and positively correlated
                                                                                                                  with commercially zoned. Water and
                                                                                                                  sewer impact fee is negatively
                                                                                                                  correlated with residentially zoned land
                                                                                                                  value.



Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                                                                       200
 Author(s)            Data        Location              Context                   Outcome Variable and         Results
 (Publication         Year                                                        Methodology
 Year)
 Bae, Kwon,          1998     |   FL (statewide)        Nearly two-thirds of      Value of developable land | Impact fee is positively correlated with
 Coutts, Park, and | to                                 Florida’s counties have   parcels, correlation with   value of developable land parcels.
 Feiock (2015)       2007                               impact fees               impact fees
 Lawhon (2015)        1960    | Loveland, CO            Period of rapid           Number of rental units     Impact fee is not significantly
                      to                                population growth         per nonwhite resident      correlated with either outcome
                      2010                                                        and annual MFI over time | variable.
                                                                                  in Loveland and nearby
                                                                                  towns




Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                                                                201
Appendix H. Case Study Methodology
                                                                   Contributors:   ECONorthwest


ECONorthwest identified several recent developments in Washington County that provide an
opportunity to examine an example of the relationship between SDCs and housing prices
within Oregon. Each development faced different SDC costs, but all compete within the same
subregional housing market. ECONorthwest considered three areas that were recently brought
into the Portland Metro urban growth boundary (UGB): South Cooper Mountain in the City of
Beaverton, South Hillsboro in the City of Hillsboro, and River Terrace in the City of Tigard.

Study Areas
South Cooper Mountain is a 544-acre area that was brought into the UGB in 2011 and became
part of Beaverton in 2013. The area sits at the far southwest edge of the city, along the border
with Tigard. The community plan for South Cooper Mountain includes a mix of high-density,
medium-density, and low-density residential areas to create a walkable, bikeable, and family-
friendly neighborhood with a variety of housing options.

South Hillsboro includes 1,400 acres of farms, open space, and developed land at the
southeastern edge of Hillsboro, along the border with Aloha. This area was brought into the
regional UGB over several years, with the largest piece —1,062 acres—added in 2011. The South
Hillsboro Community Plan approved in 2015 creates anew town center along Tualatin Valley
Highway and a smaller village center, both with high-density housing, commercial, and retail
spaces. The rest of the plan area includes a mix of apartments, townhomes, and lower-density
housing and a network of open spaces linked by a trail system.

River Terrace is a 490-acre area just south of South Cooper Mountain that was added to the
UGB in 2002 and 2011 and incorporated into the City of Tigard in 2014. The community plan for
River Terrace envisions a primarily medium-density neighborhood of about 2,300 homes with
one commercial core and a network of open spaces and parks.




Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                              202
SDCs in the Study Areas
Exhibit 70 summarizes the SDCs applied to single-family construction in South Cooper
Mountain, South Hillsboro, and River Terrace (“growth areas”) and the standard citywide SDC
rates applicable to adjacent developments that are not part of the growth area.?*

Exhibit 70. System Development Charges for Detached Single-Family Housing, 2021
Source: City of Beaverton, City of Hillsboro, City of Tigard, and Washington County.
                                      Beaverton                               Hillsboro                       Tigard
                         Standard                Growth             Standard              Growth   Standard            Growth
                                                  Area                                     Area                         Area
 Clean Water Services and County SDCs
 Sewer*                                 $6,085                                $6,085                         $6,085
 Stormwater*                            $1,252                                  $585                          $585
 Transportation                         $9,623                                $9,623                         $9,623
 K*


 City-Specific SDCs
 Parks                              $11,787***                       $6,577            $12,177     $10,345             $10,903
 Transportation                 -                $8,826                  -             $13,523     $7,076              $10,348
 Water                                  $9,193                                $11,035                       $10,095
 Total                   $37,940                 $46,767            $33,905            $53,030     $43,809             $47,640
                                                 (+23%)                                   (+56%)                        (+9%)
* Connection charges for Clean Water Services
** Transportation Development Tax for Washington County
***   Parks SDC from Tualatin       Hills Park and   Recreation   District (THPRD)



Regression Model
ECONorthwest employed a linear regression model to analyze the relationship between SDCs
and housing prices within the Portland metro area housing market, specifically in three cities in
Washington County with recent urban growth areas. The data in the model are based on
transaction data of home sales in each of the urban growth areas and in nearby neighborhoods
with similar housing and access to transportation and retail amenities.

ECONorthwest created a dataset using property transaction data from Redfin. ECONorthwest
analyzed sales transactions between January 2017, when the new construction in urban growth
areas appeared on the market, and February 2022. This dataset included 1,519 unique properties
in Washington County. ECONorthwest filtered the data to include only detached single-family
units. Each observation was categorized as either within an urban growth area or ina
comparison area. Each property was assigned an estimated total SDC amount based on the total
SDC rates of each jurisdiction and the supplemental SDCs for units in urban growth areas.



236 Beaverton, Hillsboro, and Tigard adjust their SDCs annually using the Seattle Construction Cost Index —an
inflation index— published by Engineering News-Record. Each city uses the data from a different month to set their
updated fees. This table records fees at the start of the fiscal year in July 2021.


Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                                            203
ECONorthwest adjusted the SDC rates to one year prior to construction to approximate SDC
rates at the time of permitting, using the Engineering News Record’s Construction Cost Index for
Seattle.*°” Finally, parcel sizes were joined from the Metro RLIS database and outliers were
filtered out, for a total of 974 observations. The distribution of these observations by location is
summarized in Exhibit 71.

Exhibit 71. Distribution of Observations in the Dataset by Location
Source: ECONorthwest, Redfin
             Development Area
 Growth Area                           689
 Comparison Area                       285
 Total                                 974
                    City
 Beaverton                             172
 Hillsboro                             467
 Tigard                                335
 Total                                 974



ECONorthwest created three regression models to understand the relationship between aspects
of development costs, location, amenities, and housing prices. Exhibit 72 summarizes the results
of these analyses. The first model tested the per dollar relationship between SDCs and the price
per square foot of a detached single-family unit. The results of this model indicate that for every
dollar of SDCs, all else being equal, the price per square foot of a unit is higher by $0.0007. In
other words, $10,000 in SDCs is related to about $7 higher housing price per square foot. A
second model tested the impact of location inside an urban growth area on housing prices. The
results of this regression indicate that units inside urban growth areas sold for $14.69 per square
foot more than units outside of these growth areas, all else being equal. ECONorthwest also
tested the effects of SDCs within each city. These city-specific analyses generally supported the
findings of the first two models: Higher SDCs correlate with higher prices per square foot and
prices per square foot are generally higher inside urban growth areas. However, the results are
not reported in Exhibit 72 because there were not enough observations in the dataset for all the
results of the third model to be statistically significant.

The regression models were able to explain about 74.4 to 75.4 percent of the variance in the
dependent variable. In addition to the positive correlation between total SDCs and price per
square foot, ECONorthwest also observed positive correlations between price per square foot
and newer houses and a negative correlation with total square footage. This negative correlation
is expected, the total development costs can be spread out across a greater unit size. While this
linear model does capture some important relationships, it does not account for nonlinear
phenomena such as construction costs, or the economies of scale that a developer might achieve
when building a planned development.




37 ‘This index is the method by which the City of Beaverton, the City of Hillsboro, and the City of Tigard adjust their
SDC rates each year.


Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                                204
Exhibit 72. Summary of Linear Regression Results
Source:   ECONorthwest
                                     Model 1            Model 2
                                            Coefficient
                                              (p-value)
 Total SDCs (dollars)                 0.0007                -
                                      (0.000)
 Year Sold                           13.7188           13.6446
                                      (0.000)           (0.000)
 Square Feet                         -0.0470            -0.0480
                                      (0.000)           (0.000)
 Lot Size (Square feet)               0.0096            0.0101
                                      (0.000)           (0.000)
 Number of Bedrooms                   -5,.329            -4.697
                                      (0.000)           (0.000)
 Number of Bathrooms                  0.0456             0.557
                                      (0.983)           (0.789)
 Growth Area Development                  -            14.6935
                                                        (0.000)
 R2                                    0.744             0.754



To help interpret the results of the regression models, ECONorthwest created a prototypical
house with features frequently observed across all three cities. Exhibit 73 summarizes the
features of this prototype. ECONorthwest applied the results of the primary regression model
to this prototype to understand the relationship between SDCs of different amounts and a
standardized detached home.

Exhibit 73. Housing Prototype Characteristics
Source:   ECONorthwest
      Feature             Value
 Square Feet              2,400
 Year Sold                2022
 Year Built               2022
 Beds                       4
 Baths                     2.5
 Lot Size (sq. ft)        4,500



Model 1 predicts that a $10,000 difference in SDCs for this prototypical single-family unit would
be associated with a $16,800 higher sale price. Model 2 predicts that being in a growth area
would be associated with roughly a $35,260 higher sale price for this example home.




Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                          205
Appendix |. Testimony on HB 3040 Related to
  Timing of SDC Payment
                                                                  Contributors: Galardi Rothstein Group

Exhibit 74. Testimony on House Bill 3040 Related to Timing of SDC Payments
Source: Summarized by ECONorthwest and Galardi Rothstein Group
  File           Author                                               Testimony
 16223 | Unknown                      Deferrals are an option for the local government.
 16313 | City of Wilsonville          Local governments should not be forced to defer SDCs or provide
                                      financing to developers.
 16477 | Multiple local               “Interest savings from delaying a SDC payment are minimal.”
         governments
 16483 | City of Cave                 “Deferring SDC charges would raise our administrative costs because
         Junction                     we do not have the resources or capacity to track when a sale
                                      happens and then follow through with the SDC collection process.
                                      Where is the consequence if a new owner homeowner doesn’t pay the
                                      SDC charges? This bill puts the burden unfairly on the city.”
 16512 | City of Irrigon              “It should be up to each local jurisdiction if they want to defer
                                      collection... Deferring for a time after closing . . shows that the
                                      state is in cooperation and working with developers and big
                                      businesses, not buyers or local governments.”
 16567 | Tualatin Hills PRD           Required deferrals would “come ata substantial cost and risk to local
                                      government.”
 16571 | City of Springfield          Required deferrals would “unnecessarily limit our ability to determine
                                      the timing of SDCs.”
 16588 | City of Gresham              Required deferrals “would create additional administrative burden” for
                                      the City.
 16608 | Special Districts            Required deferrals would impose costs on local governments with no
         Association of               guarantee of savings for homebuyers.
         Oregon
 16650 | City of Hillsboro            Required deferrals would increase administrative burden.
 16659 | City of Portland             Local governments should continue to have the flexibility to determine
                                      the timing of SDC payments.
 16664 | Multnomah         County   | “Requiring that SDCs be assessed when a certificate of occupancy is
                                      issued or at the point of sale would make it difficult, if not impossible,
                                      for local governments to ensure collections from non-paying
                                      developers. Furthermore, this bill does not require that developers
                                      pass on cost savings to homebuyers or reduce housing prices.”
 16690 | Jim Brewer                   Proposed deferral provisions are poorly worded and would have
         (affiliated with             unintended consequences.
         multiple cities)
 16694 | City of                      “Changing the collection date will result in small savings on interest for
         Independence                 developers and increase costs for local governments.”
 16777 | Metropolitan                 Required deferrals would increase costs for ratepayers.
         Wastewater
         Management
         Commission
 16819 | Oregon Association           Required deferrals would increase costs for ratepayers.
         of Clean Water
         Agencies


Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                          206
  File           Author                                            Testimony
 16964   | Unknown                  “Changing the collection date will result in small savings on interest for
                                    developers and increase costs for local governments.”
 17156 | City of Prineville         Required deferrals would “not be effective in achieving the overarching
                                    goal of supporting affordable housing.”
 17195 | City of Sherwood           Required deferrals would impose costs on local governments with no
                                    guarantee of savings for homebuyers.
 17208 | City of Eugene             “Local governments are not involved in private property transactions
                                    and this requirement would result in an excessive burden on local
                                    governments to track real estate transactions to ensure that the public
                                    fees, which a project owes, are paid. Additionally, it is unclear how
                                    payment deferral for commercial and industrial developments assists
                                    with affordable housing.”
 17407 | Oregon Building            “Tying SDC payment to ‘time of sale’ would create additional
         Officials Association    | administration and local government involvement in a part of the
                                    process the local government has thus far been removed from, create
                                    a dramatic loss of efficacy because the local government would need
                                    to audit unsold properties continually until they sold and their
                                    associated SDC payments were verified, and place the local
                                    government in the ‘no-win’ position to create additional enforcement,
                                    potentially against the new homeowner, if the fees were not paid upon
                                    sale.”
 17423 | Metropolitan               Proposed provisions preempt local authority.
         Mayors’ Consortium
 17430 | American Planning          Deferral   of SDCs should be at the discretion of the local government.
         Association Oregon
         Chapter
 17433 | Washington County        | Required deferrals would “leave the County with a significantly higher
                                    administrative      burden.”




Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                         207
Appendix J. Summary of Feedback on SDC
  Deferral Experience
To better understand the implications of SDC deferral programs for the jurisdiction, FCS
GROUP and Galardi Rothstein Group contacted nine cities that have (or previously had) an
SDC deferral program with questions regarding administration of this program (Exhibit 75).

Exhibit 75. SDC Deferral Program Contact Log
Source: ECONorthwest
 Jurisdiction          Status
 Cornelius             Current program
 Madras                Current program
 Medford               No response
 Pendleton             Provided details only for installment payments (not deferrals)
 Redmond               Had a program in the past; sunset program as of 2021.
 Sherwood              Current program
 Tigard                Current program
 Veneta                Current program

 Wilsonville           Had a program in the past; cancelled program in 2019 code update.




Each jurisdiction received the following questions:

    =     What are the eligibility criteria for SDC deferral?
    =     What are the program requirements (e.g., application process, is a lien required, is
          interest charged, etc.)?

    =     How often is the deferral option used, and what types of development use it most?
    =     How long does the deferral typically last (i-e., how long does most development that
          uses the deferral take between building permit and certificate of occupancy or when the
          SDCs are due)?

    =     Has non-payment been an issue for any of the developments that have used the deferral
          option? If so, how often has this been an issue?

    =     How much additional staff time is required for developments participating in the SDC
          deferral program compared to developments that pay SDCs at building permit? Which
          parts of the process require additional staff time?
    =     Do you have any additional comments or lessons learned to share about how the
          program is working in your jurisdiction?
In addition, one jurisdiction submitted comments on the Public Review Draft that described
their deferral system. These comments have been integrated to the extent possible.


Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                            208
Feedback Summary
Eligibility       & Program Requirements

Eligibility criteria varied widely among the jurisdictions contacted. Some allow deferrals for all
residential and commercial projects or for all new residential development, while others limit
eligibility based on SDC amount (e.g., Sherwood allows a deferral if the total City
Transportation and Parks System Development Charges exceed $50,000), or allow deferrals only
for non-profits developing income-restricted housing (e.g., Cornelius).

Typical application processes require developers to submit a formal request, which the City
reviews and approves. Roughly half of the jurisdictions report requiring a lien? as a condition
of SDC deferral. Others require agreements notarized by the property owner. None require
interest payments for SDC deferral.

Timing of Payment

For most jurisdictions contacted, the deferred payment is due prior to receiving the Certificate
of Occupancy (C of O); a few use a time limit in addition to or instead of the C of O (e.g., 9
months or a year). The jurisdiction that offered their experience as a comment on the Public
Review Draft of the report noted they currently require payment at C of O, but have discussed
moving the deadline to the final framing inspection (earlier in the construction process), so that
any issues can be resolved before a homebuyer is expecting to move in, avoiding impacting the
future resident or the jurisdiction appearing to be the problem if there is a hold-up at C of O.

Utilization

Many of the jurisdictions that responded receive a small number of deferral requests annually
(Cornelius and Wilsonville have used their program twice, Pendleton uses it roughly once
every ten years). However, Madras, which allows deferral for all residential development, saw a
steady decrease in deferral requests over the last three years, where nearly half of all SDC
payments were deferred. In its program history, Madras has seen 187 total deferrals and five in
2022, mostly for subdivisions. In Tigard, Sherwood, and Wilsonville deferrals were more likely
to be taken by large developments due to deferrals not being advertised and/or eligibility
criteria.

Administrative Time and Costs

All jurisdictions noted an increase in administrative effort associated with the deferral program,
though some said it was a major increase and some said it was less than an hour of staff time.
Tasks involved in the deferral process include reviewing and approving the deferral request,
filing a lien (if required), communication between agencies or departments regarding the


38 Liens are legal rights to property by creditors. Liens typically remain in effect until the debt obligation is satisfied
and allow the creditor to use the property as collateral if the debt obligation is not fulfilled.


Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                                     209
application, tracking status through the development process, and closing out liens or updating
permit systems when SDCs have been paid. In Madras, certificates of occupancy are granted by
the county, so the process requires an additional level of coordination. Jurisdictions reported
that deferral requests can take anywhere from 15 minutes to 7 hours per request. Two smaller
jurisdictions use paper filing and mentioned if the number of deferrals increased, they would
need to move to an electronic tracking system. In Redmond, the staff burden made the program
cumbersome to administer (staff reported it was used frequently), which was one reason the
City went on to sunset the program. However, Tigard and Veneta report the additional time
spent on deferral is negligible.

There were also costs associated with follow-up and enforcement of payment in some cases. In
Wilsonville, one notable non-payment dispute took four years to litigate, which led the city to
end the program in 2019 during their SDC code update (see below).

Non-Payment

Three of the seven jurisdictions that provided detailed information reported instances where
follow up or enforcement was necessaty:

    =   In Sherwood, one development remains vacant with outstanding fees. (While staff
        didn’t specify, this is presumably a commercial development, given that it is unlikely an
        apartment or single-family home would be completed but unoccupied for a long period
        of time.)

    »   Wilsonville has had at least two instances where deferrals for commercial developments
        have resulted in disputes with developers who sought to renegotiate the terms of the
        deferral agreement.
    =   In Madras, a few deferrals (out of over 100) required follow up at the one-year deadline
        (perhaps because this is an arbitrary timeline relative to the construction timeline), but
        did subsequently pay upon follow up. The City noted that one developer in particular
        had sought to avoid payment. This was the only nonpayment issue attributed
        specifically to residential development.

Key Findings
The two key concerns with deferrals are administrative burden and nonpayment. Take-aways
related to these concerns are summarized below.

    =   Administrative Burden: The responses suggest that administrative burden can be quite
        variable depending on a jurisdiction’s permitting system and deferral procedures. For
        jurisdictions where the program is broadly available and well-understood within the
        residential development community, the volume of deferral applications can be
        challenging due to the total amount of staff time required. In some communities, some
        of this staff time is linked to filing liens, which are more time consuming to establish and
        remove, but give the jurisdiction more leverage if there is a nonpayment issue.


Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                             210
        Streamlining seems to have helped some jurisdictions to an extent, but there are limits to
        the ability to streamline if a jurisdiction must coordinate with other agencies (e.g., the
        county) or does not have an efficient permitting system. Even for jurisdictions that
        process few deferrals, the amount of effort for each application can be substantial for
        some, depending on how their program and permitting system works.
    =   Nonpayment: Many of the most egregious examples of nonpayment were linked to
        commercial projects. Some factors specific to commercial development may have
        contributed: there is greater variability in SDCs for commercial development depending
        on the specific end user, which may not be known in detail up front, and could increase
        the risk of a developer seeking to change the total SDC amount later, when tenants are
        known. In addition, commercial development tends to have fewer tenants and can take
        longer to lease up compared to apartments where there are many tenants who typically
        begin to move in immediately upon C of O. Issues related to residential development
        appear to be primarily where a time-based deadline was reached before C of O without
        the developer noticing immediately. This is unsurprising, given that the date may not
        correspond to any particular construction milestone. One jurisdiction also noted one
        developer who attempted to avoid requirements on several occasions.
While the negative experiences of some jurisdictions led them to advise caution related to
deferrals, the successful (or mixed) experiences of other jurisdictions suggest that some of the
concerns could potentially be avoided or mitigated through program requirements and
eligibility criteria. However, given the variation in how jurisdictions handle permitting, it may
be easier for some jurisdictions to offer deferrals than others, and even at the low end of effort
per application, a broadly-used program could potentially become burdensome.




Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                211
Exhibit 76. Deferral Program Feedback Summary
Source: Personal Communication with FCS GROUP, Galardi Rothstein Group, and ECONorthwest; U.S. Census Bureau (2021).
Color coding key: blue = positive experience, yellow = mixed experience, Orange = negative experience
 City              Eligibility Criteria       Timing            Total Deferrals   | Administrative Burden       Uses a | Charges     Non-Payment Cases
 (Population)                                                                                                   Lien?    Interest?
 Veneta (5K)       Anyone building a    Due by Final            Not specified,    | A little extra time for     Yes      No          None identified
                   new home             Inspections             but has been        form and lien
                                        and/or                  used.
                                        Certificate of
                                        Occupancy
 Tigard            Any development      Due by                  Used some by    | 15-20 minutes per           No         No          None
 (55K)             upon request (used | Certificate of          larger            deferral for initial
                   to limit to projects Occupancy               developments    | permit, sometimes
                   with SDCs higher                             and               additional time after
                   than for single                              subdivisions.     initial review. Don’t have
                   family detached;                                               a great way to track
                   not advertised)                                                deferrals in the system—
                                                                                  could be more
                                                                                  streamlined.
 Cornelius         Only for non-profits     | Due by            2                 7 hours per deferral. If    No         No          None
 (13K)             developing                 Certificate of                      volume of applications
                   affordable housing.      | Occupancy                           increases, will need new
                                                                                  system.
 Madras (7K)    | All new residential         Due by            187 total, 5 in | 3+ hours per deferral for | Yes        No          A few deferrals went
                  development                 Certificate of    2022. Mostly      paperwork, filing lien;                            past 1-year deadline
                                              Occupancy or      subdivisions.     additional time for                                but paid on follow
                                              1 year                              monitoring and follow                              up. Some
                                              whichever                           up, checking sale price                            developers (one In
                                              comes first                         of the house2s2. Was                               particular) “try to
                                                                                  very time consuming at                             creatively avoid
                                                                                  beginning but have                                 payment” of the
                                                                                  streamlined process.                               SDCs.
 Sherwood          Only if the total City   | Certificate of    Common for        Less than 3 hours per       No         No          One property stands
 (20K)             SDCs                       Occupancy         large             permit (total, for                                 vacant with
                   (Transportation and                          developments,




239 Madras provides SDCs reductions for single-family dwellings based on the sale price of new homes.


Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                                                                       212
 City                  Eligibility Criteria       Timing             Total Deferrals    | Administrative Burden      Uses a | Charges     Non-Payment Cases
 (Population)                                                                                                        Lien?    Interest?
                       Parks) are more                               especially if        processing, signatures,                         outstanding SDC
                       than $50,000.                                 expecting SDC | and tracking).                                       fees.
                                                                      credits
 Wilsonville           [No current                Typically           Used                Much staff time            -       -             Both recent
 (26K)—                program—prior              drafted to be       infrequently,       required for litigation.                        commercial
 program no            eligibility criteria not | one year or         generally large                                                     developers did not
 longer                provided, but              less. Not tied      commercial                                                          or could not pay on
 offered,              applied to at least        to Certificate of | development.                                                        time, tried to
 responses             some commercial            Occupancy.          Two that staff                                                       renegotiate terms.
 reflect prior         development]                                   remember.                                                           One resulted in 4-
 program                                                                                                                                  year litigation with
                                                                                                                                           ruling in favor of
                                                                                                                                          City.
 Redmond               Any development            Due by final       Program used       | Much staff time            Yes      No          -
 (35K)—                that owed SDCs.            inspection or      a lot. Mostly        required for processing
 program no                                       within 9           residential,         forms, getting things
 longer                                           months of the      some                 notarized, verifying
 offered,                                         date of the        commercial.          payment. Many parties
 responses                                        agreement.                              involved (Finance, City
 reflect prior                                                                            Recorders Office,
 program                                                                                  Building Department)
                                                                                          Became too much of an
                                                                                          administrative burden to
                                                                                          sustain—sunset the
                                                                                          program.
Note: Dashes     indicate respondent did not address topic.




Oregon System Development Charges Study: Final Report                                                                                                            213
