                                                                                     GeorGceE   Mariton,   JD
                                                                          PROCUREMENT   DIVISION    DIRECTOR
 CLACKAMAS
      COUNT       Y                                                                PROCUREMENT     DIVISION
                                                                                  PuBLic SERVICES BUILDING
                                                                   2051   KAEN ROAD | OREGON City, OR 97045



Board of County Commissioners
Clackamas County

Members of the Board:

                      Approval of Contract with Language Line Services, Inc. for
                 On-call   Interpreter Services for Clackamas       County Departments

 Purpose/Outcomes                       To provide On-call Interpreter Services for Clackamas County
 Fiscal Impact                          The total contract value is $1,500,000.00
 Funding Source                         Various depending on Department Request for Services
 Duration                               Through June 30, 2023
 Strategic Plan Alignment               Ensure safe, healthy and secure communities
 Contact Person                         Kim Randall, Procurement; 503-742-5449

BACKGROUND:
On April 24, 2018 a Strategic Procurement was published RFP #201 7-87 for On-call Interpreter
Services. The RFP received nine responsive and responsible bidders and all nine Contractors
were awarded contracts to provide On-call Interpreter Services for Clackamas County as
needed. Scope of Work to be determined at time of Service and mutually agreed upon by
County and Contractor.      This is the final Contract award for all bidders.

This request has been reviewed and approved by County Counsel.

RECOMMENDATION:
Staff recommends the Board of County Commissioners of Clackamas County approve the
Contract with Language Line Services, Inc. for On-call Interpreter Services for Clackamas
County.

Respectfully submitted,



Kimberly Randall
Procurement and Contract Analyst


Placed on the                                      Agenda by the Procurement Division




                      P. 503.742.5444    |   F. 503.742.5440   |   WWW.CLACKAMAS.US
  y =                                    CLACKAMAS COUNTY
CLACKAMAS                     PERSONAL/PROFESSIONAL SERVICES CONTRACT

This Personal/Professional Services Contract (this “Contract”) is entered into between Language Line
Services, Inc. (“Contractor”), and Clackamas County, a political subdivision of the State of Oregon
(“County”).

ARTICLE I

1. Effective Date and Duration. This Contract shall become effective upon signature of both parties.
Unless earlier terminated or extended, this Contract shall expire on June 30, 2023. However, such
expiration shall not extinguish or prejudice the County’s right to enforce this Contract with respect to: (a)
any breach of a Contractor warranty; or (b) any default or defect in Contractor performance that has not
been cured.

2. Scope of Work. Contractor will provide the following personal/professional services: To provide
Interpreting Services on an on-call basis (“Work”), further described in Article I.

3. Consideration. The County agrees to pay Contractor, from available and authorized funds, a sum not
to exceed one million five hundred thousand dollars ($1,500,000.00), for accomplishing the Work
required by this Contract. If any interim payments to Contractor are made, such payments shall be made
only in accordance with the schedule and requirements in Article III.

4. Travel and Other Expense. Authorized: [_] Yes           [XJ No
If travel expense reimbursement is authorized in this Contract, such expense shall only be rermbursed at
the rates in the County Contractor Travel Reimbursement Policy, hereby incorporated by reference and
found at: http://www.clackamas.us/bids/terms.html. Travel expense reimbursement is not in excess of the
not to exceed consideration.

5. Contract Documents. This Contract consists of the following documents which are listed in
descending order of precedence and are attached and incorporated by reference, this Contract, Exhibits A
and B.

6. Contractor Data.
Name: Language Line Services, Inc.
Address:      | Lower Ragsdale Drive, Bldg. 2, Monterey, CA 93940
Contractor Contract Administrator: Rick Cummings
Phone No.: 831-648-5529
Email:     rcummings @ languageline.com

MWESB Certification: [_] DBE #               [_] MBE #              [ ] WBE#                 [_] ESB #

Payment information will be reported to the Internal Revenue Service (“IRS”) under the name and
taxpayer ID number submitted. (See IR.S. 1099 for additional instructions regarding taxpayer ID
numbers.) Information not matching IRS records could subject Contractor to backup withholding.




RFP 2017-87 Interpreter Services                                                                     1
Language Line Services, Inc.
ARTICLE
   1. ACCESS TO RECORDS. Contractor shall maintain books, records, documents, and other
      evidence and accounting procedures and practices sufficient to reflect properly all costs of
      whatever nature claimed to have been incurred and anticipated to be incurred in the performance
      of this Contract. County and their duly authorized representatives shall have access to the books,
      documents, papers, and records of Contractor which are directly pertinent to this Contract for the
      purpose of making audit, examination, excerpts, and transcripts. Such books and records shall be
      maintained by Contractor for a minimum of three (3) years, or such longer period as may be
      required by applicable law, following final payment and termination of this Contract, or until the
      conclusion of any audit, controversy or litigation arising out of or related to this Contract,
      whichever date is later.

           AVAILABILITY OF FUNDS. County certifies that sufficient funds are available and
           authorized for expenditure to finance costs of this Contract within its current annual appropriation
           or expenditure limitation, provided, however, that continuation of this Contract, or any extension,
           after the end of the fiscal period in which it is written, is contingent on a new appropriation or
           limitation for each succeeding fiscal period sufficient in amount, in the exercise of the County’s
           reasonable administrative discretion, to continue to make payments under this Contract.

           CAPTIONS. The captions or headings in this Contract are for convenience only and in no way
           define, limit, or describe the scope or intent of any provisions of this Contract.

           COMPLIANCE              WITH   APPLICABLE    LAW.    Contractor shall comply with all federal, state,
           county, and local laws, ordinances, and regulations applicable to the Work to be done under this
           Contract. Contractor specifically agrees to comply with all applicable requirements of federal
           and state civil rights and rehabilitation statutes, rules, and regulations. Contractor shall also
           comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (Pub. L. No. 101-336), Title VI of the
           Civil Rights Act of 1964, Section V of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, ORS 659A.142, and all
           regulations and administrative rules established pursuant to those laws. Contractor further agrees
           to make payments promptly when due, to all persons supplying to such Contractor, labor or
           materials for the prosecution of the Work provided in this Contract; pay all contributions or
           amounts due the Industrial Accident Funds from such Contractor responsibilities incurred in the
           performance of this Contract; not permit any lien or claim to be filed or prosecuted against the
           County on account of any labor or material furnished; pay to the Department of Revenue all sums
           withheld from employees pursuant to ORS 316.167. If Contractor fails or refuses to make any
           such payments required herein, the appropriate County official may pay such claim. Any
           payment of a claim in the manner authorized in this section shall not relieve the Contractor or
           Contractor’s surety from obligation with respect to unpaid claims. Contractor shall promptly pay
           any person or entity that furnishes medical care to Contractor’s employees those sums which
           Contractor agreed to pay for such services and all money Contractor collected or deducted from
           employee’s wages to provide such services.

           EXECUTION AND COUNTERPARTS. This Contract may be executed in several
           counterparts, each of which shall be an original, all of which shall constitute but one and the same
           instrument.

           GOVERNING LAW. This Contract shall be governed and construed in accordance with the
           laws of the State of Oregon without regard to principles of conflicts of law. Any claim, action, or
           suit between County and Contractor that arises out of or relates to the performance of this
           Contract shall be brought and conducted solely and exclusively within the Circuit Court for
           Clackamas County, for the State of Oregon.      Provided, however, that if any such claim, action, or



RFP 2017-87 Interpreter Services                                                                          2
Language Line Services, Inc.
           suit may be brought in a federal forum, it shall be brought and conducted solely and exclusively
           within the United States District Court for the District of Oregon.

     7.    HAZARD COMMUNICATION. Contractor shall notify County prior to using products
           containing hazardous chemicals to which County employees may be exposed. Products
           containing hazardous chemicals are those products defined by Oregon Administrative Rules,
           Chapter 437. Upon County’s request, Contractor shall immediately provide Material Safety Data
           Sheets for the products subject to this provision.

     8.    INDEMNITY, RESPONSIBILITY FOR DAMAGES. Contractor shall be responsible for all
           damage to property, injury to persons, and loss, expense, inconvenience, and delay which may be
           caused by, or result from, the conduct of Work, or from any act, omission, or neglect of
           Contractor, its subcontractors, agents, or employees. The Contractor agrees to indemnify, hold
           harmless and defend the County, and its officers, elected officials, agents and employees from
           and against all claims and actions, and all expenses incidental to the investigation and defense
           thereof, arising out of or based upon damage or injuries to persons or property caused by the
           errors, omissions, fault or negligence of the Contractor or the Contractor's employees,
           subcontractors, or agents.

     9,    INDEPENDENT CONTRACTOR STATUS. The service(s) to be rendered under this Contract
           are those of an independent contractor. Although the County reserves the right to determine (and
           modify) the delivery schedule for the Work to be performed and to evaluate the quality of the
           completed performance, County cannot and will not control the means or manner of Contractor’s
           performance. Contractor is responsible for determining the appropriate means and manner of
           performing the Work. Contractor is not to be considered an agent or employee of County for any
           purpose, including, but not limited to: (A) The Contractor will be solely responsible for payment
           of any Federal or State taxes required as a result of this Contract; (B) This Contract is not
           intended to entitle the Contractor to any benefits generally granted to County employees,
           including, but not limited to, vacation, holiday and sick leave, other leaves with pay, tenure,
           medical and dental coverage, life and disability insurance, overtime, Social Security, Workers'
           Compensation, unemployment compensation, or retirement benefits; and (C) If the Contractor has
           the assistance of other persons in the performance of this Contract, and the Contractor is a subject
           employer, the Contractor shall qualify and remain qualified for the term of this Contract as an
           insured employer under ORS Chapter 656. (Also see Article V)

     10. INSURANCE.                Contractor shall provide insurance as indicated on Article IV, attached hereto
           and by this reference made a part hereof. Insurance policies, which cannot be excess to a self-
           insurance program, are to be issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the
           State of Oregon.

     11. LIMITATION OF LIABILITIES. Except for liability arising under or related to Section 14 or
         21(B), neither party shall be liable for () any indirect, incidental, consequential or special
         damages under this Contract or (ii) any damages of any sort arising solely from the termination of
         this Contact in accordance with its terms. This Contract is expressly subject to the debt limitation
           of Oregon counties set forth in Article XI, Section 10, of the Oregon Constitution, and is
           contingent upon funds being appropriated therefore.          Any provisions herein which would conflict
           with law are deemed inoperative to that extent.

     12. NOTICES. Except as otherwise expressly provided in this Contract, any communications
         between the parties hereto or notices to be given hereunder shall be given in writing by personal
         delivery, email, or mailing the same, postage prepaid, to the County at: Clackamas County
           Procurement, 2051 Kaen Road, Oregon City, OR 97045, or procurement @clackamas.us,                    or to

RFP 2017-87 Interpreter Services                                                                            3
Language Line Services, Inc.
           Contractor at the address or number set forth in Section 1 of this Contract, or to such other
           addresses or numbers as either party may hereafter indicate. Any communication or notice so
           addressed and mailed shall be deemed to be given five (5) days after mailing. Any
           communication or notice by personal delivery shall be deemed to be given when actually
           delivered.

     13. OWNERSHIP OF WORK PRODUCT. All work product of Contractor that results from this
         Contract (the “Work Product’) is the exclusive property of County. County and Contractor
         intend that such Work Product be deemed “work made for hire” of which County shall be deemed
         the author. If for any reason the Work Product is not deemed “work made for hire,” Contractor
         hereby irrevocably assigns to County all of its night, title, and interest in and to any and all of the
         Work Product, whether arising from copyright, patent, trademark or trade secret, or any other
         state or federal intellectual property law or doctrine. Contractor shall execute such further
         documents and instruments as County may reasonably request in order to fully vest such rights in
         County. Contractor forever waives any and all rights relating to the Work Product, including
         without limitation, any and all rights arising under 17 USC § 106A or any other rights of
         identification of authorship or rights of approval, restriction or limitation on use or subsequent
         modifications.

     14. REPRESENTATIONS AND WARRANTIES. Contractor represents and warrants to County
         that (A) Contractor has the power and authority to enter into and perform this Contract; (B) this
         Contract, when executed and delivered, shall be a valid and binding obligation of Contractor
         enforceable in accordance with its terms; (C) the Work under this Contract shall be performed in
         a good and workmanlike manner and in accordance with the highest professional standards; and
         (D) Contractor shall at all times during the term of this Contract, be qualified, professionally
         competent, and duly licensed to perform the Work. The warranties set forth in this section are in
           addition to, and not in lieu of, any other warranties provided.

     15. SURVIVAL. All rights and obligations shall cease upon termination or expiration of this
           Contract, except for the rights and obligations set forth in Article II, Paragraphs 1, 6, 8, 11, 13,
           14, 15, and 21.

     16. SEVERABILITY. If any term or provision of this Contract is declared by a court of competent
         jurisdiction to be illegal or in conflict with any law, the validity of the remaining terms and
         provisions shall not be affected, and the rights and obligations of the parties shall be construed
         and enforced as if the Contract did not contain the particular term or provision held to be invalid.

     17. SUBCONTRACTS AND ASSIGNMENTS. Contractor shall not enter into any subcontracts for
         any of the Work required by this Contract, or assign or transfer any of its interest in this Contract
         by operation of law or otherwise, without obtaining prior written approval from the County,
         except that Contractor may assign this Contract to a successor in interest in all its business
         provided such successor ratifies and assumes this Contract in its entirety. In addition to any
         provisions the County may require, Contractor shall include in any permitted subcontract under
           this Contract a requirement that the subcontractor be bound by this Article II, Paragraphs 1, 8, 13,
           15, and 27 as if the subcontractor were the Contractor. County’s consent to any subcontract shall
           not relieve Contractor of any of its duties or obligations under this Contract.

           County acknowledges and agrees that (1) (a) Contractor does not subcontract any of its services,
           (b) its interpreter workforce consists of its own employees, individual independent contractor
           interpreters and interpreters provided through professional interpretation employment companies
           (collectively, “LLS Personnel”), (c) all of such services including the training of all LLS
           Personnel, and the quality and performance standards to be met by all LLS Personnel, are

RFP 2017-87 Interpreter Services                                                                          4
Language Line Services, Inc.
           supervised by Contractor, which is solely responsible for ensuring that the terms and conditions
           of its customer agreements are met, and (d) no specific LLS Personnel are assigned to any
           specific customer, LLS Personnel availability being based on the language for which
           interpretation is sought and the real time availability of LLS Personnel, and (2) County hereby
           approves the use of all of LLS Personnel.

     18. SUCCESSORS IN INTEREST. The provisions of this Contract shall be binding upon and shall
         inure to the benefit of the parties hereto, and their respective authorized successors and assigns.

     19. TAX       COMPLIANCE       CERTIFICATION.          Contractor must, throughout the duration of this
           Contract and any extensions, comply with all tax laws of this state and all applicable tax laws of any
           political subdivision of this state. Any violation of this section shall constitute a material breach of
           this Contract. Further, any violation of Contractor’s warranty in this Contract that Contractor has
           complied with the tax laws of this state and the applicable tax laws of any political subdivision of
           this state also shall constitute a material breach of this Contract. Any violation shall entitle County
           to terminate this Contract, to pursue and recover any and all damages that arise from the breach and
           the termination of this Contract, and to pursue any or all of the remedies available under this
           Contract, at law, or in equity, including but not limited to: (A) Termination of this Contract, in
           whole or in part; (B) Exercise of the right of setoff, and withholding of amounts otherwise due
           and owing to Contractor, in an amount equal to County’s setoff right, without penalty; and (C)
           Initiation of an action or proceeding for damages, specific performance, declaratory or injunctive
           relief. County shall be entitled to recover any and all damages suffered as the result of
           Contractor’s breach of this Contract, including but not limited to direct, indirect, incidental and
           consequential damages, costs of cure, and costs incurred 1n securing replacement performance.
           These remedies are cumulative to the extent the remedies are not inconsistent, and County may
           pursue any remedy or remedies singly, collectively, successively, or in any order whatsoever.

           The Contractor represents and warrants that, for a period of no fewer than six calendar years
           preceding the effective date of this Contract, Contractor has faithfully complied with: (A) All tax
           laws of this state, including but not limited to ORS   305.620 and ORS     Chapters 316, 317, and 318;
           (B) Any tax provisions imposed by a political subdivision of this state that applied to Contractor,
           to Contractor’s property, operations, receipts, or income, or to Contractor’s performance of or
           compensation for any Work performed by Contractor; (C) Any tax provisions imposed by a
           political subdivision of this state that applied to Contractor, or to goods, services, or property,
           whether tangible or intangible, provided by Contractor; and (D) Any rules, regulations, charter
           provisions, or ordinances that implemented or enforced any of the foregoing tax laws or
           provisions.

     20. TERMINATIONS. This Contract may be terminated for the following reasons: (A) This
         Contract may be terminated at any time by mutual consent of the parties, or by the County for
         convenience upon thirty (30) days’ written notice to the Contractor; (B) County may terminate
         this Contract effective upon delivery of notice to Contractor, or at such later date as may be
           established by the County, if (1) federal or state laws, rules, regulations, or guidelines are
           modified, changed, or interpreted in such a way that either the Work under this Contract is
           prohibited or the County is prohibited from paying for such Work from the planned funding
           source; or (11) any license or certificate required by law or regulation to be held by the Contractor
           to provide the services required by this Contract is for any reason denied, revoked, or not
           renewed; (C) This Contract may also be immediately terminated by the County for default
           (including breach of Contract) if (4) Contractor fails to provide services or materials called for by
           this Contract within the time specified herein or any extension thereof; or (11) Contractor fails to
           perform any of the other provisions of this Contract or so fails to pursue the Work as to endanger
           performance of this Contract in accordance with its terms, and after receipt of notice from the

RFP 2017-87 Interpreter Services                                                                            5
Language Line Services, Inc.
           County, fails to correct such failure within ten (10) business days; or (D) If sufficient funds are
           not provided in future approved budgets of the County (or from applicable federal, state, or other
           sources) to permit the County in the exercise of its reasonable administrative discretion to
           continue this Contract, or if the program for which this Contract was executed is abolished,
           County may terminate this Contract without further liability by giving Contractor not less than
           thirty (30) days’ notice.

     21. REMEDIES. (A) In the event of termination pursuant to Article IT Section 20(A), (B)(i), or (D),
         Contractor’s sole remedy shall be a claim for the sum designated for accomplishing the Work
         multiplied by the percentage of Work completed and accepted by the County, less previous
         amounts paid and any claim(s) which the County has against Contractor. If previous amounts
         paid to Contractor exceed the amount due to Contractor under Section 21(A), Contractor shall
         pay any excess to County on demand. (B) In the event of termination pursuant to Sections
         20(B)(i1) or 20(C), the County shall have any remedy available to it in law or equity. If it is
         determined for any reason that Contractor was not in default under Sections 20(B)(ii) or 20(C),
         the rights and obligations of the parties shall be the same as if the Contract was terminated
         pursuant to Section 20(A). (C) Upon receiving a notice of termination of this Contract, Contractor
         shall immediately cease all activities under this Contract, unless County expressly directs
           otherwise in such notice of termination.   Upon termination of this Contract, Contractor shall
           deliver to County all documents, information, works-in-progress and other property that are or
           would be deliverables had the Contract Work been completed. Upon County’s request,
           Contractor shall surrender to anyone County designates, all documents, research, objects or other
           tangible things needed to complete the Work.

     22. NO THIRD PARTY BENEFICIARIES. County and Contractor are the only parties to this
         Contract and are the only parties entitled to enforce its terms. Nothing in this Contract gives, 1s
         intended to give, or shall be construed to give or provide any benefit or right, whether directly,
         indirectly or otherwise, to third persons unless such third persons are individually identified by
         name herein and expressly described as intended beneficiaries of the terms of this Contract.

     23. TIME IS OF THE ESSENCE. Contractor agrees that time is of the essence in the performance
         this Contract.

     24. FOREIGN CONTRACTOR. If the Contractor is not domiciled in or registered to do business in
         the State of Oregon, Contractor shall promptly provide to the Oregon Department of Revenue and
         the Secretary of State, Corporate Division, all information required by those agencies relative to
         this Contract. The Contractor shall demonstrate its legal capacity to perform these services in the
         State of Oregon prior to entering into this Contract.

     25. FORCE MAJEURE.            Neither County nor Contractor shall be held responsible for delay or
           default caused by fire, terrorism, riot, acts of God, or war where such cause was beyond,
           respectively, County’s or Contractor’s reasonable control. Contractor shall, however, make all
           reasonable efforts to remove or eliminate such a cause of delay or default and shall upon the
           cessation of the cause, diligently pursue performance of its obligations under this Contract.

     26. WAIVER. The failure of County to enforce any provision of this Contract shall not constitute a
         waiver by County of that or any other provision.

     27. COMPLIANCE. Pursuant to the requirements of ORS 279B.020 and 279B.220 through
           279B.235 and Article XI, Section 10, of the Oregon Constitution, the following terms and
           conditions are made a part of this Contract:


RFP 2017-87 Interpreter Services                                                                       6
Language Line Services, Inc.
           (A) Contractor shall: (4) Make payments promptly, as due, to all persons supplying to the
           Contractor labor or materials for the prosecution of the Work provided for in this Contract; (11)
           Pay all contributions or amounts due the Industrial Accident Fund from such Contractor or
           subcontractor incurred in the performance of this Contract; (111) Not permit any lien or claim to be
           filed or prosecuted against the County on account of any labor or material furnished.
           (B) If the Contractor fails, neglects or refuses to make prompt payment of any claim for labor or
           services furnished to the Contractor or a subcontractor by any person in connection with this
           Contract as such claim becomes due, the proper officer representing the County may pay such
           claim to the person furnishing the labor or services and charge the amount of the payment against
           funds due or to become due to the Contractor by reason of this Contract.
           (C) The Contractor shall pay employees for Work in accordance with ORS 279B.020 and ORS
           279B.235, which is incorporated herein by this reference. All subject employers working under
           the contract are either employers that will comply with ORS 656.017 or employers that are
           exempt under ORS 656.126. (D) The Contractor shall promptly, as due, make payment to any
           person or co-partnership, association or corporation furnishing medical, surgical and hospital
           care, or other needed care and attention incident to sickness and injury to the employees of the
           Contractor, of all sums which the Contractor agrees to pay for such services and all moneys and
           sums which the Contractor collected or deducted from the wages of the Contractor's employees
           pursuant to any law, contract or agreement for the purpose of providing or paying for such
           services.

     28. CONFIDENTIALITY. Contractor acknowledges that it and its employees and agents may, in
         the course of performing their obligations under this Contract, be exposed to or acquire
         information that the County desires or is required to maintain as confidential. Any and all
         information of any form obtained by Contractor or its employees or agents in the performance of
         this Contract, including but not limited to Personal Information (as “Personal Information” is
         defined in ORS 646A.602(11), shall be deemed to be confidential information of the County
         (“Confidential Information”). Any reports or other documents or items (including software)
         which result from the use of the Confidential Information by Contractor shall be treated with
         respect to confidentiality in the same manner as the Confidential Information.

           Contractor agrees to hold Confidential Information in strict confidence, using at least the same
           degree of care that Contractor uses in maintaining the confidentiality of its own confidential
           information, and not to copy, reproduce, sell, assign, license, market, transfer or otherwise
           dispose of, give or disclose Confidential Information to third parties or use Confidential
           Information for any purposes whatsoever (other than in the performance of this Contract), and to
           advise each of its employees and agents of their obligations to keep Confidential Information
           confidential.

           Contractor agrees that, except as directed by the County, Contractor will not at any time during or
           after the term of this Contract, disclose, directly or indirectly, any Confidential Information to any
           person, and that upon termination or expiration of this Contract or the County’s request,
           Contractor will turn over to the County all documents, papers, records and other materials in
           Contractor's possession which embody Confidential Information. Contractor acknowledges that
           breach of this Contract, including disclosure of any Confidential Information, or disclosure of
           other information that, at law or in good conscience or equity, ought to remain confidential, will
           give rise to irreparable injury to the County that cannot adequately be compensated in damages.
           Accordingly, the County may seek and obtain injunctive relief against the breach or threatened
           breach of the foregoing undertakings, in addition to any other legal remedies that may be
           available. Contractor acknowledges and agrees that the covenants contained herein are necessary
           for the protection of the legitimate business interests of the County and are reasonable in scope
           and content.

RFP 2017-87 Interpreter Services                                                                        7
Language Line Services, Inc.
           Contractor agrees to comply with all reasonable requests by the County to ensure the
           confidentiality and nondisclosure of the Confidential Information, including if requested and
           without limitation: (a) obtaining nondisclosure agreements, in a form approved by the County,
           from each of Contractor’s employees and agents who are performing services, and providing
           copies of such agreements to the County; and (b) performing criminal background checks on each
           of Contractor’s employees and agents who are performing services, and providing a copy of the
           results to the County.

           Contractor shall report, either orally or in writing, to the County any use or disclosure of
           Confidential Information not authorized by this Contract or in writing by the County, including
           any reasonable belief that an unauthorized individual has accessed Confidential Information.
           Contractor shall make the report to the County immediately upon discovery of the unauthorized
           disclosure, but in no event more than two (2) business days after Contractor reasonably believes
           there has been such unauthorized use or disclosure. Contractor’s report shall identify: (4) the
           nature of the unauthorized use or disclosure, (11) the Confidential Information used or disclosed,
           (iii) who made the unauthorized use or received the unauthorized disclosure, (iv) what Contractor
           has done or shall do to mitigate any deleterious effect of the unauthorized use or disclosure, and
           (v) what corrective action Contractor has taken or shall take to prevent future similar
           unauthorized use or disclosure. Contractor shall provide such other information, including a
           written report, as reasonably requested by the County.

           Notwithstanding any other provision in this Contract, Contractor will be responsible for all
           damages, fines, and corrective actions (including credit monitoring and identity restoration
           services) arising from disclosure of such Confidential Information caused by a data breach or a
           breach of Contractor’s confidentiality obligations hereunder.

           The provisions in this Section shall operate in addition to, and not as limitation of, the
           confidentiality and similar requirements set forth in the rest of the Contract, as it may otherwise
           be amended. Contractor’s obligations under this Contract shall survive the expiration or
           termination of the Contract, as amended, and shall be perpetual.

     29. CRIMINAL BACKGROUND CHECK REQUIREMENTS. Contractor shall be required to
         have criminal background checks (and in certain instances fingerprint background checks)
         performed on all employees, agents, or subcontractors that perform services under this Contract.
         Only those employees, agents, or subcontractors that have met the acceptability standards of the
         County may perform services under this Contract or be given access to Personal Information,
         Confidential Information or access to County facilities.

     30. MERGER. THIS CONTRACT CONSTITUTES THE ENTIRE AGREEMENT
         BETWEEN THE PARTIES WITH RESPECT TO THE SUBJECT MATTER
         REFERENCED THEREIN. THERE ARE NO UNDERSTANDINGS, AGREEMENTS,
         OR REPRESENTATIONS, ORAL OR WRITTEN, NOT SPECIFIED HEREIN
         REGARDING THIS CONTRACT. NO AMENDMENT, CONSENT, OR WAIVER OF
         TERMS OF THIS CONTRACT SHALL BIND EITHER PARTY UNLESS IN WRITING
         AND SIGNED BY ALL PARTIES. ANY SUCH AMENDMENT, CONSENT, OR
         WAIVER SHALL BE EFFECTIVE ONLY IN THE SPECIFIC INSTANCE AND FOR
         THE SPECIFIC PURPOSE GIVEN. CONTRACTOR, BY THE SIGNATURE HERETO
         OF ITS AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE, IS AN INDEPENDENT CONTRACTOR,
         ACKNOWLEDGES HAVING READ AND UNDERSTOOD THIS CONTRACT, AND
         CONTRACTOR AGREES TO BE BOUND BY ITS TERMS AND CONDITIONS.

                                            [Signature Page Follows]

RFP 2017-87 Interpreter Services                                                                        8
Language Line Services, Inc.
By their signatures below, the parties to this Contract agree to the terms, conditions, and content
expressed herein.

 Language Line Services, Inc.                               Clackamas County:
 1 Lower Ragsdale Drive, Bldg. 2
 Monterey, CA 93940




 Authorized Signature                                       Chair


                                                           Recording Secretary
 Name / Title (Printed)

                                                           Date
 Date


 226912-99 FBC / Delaware                                  Approved as to Form:
 Oregon Business Registry #


                                                            County Counsel


                                                           Date




RFP 2017-87 Interpreter Services
Language Line Services, Inc.
                                                 ARTICLE HI

                              PERSONAL/PROFESSIONAL         SERVICES CONTRACT

SCOPE OF WORK

Contractor shall provide On-call Interpretation services as further described in Exhibits A and B, hereby
attached and incorporated by reference.


The services under this Contract are considered an “on-call” or “as-needed basis,” in which no Work may
be performed until a detailed task scope of work is developed and agreed to by the parties for a specific
project. Each task scope of work must minimally include: a detailed description of services to be
provided, a schedule of key milestones for completion of the task, the maximum fee for completion of the
task, and any obligations of the County to complete the task. No task scope of work may commence until
an amendment is made to this Contract or an official County Purchase Order is issued and that
specifically incorporates by reference this Contract and the agreed upon task scope of work. No task
scope of work may modify this Contract and its terms and conditions unless an amendment is made to
this Contract.




CONSIDERATION

     a.    Consideration Rates — Time and Material Rate as further described in Exhibit B, hereby attached
           and incorporated by reference.

     a.    Payment for all Work performed under this Contract shall be subject to the provisions of ORS
           293.462 and shall not exceed the total maximum sum of one million five hundred thousand
           dollars ($1,500,000.00) over the life of this Contract. Invoices shall be submitted to requesting
           Department Project Managers per request.

     b.    Unless otherwise specified, Contractor shall submit monthly invoices for Work performed. If
           Contractor fails to present invoices in proper form within sixty (60) calendar days after the end of
           the month in which the services were rendered, Contractor waives any rights to present such invoice
           thereafter and to receive payment therefor. Payments shall be made to Contractor following the
           County’s review and approval of invoices submitted by Contractor. Contractor shall not submit
           invoices for, and the County will not pay, any amount in excess of the maximum compensation
           amount set forth above. If this maximum compensation amount is increased by amendment of this
           Contract, the amendment must be fully effective before Contractor performs Work subject to the
           amendment. The billings shall also include the total amount billed to date by Contractor prior to
           the current invoice.

     c.    Invoices shall describe all Work performed with particularity, by whom it was performed, and shall
           itemize and explain all expenses for which reimbursement is claimed. The billings shall also include
           the total amount billed to date by Contractor prior to the current invoice.




RFP 2017-87 Interpreter Services                                                                     10
Language Line Services, Inc.
                                                ARTICLE IV
                                                INSURANCE

During the term of this Contract, Contractor shall maintain in full force at its own expense, each insurance
noted below:

1.   Required by County of Contractor with one or more workers, as defined by ORS 656.027.

     Contractor, its subcontractors, if any, and all employers providing work, labor, or materials
     under this Contract are subject employers under the Oregon Workers’ Compensation Law,
     and shall either comply with ORS 656.017, which requires said employers to provide workers’
     compensation coverage that satisfies Oregon law for all their subject workers, or shall comply
     with the exemption set out in ORS 656.126.

     LX] Required by County        [_] Not required by County

     Professional Liability insurance with a combined single limit, or the equivalent, of not less than
     $1,000,000 for each claim, incident, or occurrence, with an annual aggregate limit of $2,000,000.
     This is to cover damages caused by error, omission or negligent acts related to the professional
     services to be provided under this Contract. The policy must provide extending reporting period
     coverage for claims made within two years after the contract is completed.

     XX] Required by County        [_] Not required by County

     General Liability insurance with a combined single limit, or the equivalent, of not less than
     $1,000,000 for each claim, incident, or occurrence, with an annual aggregate limit of $2,000,000 for
     Bodily Injury and Property Damage.     It shall include contractual liability coverage for the indemnity
     provided under this Contract.

     XX] Required by County        [_] Not required by County

     Automobile Liability insurance with a combined single limit, or the equivalent, of not less than
     $1,000,000 for each accident for Bodily Injury and Property Damage, including coverage for owned,
     hired, or non-owned vehicles, as applicable.

     Certificates of Insurance. Contractor shall furnish evidence of the insurance required in this
     Contract. The insurance for general liability and automobile liability must include an endorsement
     naming the County, its officers, elected officials, agents, and employees as additional insureds with
     respect to the Work under this Contract. Insuring companies or entities are subject to County
     acceptance. If requested, complete copies of insurance policies, trust agreements, etc. shall be
     provided to the County. The Contractor shall be financially responsible for all pertinent deductibles,
     self-insured retentions and/or self-insurance.

     Notice of cancellation or change. There shall be no cancellation, material change, reduction of
     limits or intent not to renew the insurance coverage(s) without thirty (30) days written notice from the
     Contractor or its insurer(s) to the County at the following address: Clackamas County Procurement
     Division, 2051 Kaen Road, Oregon City, OR 97045 or procurement         @clackamas.us.




RFP 2017-87 Interpreter Services                                                                     11
Language Line Services, Inc.
                                              ARTICLE V
                        CERTIFICATION STATEMENT FOR INDEPENDENT                                                 CONTRACTOR
                                 (Contractor completes if Contractor is not a corporation or is a Professional Corporation)


 Contractor certifies he/she is independent as defined in Oregon Revised Statutes 670.600 and meets the
 following standards that the Contractor is:

               Free from direction and control, beyond the right of the County to specify the desired result; AND
PWN PE




               Are licensed if licensure is required for the services; AND
               Are responsible for other licenses or certificates necessary to provide the services AND
               Are customarily engaged in an “independently established business.”

 To qualify under the law, an “independently established business” must meet three (3) out of the
 following five (5) criteria. Check as applicable:

 __X___            A. Maintains a business location that is: (a) Separate from the business or work of the County; or
                      (b) that is in a portion of their own residence that is used primarily for business.

     xX            B. Bears the risk of loss, shown by factors such as: (a) Entering into fixed price contracts; (b)
                      Being required to correct defective work; (c) Warranting the services provided; or (d)
                      Negotiating indemnification agreements or purchasing liability insurance, performance
                         bonds, or errors and omissions insurance.

                   C.    Provides contracted services for two or more different persons within a 12-month period, or
                         routinely engages in business advertising, solicitation or other marketing efforts reasonably
                         calculated to obtain new contracts to provide similar services.

                   D.    Makes significant investment in the business through means such as: (a) Purchasing tools or
                         equipment necessary to provide the services; (b) Paying for the premises or facilities where
                         the services are provided; or (c) Paying for licenses, certificates or specialized training
                         required to provide the services.

         X__       E.    Has the authority to hire and fire other persons to provide assistance in performing the
                         services.

 Additional provisions:
     1. A person who files tax returns with a Schedule F and also performs agricultural services
         reportable on a Schedule C is not required to meet the independently established business
         requirements.
     2. Establishing a business entity such as a corporation or limited liability company, does not, by
         itself, establish that the individual providing services will be considered an independent
          contractor.




 Contractor Signature                                                                               Date




 RFP 2017-87 Interpreter Services                                                                                             12
 Language Line Services, Inc.
                                             EXHIBIT A
                                   RFP #2017-87 Interpreter Services




RFP 2017-87 Interpreter Services                                       13
Language Line Services, Inc.
                                         EXHIBIT B
                                   CONTRACTORS RESPONSE




RFP 2017-87 Interpreter Services                          14
Language Line Services, Inc.
