DOWL

                                                Testimony to the
                     Senate Committee on Judiciary in Support of SB 1575
                                                  February 8, 2024
Good afternoon, Chair Prozanski, Vice Chair Thatcher, and members of the Senate Committee on Judiciary. For the
record, my name is Korey Derrick representing DOWL,       LLC. We have been in business in Oregon as DOWL since
2013 and formerly as OBEC since 1971 and employ 153 and perform work throughout all parts of the State. | am
writing today to strongly support Senate Bill 1575.


Oregon’s engineers, architects and land surveyors care deeply about our communities, which is why we invest in
our local economy, creating jobs and housing for Oregonians. Right now, we are being forced into unfair
contracting practices called “duty to defend” clauses, which require us to pay the legal expenses for those involved
in construction project related claims before fault is determined. This is detrimental to all design firms but
especially women,    minority, veteran owned and emerging small businesses. Because engineers, architects and
land surveyors are being forced to shoulder the legal liability and legal expense without any insurance to cover this
onerous Clause, not all Oregon firms are participating in public agency projects. This problem persists and also
includes low-income public housing to help address Oregon’s homelessness crisis and its associated infrastructure.


Our firm’s experience with duty to defend has been extremely challenging with certain jurisdictions and public
entities. Many will not accept any modifications to their contract language, forcing DOWL to forego proposing on
design related projects. The Port of Portland is the most recent jurisdiction that we walked away from a RFP due to
poor contract indemnity and duty-to-defend language. Clackamas, Lane, Jackson, Marion, Multnomah, and
Washington Counties along with Oregon      Department of Transportation are a few of the larger jurisdictions that
have been unwilling to accept modifications related to duty-to defend language. We implore you to back this bill to
help protect all engineering, architectural, and survey firms doing work in Oregon, small or large, so they can be
backed by professional insurance instead of paying up front costs out of pocket. Ultimately, access to a design
professional’s insurance policy is more beneficial to public clients versus the design firm itself. This will also
provide a better value to all Oregon citizens as more design firms would be willing to submit on public proposals to
get the best design at the best price.

We respectfully ask this committee to support SB 1575. Passing this bill would eliminate bad and unfair contract
practices and ensure everyone involved in a project pays their fair share of legal expenses. This isn’t about shirking
responsibility — it’s about ensuring fairness, so everyone is paying their own way and adequately protected by their
insurance.


Thank you for your service and we are happy to be a resource if you have additional questions.


Thank you.


DOWL


Korey Derrick (Oregon Resident)
Risk Management Specialist
309 SW 6th Avenue, Suite 700
Portland, OR 97204




                 971-280-8641   m 309 SW 6th Ave, Suite 700 m= Portland, Oregon 97204   = www.dowl.com
