MEMORANDUM FOR:               All Community Planning and Development Directors
                                                                                                JAMES Digitally
                                                                                                      by JAMES
                                                                                                                signed

FROM:                         James Arthur Jemison, II, Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary, D JEMIS JEMISON
                                                                                                      Date:
                                                                                                      2021.09.08
                                                                                                ON 20:02:00 -04'00'
SUBJECT:                      Waivers and Alternative Requirements For Implementation
                              of the HOME American Rescue Plan (HOME-ARP) Program


I.    SUMMARY

Section 3205 of the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (P.L. 117-2) (“ARP”) authorizes the
Secretary of HUD to waive or specify alternative requirements for any provision of the Cranston-
Gonzalez National Affordable Housing Act (42 U.S.C. 12701 et seq.) (“NAHA”) or regulation
for the administration of $5 billion in funds appropriated to the HOME Investment Partnerships
Program (“HOME-ARP”), other than requirements related to fair housing, nondiscrimination,
labor standards, and the environment, upon a finding that the waiver or alternative requirement is
necessary to expedite or facilitate the use of HOME-ARP funds.
Title II of NAHA is the authorizing statute for the HOME Investment Partnerships Program
(HOME) and applicable HOME regulations are at 24 CFR part 92. Consolidated plan
requirements for the use of HOME funds are in title I of NAHA with applicable regulations in 24
CFR part 91.
This Appendix describes waivers and alternative requirements, consistent with ARP, imposed on
all HOME-ARP awards by the CPD Notice entitled “Requirement for the Use of Funds in the
HOME-American Rescue Plan Program”, (the “HOME-ARP Notice”). The Secretary has
determined that each waiver and alternative requirement described in this HOME-ARP Notice is
necessary to expedite or facilitate the use of HOME-ARP funds. A participating jurisdiction may
request additional waivers and alternative requirements from HUD to address specific needs
related to its use of HOME-ARP funds. References to “HOME-ARP Notice” in this Appendix
mean all sections of the HOME-ARP Notice and this Appendix.
Pursuant to the Secretary’s HOME-ARP statutory authority, the Secretary is waiving the
following provisions of NAHA and HOME regulations and imposing the alternative
requirements as described below.
II.    OVERALL REQUIREMENTS

       A. Compliance with HOME-ARP Notice. The requirements in 24 CFR part 92, as
          revised by this Appendix apply to HOME-ARP. All references to compliance with
          requirements of or in “this part” in 24 CFR part 92 shall mean compliance with the


                                   www.hud.gov        espanol.hud.gov
   requirements in “24 CFR part 92, as revised by this Appendix to the HOME-ARP
   Notice,” unless specifically stated otherwise in this Appendix.
B. Substitution of “HOME-ARP” for “HOME.” All references to “HOME”
   throughout 24 CFR part 92 shall mean “HOME-ARP” for the use of HOME-ARP
   funds unless otherwise stated in the HOME-ARP Notice.
C. Use of “the Act” and “title II of NAHA.” The definition of “Act” is not revised,
   however “title II of NAHA” and “Act” are used interchangeably throughout this
   Appendix and 24 CFR part 92 and means the HOME Investment Partnerships Act at
   title II of the Cranston-Gonzalez National Affordable Housing Act, as amended, 42
   U.S.C. 12701 et seq.
D. Substitution of “nonprofit organization” for “community housing development
   organization.” All references to “community housing development organization” or
   “CHDO” in 24 CFR part 92, except the definition of CHDO in 24 CFR 92.2, are
   waived and revised to “nonprofit organization.”
E. Matching Contribution Requirements. The requirements of 24 CFR 92.218
   through 24 CFR 92.222 and any other requirements for matching contributions in 24
   CFR part 92 shall not apply to HOME-ARP funds, as subsection (c)(1) of ARP states
   that the underlying statutory requirement at section 220 of NAHA (42 U.S.C. 12750)
   does not apply to HOME-ARP funds.
F. Set-aside for Community Housing Development Organizations (CHDOs). The
   requirements of 24 CFR 92.300, 92.301, 92.302, 92.303, 92.452, 92.504(c)(3)(x), and
   92.504(c)(7) and any other requirements for amounts set-aside for CHDOs shall not
   apply to HOME-ARP funds as subsection (c)(1) of ARP states that the underlying
   statutory requirements at section 231 of NAHA (42 U.S.C. 12771) do not apply to
   HOME-ARP funds. In addition, the statutory requirements in sections 232, 233, and
   234 of NAHA (42 U.S.C. 12772, 12773, and 12774(a)) for the use of set-aside funds
   for CHDOs are waived.
G. Expiration of right to draw funds. The requirements of 24 CFR 92.500(d) and any
   other requirements for the 24-month deadline for the commitment of funds shall not
   apply to HOME-ARP funds as subsection (c)(1) of ARP states that the underlying
   statutory requirement at section 218(g) of NAHA (42 U.S.C. 12748) does not apply to
   HOME-ARP funds.
H. Homebuyer activities/Existing homeowner requirements. All statutory
   requirements for homebuyer or existing homeowner activities in NAHA are waived
   for the use of HOME-ARP funds because homebuyer/existing homeowner assistance
   is not an eligible activity under HOME-ARP. Specifically, HUD waives the
   requirements in sections 212(a)(1), 215(b), 254 of NAHA (42 U.S.C. 12742(a)(1),
   12745, 12804) for homeownership, homebuyer, and owner-occupied activities,
   including the development of affordable housing for homeownership and homeowner
   rehabilitation. Requirements in 24 CFR 92.205, 24 CFR 92.206, 24 CFR 92.207, 24
   CFR 92.217, 24 CFR 92.251(c)(3), 24 CFR 92.254, 24 CFR 92.255, 24 CFR 92.258,
   and 92.504(c)(3)(ii)(B) applicable to homeownership activities shall not apply and are
   waived.


                                        2
       I. Other Support for State and Local Housing Strategies and Specified Model
          Program. The statutory requirements in section 213 (42 U.S.C. 12743), sections 241
          to 245 of NAHA (42 U.S.C. U.S.C. 12781-12785), and sections 251 to 260 (42
          U.S.C. 12801-12810) do not apply to HOME-ARP and are waived.
       J. References to the Appendix: All references to “Appendix” shall mean “the
          Appendix of the HOME-ARP Notice, which may be amended from time to time by
          HUD” and is made part of the HOME-ARP Notice.”

III.   WAIVERS AND ALTERNATIVE REQUIREMENTS
A.     SUBPART A - GENERAL
       The definitions in 24 CFR 92.2 apply to the use of HOME-ARP funds except that HUD
       waives 24 CFR 92.2 and imposes the following revised definitions as alternative
       requirements:
               Commitment means (1) The participating jurisdiction has executed a legally
          binding written agreement (that includes the date of the signature of each person
          signing the agreement) that meets the minimum requirements for a written agreement
          in §92.504(c), as revised by this Appendix, and the HOME-ARP Notice. An
          agreement between the participating jurisdiction and a subrecipient that is controlled
          by the participating jurisdiction (e.g., an agency whose officials or employees are
          official or employees of the participating jurisdiction) does not constitute a
          commitment. An agreement between the representative unit and a member unit of
          general local government of a consortium does not constitute a commitment. Funds
          for administrative and planning costs of the HOME-ARP program are committed
          based on the amount in the program disbursement and information system for
          administration and planning. The written agreement must be:
               (i) With a State recipient or a subrecipient to use a specific amount of HOME-
          ARP funds to produce affordable housing, acquire and develop non-congregate
          shelter, provide tenant-based rental assistance, or provide supportive services;
               (ii) With a nonprofit organization carrying out HOME-ARP activities to provide
          funds for operating expenses, in accordance with the HOME-ARP Notice;
               (iii) To develop the capacity of nonprofit organizations in the jurisdiction
          carrying out HOME-ARP activities, in accordance with the HOME-ARP Notice; or
               (iv) To commit to a specific local project, as defined in paragraph (2) of this
          definition and HOME-ARP Notice.

                (2) Commit to a specific local project means:
                (i) Rental Housing. (A) If the project consists of rehabilitation or new
          construction (with or without acquisition) the participating jurisdiction (or State
          recipient or sub recipient) and project owner have executed a written legally binding
          agreement under which HOME-ARP assistance will be provided to the owner for an
          identifiable project for which all necessary financing has been secured, a budget and
          schedule have been established, and underwriting has been completed and under
          which construction is scheduled to start within twelve months of the agreement date.
          If the project is owned by the participating jurisdiction or State recipient, the project


                                                3
has been set up in the disbursement and information system established by HUD, and
construction can reasonably be expected to start within twelve months of the project
set-up date.
      (B) If the project consists of acquisition of standard housing and the participating
jurisdiction (or State recipient or subrecipient) is acquiring the property with HOME-
ARP funds, the participating jurisdiction (or State recipient or subrecipient) and the
property owner have executed a legally binding contract for sale of an identifiable
property and the property title will be transferred to the participating jurisdiction (or
State recipient or subrecipient) within six months of the date of the contract.
      (C) If the project consists of acquisition of standard housing and the participating
jurisdiction (or State recipient or subrecipient) is providing HOME-ARP funds to a
purchaser to acquire rental housing, the participating jurisdiction (or State recipient or
subrecipient) and the purchaser have executed a written agreement under which
HOME-ARP assistance will be provided for the purchase of rental housing and the
property title will be transferred to the purchaser within six months of the agreement
date.

(ii) Non-Congregate Shelter. (A) If the project consists of rehabilitation or new
construction (with or without acquisition) the participating jurisdiction (or State
recipient or sub recipient) and project owner have executed a written legally binding
agreement under which HOME-ARP assistance will be provided to the owner for an
identifiable project for which development is reasonably expected to begin within 12
months of the date of commitment.
(B) If the project consists of acquisition (without rehabilitation or new construction)
of a property and the participating jurisdiction (or State recipient or subrecipient) is
either acquiring the property with HOME-ARP funds or providing HOME-ARP
funds to a purchaser to acquire the property for use as a non-congregate shelter that is
reasonably expected to operate within six months of the date the commitment, the
participating jurisdiction (or State recipient or subrecipient) and the property owner or
purchaser have executed a legally binding contract for sale of an identifiable property
and the property title will be transferred from the property owner to the participating
jurisdiction (or State recipient or subrecipient) or purchaser.

(iii) Tenant-based rental assistance. If the project consists of tenant-based rental
assistance, the participating jurisdiction (or State recipient, or subrecipient) has
entered into a rental assistance contract with the owner, the tenant, or the sponsor of
the qualifying household in accordance with the provisions of the HOME-ARP
Notice.

(iv) Supportive Services. If the project consists of providing supportive services, the
participating jurisdiction (or State recipient, or subrecipient) has entered into a legally
binding written agreement or contract with the contractor or subrecipient providing
services to qualifying households in accordance with the HOME-ARP Notice.

   HOME-ARP funds mean funds made available under Section 3205 of the
American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (P.L. 117-2) through allocations.



                                       4
      Housing includes manufactured housing and manufactured housing lots,
permanent housing for disabled homeless persons, transitional housing, single-room
occupancy housing, and group homes. Housing does not include emergency shelters,
congregate or non-congregate shelters (including shelters for disaster victims), or
facilities such as nursing homes, convalescent homes, hospitals, residential treatment
facilities, correctional facilities, halfway houses, housing for students, or dormitories
(including farmworker dormitories).

      Program income. Program income means gross income received by the
participating jurisdiction, State recipient, or a subrecipient directly generated from the
use of HOME-ARP funds. When program income is generated by housing or shelter
that is only partially assisted with HOME-ARP funds, the income shall be prorated to
reflect the percentage of HOME-ARP funds used. Program income includes, but is
not limited to, the following:
      (1) Proceeds from the disposition by sale or long-term lease of real property
acquired, rehabilitated, or constructed with HOME-ARP funds;
      (2) Gross income from the use or rental of real property, owned by the
participating jurisdiction, State recipient, or a subrecipient, that was acquired,
rehabilitated, or constructed, with HOME-ARP funds, less costs incidental to
generation of the income (Program income does not include gross income from the
use, rental or sale of real property received by the project owner, developer, or
sponsor, unless the funds are paid by the project owner, developer, or sponsor to the
participating jurisdiction, subrecipient or State recipient);

     (3) Payments of principal and interest on loans made using HOME-ARP funds;

     (4) Proceeds from the sale of loans made with HOME-ARP funds;

   (5) Proceeds from the sale of obligations secured by loans made with HOME-
ARP funds;

     (6) Interest earned on program income pending its disposition;

    (7) Any other interest or return on the investment of HOME-ARP funds
permitted under §92.205(b) or the HOME-ARP Notice; and,

     (8) Any operating cost assistance or replacement reserve funds returned to the
participating jurisdiction after the required compliance or use period, in accordance
with the HOME-ARP Notice.

      Project means a site or sites together with any building (including a
manufactured housing unit) or buildings located on the site(s) that are under common
ownership, management, and financing and are to be assisted with HOME-ARP funds
as a single undertaking under 24 CFR part 92 and the HOME-ARP Notice. The
project includes all the activities associated with the site and building.



                                      5
        For HOME-ARP tenant-based rental assistance or supportive services, project means
        assistance to a qualifying individual or family.

                Project completion means that all necessary title transfer requirements and
        construction work, if applicable, have been performed; the project complies with the
        requirements of the HOME-ARP Notice and applicable requirements of this part, as
        revised by this Appendix,(including the property standards); the final drawdown of
        HOME funds has been disbursed for the project; and the project completion
        information has been entered into the disbursement and information system
        established by HUD, except that with respect to rental housing project completion, for
        the purposes of 92.502(d), project completion occurs upon completion of construction
        and before occupancy.

        For HOME-ARP tenant-based rental assistance or supportive services, project
        completion means the final drawdown has been disbursed for the project.

             Subrecipient means a public agency or nonprofit organization selected by the
        participating jurisdiction to receive HOME-ARP funds to administer all or some of
        the participating jurisdiction's HOME-ARP programs. A public agency or nonprofit
        organization that receives HOME-ARP funds solely as a developer or owner of a
        housing project or non-congregate shelter is not a subrecipient. The participating
        jurisdiction's selection of a subrecipient is not subject to the procurement procedures
        and requirements.

     All other definitions in 92.2 applicable to HOME-ARP remain unchanged.

B.   SUBPART B - ALLOCATION FORMULA

            1.      Formula Allocation. ARP required the Secretary to allocate HOME-ARP
            funds pursuant to section 217 of NAHA (42 U.S.C. 12747) to grantees that
            received allocations in fiscal year (FY) 2021 pursuant to that same formula,
            within 30 days of enactment of ARP. Therefore, section 216(1) (42 U.S.C.
            12746(1)) which requires the allocation of funds provided under title II of NAHA
            in 20 days from the date of enactment of the appropriation and sections 216(10)
            (42 U.S.C. 12746(10)) and 217(a)(4) (42 U.S.C. 12747(a)(4)) which provide for a
            threshold reduction do not apply. The requirements in 24 CFR 92.50 and 92.60
            apply only to the extent that they do not conflict with this ARP statutory
            requirement. All regulatory requirements related to the participation threshold
            amount do not apply to HOME-ARP.
     INSULAR AREAS
        2. Program description. The requirements in 24 CFR 92.61 are waived to the
           extent they apply to HOME-ARP funds and HUD imposes the alternative
           requirement that insular areas must comply with the requirements for participating


                                              6
   jurisdictions for the HOME-ARP allocation plan in the HOME-ARP Notice,
   unless stated otherwise in the HOME-ARP Notice.

3. Review of program description and certifications. The requirements for the
   HOME-ARP allocation plan for participating jurisdictions in the HOME-ARP
   Notice apply to insular areas, therefore 24 CFR 92.62 is waived to the extent that
   it conflicts with the following alternative requirements:

           (a) Review of HOME-ARP allocation plan. The responsible HUD Field
           Office will review an insular area's HOME-ARP allocation plan and will
           approve the plan unless the insular area has submitted a substantially
           incomplete HOME-ARP allocation plan; has submitted a HOME-ARP
           allocation plan that is inconsistent with the purposes of ARP; has failed to
           submit information sufficient to allow HUD to make the necessary
           determinations that the HOME-ARP allocation plan complies with the
           requirements in the HOME-ARP Notice; or if the level of proposed
           projects or eligible activities is not within the management capability
           demonstrated by past performance in housing and community
           development programs.
           An insular area’s allocation plan is inconsistent with ARP if it allocates
           HOME-ARP funds for uses other than a HOME-ARP eligible activity, as
           described in the HOME-ARP Notice. An insular area’s HOME-ARP
           allocation plan is substantially incomplete if the insular area does not
           complete the required public participation or consultation or fails to
           describe those efforts in the plan; if the insular area fails to include the
           required elements outlined in the HOME-ARP Notice, including the
           amount of HOME-ARP funds for each eligible HOME-ARP activity type;
           the insular area fails to identify and describe the responsibilities of the
           subrecipient or contractor administering all of its HOME-ARP award, if
           applicable; or HUD rejects the insular area’s certifications as inaccurate.
           If the insular area has not submitted information in its HOME-ARP
           allocation plan that is satisfactory to HUD to demonstrate compliance with
           HOME-ARP allocation plan requirements; or if the level of proposed
           projects or eligible activities is not within the management capability
           demonstrated by past performance in housing and community
           development programs, the insular area may be required to furnish such
           further information or assurances as HUD may consider necessary to find
           the HOME-ARP allocation plan and certifications satisfactory. The HUD
           Field Office shall work with the insular area to achieve a complete and
           satisfactory plan.




                                     7
         (b) Review period. Within thirty days of receipt of the HOME-ARP
         allocation plan, the HUD Field Office will notify the insular area if
         determinations cannot be made based on the information submitted that
         the HOME-ARP allocation plan complies with HOME-ARP allocation
         plan requirements, or if the proposed projects or activities are beyond
         currently demonstrated capability as demonstrated by past performance in
         housing and community development programs. The insular area will have
         a reasonable period of time, agreed upon mutually, to submit the necessary
         supporting information or to revise the proposed projects or activities in its
         HOME-ARP allocation plan.
         (c) HOME Investment Partnership Agreement. Upon issuance of the
         HOME-ARP Notice, HUD will obligate all HOME-ARP grants to insular
         areas through the signing of the HOME-ARP Grant Agreements by both
         parties. After obligation, HUD will permit the insular area to use 5
         percent of its award for eligible administrative and planning costs in
         accordance with the HOME-ARP Notice. After submission and
         acceptance of the insular area’s HOME-ARP allocation plan, the
         remainder of the HOME-ARP funds will be made available to the insular
         area for expenditure.
4. Amendments to program description. HUD waives 24 CFR 92.63 and imposes
   the following alternative requirement for insular areas:

         Insular areas must make a substantial amendment to its HOME-ARP
         allocation plan for a change in the method of distributing funds; to carry
         out an activity not previously described in the plan; to change the purpose,
         scope, location, or beneficiaries of an activity, including new preferences
         not previously described in the plan; a change in the guidelines that apply
         to HOME-ARP funds for other forms of investment (24 CFR 92.61(b)(6)),
         minority and women business outreach program (24 CFR 92.61(b)(7)), or
         refinancing (24 CFR 92.61(b)(8)); or a change in the tenure type of the
         project or activities; or a funding increase to a project or activity of
         $100,000 or 50% (whichever is greater). Participating jurisdictions must
         make the proposed substantial amendment public and provide for a 15-day
         public comment period prior to submission. Upon completion,
         participating jurisdictions must submit substantial amendments to HUD in
         accordance with the process for submitting the HOME-ARP allocation
         plan as described in Section V.D.
         The HUD Field Office will notify the insular area if its HOME-ARP
         allocation plan, as amended, does not permit a determination that the
         HOME-ARP allocation plan complies with the requirements in the
         HOME-ARP Notice, or if the level of proposed projects or eligible



                                   8
                   activities is not within the management capability demonstrated by past
                   performance in housing and community development programs, within 30
                   days of receipt. The insular area will have a reasonable period of time,
                   agreed upon mutually, to submit the necessary supporting information to
                   revise the proposed projects or activities in its HOME-ARP allocation
                   plan.
        5. Applicability of HOME-ARP requirements to insular areas. The requirements
           in 24 CFR 92.64 are revised to impose the alternative requirement that insular
           areas are subject to the same HOME-ARP requirements in the HOME-ARP
           Notice as participating jurisdictions, and applicable regulatory requirements for
           insular areas that are not revised by the HOME-ARP Notice. The following
           exceptions in 24 CFR 92.64, as revised, still apply to insular areas.
               (1) Subpart K (Program Administration): References to HOME Investment
                   Trust Fund in 24 CFR 92.500(b), as revised by the HOME-ARP Notice
                   shall be “HOME account” for insular areas. The requirements in 24 CFR
                   92.502(c) Local Account do not apply to insular areas, and instead insular
                   areas must comply with Treasury Circular No. 1075 (31 CFR part 205)
                   and 2 CFR 200.305.
               (2) Section 92.504 (Participating jurisdiction responsibilities; written
                   agreements; on-site inspections) applies, except that the written agreement
                   must require compliance with the requirements in the HOME-ARP Notice,
                   including the Appendix.
               (3) Subpart L (Performance Reviews and Sanctions). Section 92.552 does not
                   apply. Instead, 24 CFR 92.65 applies.

        Exceptions in 92.64(a)(1), (4), and (5) do not apply to HOME-ARP for insular areas
        and are waived. The requirements in 24 CFR 92.64(b), (c), and (d) for insular areas
        are not revised.
     6. Reallocation. Section 217 of NAHA (42 U.S.C. 12747(d)) and the regulation at 24
        CFR 92.66 for the reallocation of funds for insular areas are waived so that any
        HOME-ARP funds which are reduced or recaptured from an insular area's allocation
        will be reallocated by HUD in accordance with 24 CFR part 92, subpart J, as revised
        by this Appendix.


C.   SUBPART C - CONSORTIA; DESIGNATION AND REVOCATION OF
     DESIGNATION AS A PARTICIPATING JURISDICTION
     1. Continuous designation as a participating jurisdiction. 24 CFR 92.106 is waived
        and revised to the alternative requirement that once a State or unit of general local
        government is designated a participating jurisdiction for HOME-ARP, it must remain
        a HOME-ARP participating jurisdiction for its HOME-ARP period of performance
        and the requirements of 24 CFR 92.102 through 92.105 do not apply, unless HUD


                                             9
        revokes the designation in accordance with 24 CFR 92.107, as revised by this
        Appendix. Once allocated HOME-ARP funds, a HOME-ARP participating
        jurisdiction does not have to be a participating jurisdiction under the HOME program
        to remain a participating jurisdiction under the HOME-ARP program.
     2. Revocation of designation as a participating jurisdiction. The requirements in 24
        CFR 92.107(a) apply to HOME-ARP. The requirements in 92.107(b) and (c) are
        waived. Reallocation requirements in 92.107(c) are replaced with the alternative
        requirements for 24 CFR part 92, Subpart J, as revised by this Appendix.

D.   SUBPART D - SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS
     1. Submission requirements. HUD waives requirements associated with a
        comprehensive housing affordability strategy in sections 105 (42 U.S.C. 12705), 106
        (42 U.S.C. 12706), 107 (42 U.S.C. 12707), and 216 (42 U.S.C. 12746) of NAHA and
        24 CFR 92.150 and imposes the following alternative requirement:

            After the date of the HOME-ARP Notice, the participating jurisdiction may
            execute the HOME-ARP grant agreement with HUD to obligate the participating
            jurisdiction’s HOME-ARP allocation. After obligation and prior to acceptance of
            a participating jurisdiction’s HOME-ARP allocation plan by HUD, the
            participation jurisdiction may incur eligible administrative and planning costs in
            accordance with 24 CFR 92.207, as revised by this Appendix and may expend up
            to 5 percent of its HOME-ARP funds for eligible administrative and planning
            costs.
            The participating jurisdiction must submit a HOME-ARP allocation plan and
            related documents in accordance with the HOME-ARP Notice, including the
            requirements for the content of the HOME-ARP allocation plan, the process of
            developing and submitting the plan, certifications, consultation, public
            participation, HUD review, identification of subrecipient or contractor
            administering all of a participating jurisdiction’s HOME-ARP award and its
            responsibilities, if applicable, and amendments. After a participating jurisdiction’s
            HOME-ARP allocation plan has been accepted by HUD, in accordance with the
            HOME-ARP Notice, a participating jurisdiction may use its HOME-ARP funds
            on all eligible costs, including eligible project costs.
            If the participating jurisdiction does not submit a HOME-ARP allocation plan or
            if the participating jurisdiction’s plan is not accepted within a reasonable period of
            time, as determined by HUD, all HOME-ARP costs incurred by the participating
            jurisdiction (or its subrecipient or contractor) will be ineligible costs and any
            HOME-ARP funds expended by the participating jurisdiction must be repaid to
            the HOME Investment Trust Fund Treasury account, in accordance with guidance
            from HUD.
E.   SUBPART E - PROGRAM REQUIREMENTS



                                             10
1. Distribution of assistance. The requirements in section 222 of NAHA (42 U.S.C.
   12752) and 24 CFR 92.201 are waived to the extent necessary to impose the
   following alternative requirements:
       a. Local. Each participating jurisdiction must, insofar as is feasible, distribute
          HOME-ARP funds geographically within its boundaries and among different
          categories of need of qualifying populations, according to the priorities
          identified in its approved HOME-ARP allocation plan. The participating
          jurisdiction may only invest its HOME-ARP funds in eligible projects within
          its boundaries, or in jointly funded projects within the boundaries of
          contiguous local jurisdictions which serve qualifying populations in both
          jurisdictions. For a HOME-ARP rental or non-congregate shelter project to be
          jointly funded, both jurisdictions must make a financial contribution to the
          project.

       b. State. Each State participating jurisdiction is responsible for distributing
          HOME-ARP funds throughout the State according to the State's assessment of
          the geographical distribution of the needs of the qualifying populations within
          the State, as identified in the State's approved HOME-ARP allocation plan.
          The State must distribute HOME-ARP funds to rural areas in amounts that
          take into account the non-metropolitan share of the State's total qualifying
          populations and objective measures of rural need, such as poverty and
          homelessness data, as set forth in the State's approved HOME-ARP allocation
          plan. To the extent the need is within the boundaries of a participating unit of
          general local government, the State and the unit of general local government
          shall coordinate activities to address that need. A State that uses State
          recipients to perform program functions shall require that the State recipients
          use HOME-ARP funds in accordance with the HOME-ARP Notice and other
          applicable laws. A State may fund projects on Indian reservations located
          within the State provided that the State includes Indian reservations in its
          consolidated plan and HOME-ARP allocation plan.

ELIGIBLE AND PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES
2. New Eligible Activities. In addition to the activities contained in 24 CFR 92.205 and
   the NAHA, subsection (a)(1) of ARP has defined the following new eligible
   activities:
       (1) Supportive services to qualifying households that are not already receiving
            supportive services, including supportive services activities listed in section
            401(29) of the McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act (42 U.S.C.
            11360(29)); housing counseling; and homeless prevention services; and
       (2) The acquisition and development of non-congregate shelter units.

    For purposes of implementing the new eligible activities under ARP, HUD has
    determined that the new eligible activities are not subject to the requirements in


                                        11
    section 212 of NAHA (42 U.S.C. 12742) and imposes the requirements for the new
    eligible activities in the HOME-ARP Notice. As such, the waivers and alternative
    requirements in this Appendix shall not apply to the above-activities unless specified
    in the HOME-ARP Notice.
3. Eligible activities. HUD is providing a waiver of the requirements of section
   212(a)(1) and (3) of NAHA (42 U.S.C. 12742(a)(1) and (3)), section 215(b) of
   NAHA (42 U.S.C. 12745), 24 CFR 92.205(a)(1)-(4), (b)-(e), and 24 CFR 92.209 as
   follows:
   (1) Ineligible activities. Homeownership and owner-occupied activities, including
       assistance to homebuyers, development of affordable housing for homeownership,
       and homeowner rehabilitation, shall not be eligible activities in which HOME-
       ARP funds may be invested.

   (2) Costs associated with eligible activities. HUD is waiving and imposing an
       alternative requirement to 24 CFR 92.205(a)(1) because the regulation specifies
       that eligible costs are those set forth in 24 CFR 92.206 through 24 CFR 92.209.
       The alternative requirement is that eligible costs shall be those costs set forth in
       24 CFR 92.206 through 24 CFR 92.209, as modified by the waivers and
       alternative requirements in this Appendix.

   (3) Applicability of forms of assistance, minimum amount of assistance, multi-unit
       projects, and related limited waivers. As homeownership activities are not
       eligible activities for HOME-ARP funds, 24 CFR 92.205(b)-(d) are waived to the
       extent that they applied to assisting homebuyers, homeowners, or the
       development of housing for homeownership purposes.
   (4) Waiver and alternative requirement of regulations for terminated projects. As
       participating jurisdictions are required to have a HOME-ARP Investment Trust
       Fund Treasury account instead of the local HOME Investment Trust Fund, HUD
       is providing a limited waiver and alternative requirement of the requirements of
       24 CFR 92.205(e) to the extent that 24 CFR 92.252(e) specifies that funds must
       be paid into the participating jurisdiction’s HOME Investment Trust Fund.
       HOME-ARP funds repaid pursuant to 24 CFR 92.252(e) and the HOME-ARP
       Notice shall be repaid to the participating jurisdiction’s HOME-ARP Investment
       Trust Fund Treasury account.
4. Eligible project costs. HUD waives 24 CFR 92.206 to the extent that it conflicts with
   the eligible costs for eligible activities identified in the HOME-ARP Notice. In
   addition, HUD waives 24 CFR 92.206(d)(5) and imposes the following alternative
   requirement:

       For new construction or rehabilitation of HOME-ARP rental housing for
       qualifying populations, the cost of funding operating cost assistance during the



                                         12
       project’s compliance period or a capitalized operating cost assistance reserve in
       accordance with requirements in section VI.B of the HOME-ARP Notice is an
       eligible cost.
       For new construction or rehabilitation of HOME-ARP rental housing units for
       low-income households, the cost of funding an initial operating deficit reserve,
       which is a reserve to meet any shortfall in project income during the period of
       project rent-up for HOME-ARP units for low-income households (not to exceed
       12 months), is an eligible cost. An initial operating deficit reserve may only be
       used to pay the share of operating expenses, scheduled payments to a replacement
       reserve, and debt service of the HOME-ARP rental housing units for low-income
       households. The initial operating deficit reserve must be included in the project’s
       underwriting and the participating jurisdiction must review and approve the initial
       operating deficit reserve amount in accordance with the participating
       jurisdiction’s standardized underwriting guidelines. The initial operating deficit
       reserve must be based on a participating jurisdiction’s analysis of projected
       operating deficits attributable to the HOME-ARP units for low-income
       households during the period of project rent-up (not to exceed 12 months) and
       remaining after expected rental revenue and operating expenses are calculated
       according to the projected lease-up schedule. Any HOME-ARP funds placed in
       an initial operating deficit reserve that remain unexpended after the period of
       project rent-up may be retained for reserves for replacement for HOME-ARP
       units if permitted by the participating jurisdiction.
   HUD also waives 92.206(d)(6) to impose the following alternative requirement:
       Staff and overhead costs of the participating jurisdiction are those costs directly
       related to carrying out the project or activity, such as work specifications
       preparation, loan processing inspections, and other services related to assisting
       tenants and occupants. Although these project delivery costs may be charged as
       project costs, these costs cannot be charged to or paid by qualifying households or
       low-income families.
5. Eligible administrative and planning costs. Subsection (a)(2) of ARP provides that
   notwithstanding sections 212(c) and (d)(1) of NAHA (42 U.S.C. 12742(c) and
   (d)(1)), a participating jurisdiction or insular area may use up to fifteen percent of its
   HOME-ARP allocation for payment of administrative and planning costs of the
   HOME-ARP program. Therefore, HUD waives sections 212(c) and (d)(1) of NAHA
   (42 U.S.C. 12742(c) and (d)(1)) and the requirements in 24 CFR 92.207 to the extent
   it conflicts with the following alternative requirement:

       A participating jurisdiction may incur and expend up to fifteen percent of its
       HOME-ARP allocation for eligible administrative and planning costs. From the
       obligation date of the participating jurisdiction’s HOME-ARP award, as identified
       in the HOME-ARP Grant Agreement, until the date of HUD’s acceptance of the


                                         13
   participating jurisdiction’s HOME-ARP allocation plan, a participating
   jurisdiction may incur and expend up to five percent of its HOME-ARP allocation
   for eligible administrative and planning costs, in accordance with the
   requirements in the HOME-ARP Notice.
   HOME-ARP funds for may not be used to pay costs attributable to the regular
   HOME Program, including administrative and planning costs..
   A participating jurisdiction may provide all or a portion of its HOME-ARP
   administrative and planning funds to subrecipients and contractors that are
   administering activities on behalf of the participating jurisdiction (e.g., CoC
   entity, other non-Federal entity), in accordance with the requirements in the
   HOME-ARP Notice. However, from the obligation date of the HOME-ARP funds
   in the HOME-ARP Grant Agreement and prior to HUD’s acceptance of the
   participating jurisdiction’s HOME-ARP allocation plan, a subrecipient or
   contractor to the participating jurisdiction may only incur and expend HOME-
   ARP funds for eligible administrative and planning costs if the subrecipient or
   contractor is responsible for the participating jurisdiction’s entire HOME-ARP
   award and has executed a HOME-ARP written agreement that complies with 24
   CFR 92.504, as revised by this Appendix. A participating jurisdiction must
   identify subrecipient or contractor that is responsible for the use of the
   participating jurisdiction’s entire HOME-ARP award and describe the
   subrecipient or contractor’s responsibilities in its HOME-ARP allocation plan, in
   accordance with the HOME-ARP Notice.

   All costs must comply with the Cost Principles contained in subpart E of the
   Uniform Administrative Requirements, Cost Principles, and Audit Requirements
   for Federal Awards at 2 CFR part 200, as amended.
   If the participating jurisdiction does not submit a HOME-ARP allocation plan or
   if the participating jurisdiction’s plan is not accepted within a reasonable period of
   time, as determined by HUD, all HOME-ARP costs incurred by the participating
   jurisdiction will be ineligible costs and any HOME-ARP funds expended by the
   participating jurisdiction must be repaid to the participating jurisdiction’s HOME
   Investment Trust Fund Treasury account, in accordance with 24 CFR 92.503, as
   revised by this Appendix. Moreover, if the participating jurisdiction’s HOME-
   ARP allocation plan does not identify or include a description of the
   responsibilities of the subrecipient or contractor that is responsible for the
   participating jurisdiction’s entire HOME-ARP award, if applicable, the
   administrative and planning costs incurred or expended by the subrecipient or
   contractor will also be ineligible and any HOME-ARP funds expended by the
   participating jurisdiction or the contractor or subrecipient must be repaid to the
   participating jurisdiction’s HOME Investment Trust Fund Treasury account.
Reasonable administrative and planning costs for the HOME-ARP program include:




                                    14
a.      General management, oversight, and coordination. Reasonable costs of
overall HOME-ARP program management, coordination, monitoring, and
evaluation. Such HOME-ARP costs include, but are not limited to, necessary
expenditures for the following:
       1.      Salaries, wages, and related costs of the participating jurisdiction’s
       staff. If a participating jurisdiction charges costs to this category, the
       participating jurisdiction may either include the entire salary and related
       costs allocable to the HOME-ARP program of each person whose primary
       responsibilities with regard to the HOME-ARP program involves program
       administration assignments, or the prorated share of the salary, wages, and
       related costs of each person whose job includes any HOME-ARP program
       administrative assignments. A participating jurisdiction may only use one
       of these two methods. HOME-ARP program administration includes:
              i.       Developing systems and schedules for complying with
              HOME-ARP program requirements, including systems to prevent a
              duplication of benefits among beneficiaries of HOME-ARP
              activities;
              ii.     Developing interagency agreements and agreements with
              entities receiving HOME-ARP funds;
              iii.   Monitoring HOME-ARP activities for progress and
              compliance with HOME-ARP program requirements;
              iv.     Preparing HOME-ARP reports and other documents related
              to the HOME-ARP program for submission to HUD;
              v.     Coordinating the resolution of audit and monitoring
              findings on any HOME-ARP activities;
              vi.     Evaluating HOME-ARP program results against stated
              objectives in the HOME-ARP allocation plan, and
              vii.   Managing or supervising persons whose primary
              responsibilities with regard to the HOME-ARP program include
              such assignments as those described above.
       2.  Travel costs incurred for official business in carrying out the
       HOME-ARP program.
       3.     HOME-ARP administrative services performed under third party
       contracts or agreements, including such services as general legal services,
       accounting services, and audit services.
       4.  Other costs for goods and services required for administering the
       HOME-ARP program, such as: rental or purchase of equipment,


                                 15
       insurance, information systems necessary to track and implement
       beneficiaries of HOME-ARP activities in accordance with the
       requirements of this Notice, utilities, office supplies, and rental and
       maintenance (but not purchase) of office space.
       5.     Costs of administering HOME-ARP TBRA and HOME-ARP
       supportive services programs.
b.      Staff and overhead. Staff and overhead costs of the participating
jurisdiction related to administering a HOME-ARP project or activity, such as
work specifications preparation, loan processing, inspections, lead-based paint
evaluations (visual assessments, inspections, and risk assessments) and other
services related to assisting potential owners, tenants; and staff and overhead costs
directly related to providing advisory and other relocation services to persons
displaced by the project, including timely written notices to occupants, referrals to
comparable and suitable replacement property, property inspections, counseling,
and other assistance necessary to minimize hardship. These costs may be charged
as administrative costs, at the discretion of the participating jurisdiction; however,
these costs (except housing counseling) cannot be charged to or paid by
qualifying or low-income individuals and families.
c.      Public information. The provision of information and other resources to
residents and citizen organizations participating in the planning, implementation,
or assessment of projects being assisted with HOME-ARP funds.
d.      Fair Housing. Activities to affirmatively further fair housing (AFFH) in
accordance with 24 CFR 5.151 and the participating jurisdiction’s certification in
accordance with 24 CFR 5.152. (HUD’s Interim Final Rule entitled, “Restoring
Affirmatively Furthering Fair Housing Definitions and Certifications,” (86 FR
30779, issued on Jun. 10, 2021) as amended, established the AFFH definition at
24 CFR 5.151 and the certification requirements in 24 CFR 5.152 and became
effective on July 31, 2021. Available at
https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2021/06/10/2021-12114/restoring-
affirmatively-furthering-fair-housing-definitions-and-certifications.

d.     Indirect costs. Indirect costs may be charged to the HOME-ARP program
under a cost allocation plan prepared in accordance with 2 CFR part 200, subpart
E, as amended.
e.      Preparation of HOME-ARP allocation plan. Preparation of the HOME-
ARP allocation plan as required in the HOME-ARP Notice. Preparation includes
the costs of public hearing, consultations, and publications.
f.     Other Federal requirements. Costs of complying with the applicable
Federal requirements in 24 CFR part 92, subpart H. HOME-ARP project-specific
environmental review costs may be charged as administrative or project costs in


                                 16
       accordance with 24 CFR 92.206(d)(8) and is at the discretion of the participating
       jurisdiction.
6. Eligible community housing development organization (CHDO) operating
   expense and capacity building costs. Subsection (a)(3) of ARP provides that
   notwithstanding sections 212(a) and (g) of the Act (42 U.S.C. 12742(a) and (g)), a
   participating jurisdiction or insular area may use up to an additional five percent of its
   allocation for the payment of operating expenses of community housing development
   organizations and nonprofit organizations carrying out activities under the HOME-
   ARP Notice, but only if such funds are used to develop the capacity of the community
   housing development organization or nonprofit organization in the jurisdiction or
   insular area to carry out activities authorized under the HOME-ARP Notice; and the
   community housing development organization or nonprofit organization complies
   with the limitation on assistance in section 234(b) of NAHA (42 U.S.C. 12774(b)).
   Therefore, HUD waives sections 212(a) and (g) of the Act (42 U.S.C. 12742(a) and
   (g)) and 24 CFR 92.208 to the extent they conflict with ARP and the requirements in
   the HOME-ARP Notice for Nonprofit Operating and Capacity Building Assistance
   and imposes the following alternative requirements:

       A participating jurisdiction may use up to 5 percent of its HOME-ARP allocation
       to pay operating expenses of community housing development organizations and
       other nonprofit organizations that will carry out activities with HOME-ARP
       funds. A participating jurisdiction may also use up to an additional 5 percent of
       its allocation to pay eligible costs related to developing the capacity of eligible
       nonprofit organizations to successfully carry out HOME-ARP eligible activities.
       Participating jurisdictions may award operating expense assistance or capacity
       building assistance to a nonprofit organization if it reasonably expects to provide
       HOME-ARP funds to the organization for the eligible HOME-ARP activities of
       development and support of rental housing, tenant-based rental assistance,
       acquisition and development of non-congregate shelter, or supportive services
       within 24 months of the award.
           1. Operating Expense Assistance: Operating expenses are defined as
              reasonable and necessary costs of operating the nonprofit organization.
              These costs include employee salaries, wages and other employee
              compensation and benefits; employee education, training, and travel; rent;
              utilities; communication costs; taxes; insurance; equipment, materials, and
              supplies. HOME-ARP funds used for operating expenses must be used for
              the general operating costs of the nonprofit organization. These operating
              costs must not have a particular final cost objective, such as a project or
              activity, or must not be directly assignable to a HOME-ARP activity or
              project.




                                         17
          2. Capacity Building Assistance: Capacity building expenses are defined as
             reasonable and necessary general operating costs that will result in
             expansion or improvement of an organization’s ability to successfully
             carry out for eligible HOME-ARP activities. Eligible costs include
             salaries for new hires including wages and other employee compensation
             and benefits; costs related to employee training or other staff development
             that enhances an employee’s skill set and expertise; equipment (e.g.,
             computer software or programs that improve organizational processes),
             upgrades to materials, and supplies; and contracts for technical assistance
             or for consultants with expertise related to the HOME-ARP qualifying
             populations.

          3. Ineligible Costs:
             (a) No costs related to operating a non-congregate shelter (e.g., allocable
                 overhead and staffing costs, insurance, utilities, etc.) are eligible costs
                 under the HOME-ARP program.
             (b) The actual costs of implementing a specific activity or project,
                 including staff costs of the community housing development
                 organization or nonprofit organization to deliver supportive services or
                 administer HOME-ARP tenant-based rental assistance, are considered
                 HOME-ARP project delivery costs or project soft costs and are not
                 eligible operating expense and capacity building costs.

          4. Limitations on Assistance: In any fiscal year, operating assistance
             provided to a nonprofit organization may not exceed the greater of 50
             percent of the general operating expenses of the organization, as described
             in the HOME-ARP Notice, for that fiscal year or $50,000. Likewise, in
             any fiscal year, capacity building assistance provided to a nonprofit
             organization may not exceed the greater of 50 percent of the general
             operating expenses of the organization, as described in the HOME-ARP
             Notice for that fiscal year or $50,000. If an organization receives both
             operating assistance and capacity building assistance in any fiscal year, the
             aggregate total amount of assistance it may receive is the greater of 50
             percent of the organization’s total operating expenses for that fiscal year
             or $75,000.

7. Troubled HOME-assisted rental housing projects. HUD waives 24 CFR 92.210.

8. Pre-award costs. The requirements in 24 CFR 92.212 are waived and HUD imposes
   the alternative requirement that HOME-ARP funds cannot be used for pre-award
   costs.




                                        18
9. HOME Funds and Public Housing. HUD is waiving 24 CFR 92.213(d) to the
   extent that it requires that HOME funds must be used in accordance with 24 CFR part
   92 and the rent requirements in 24 CFR 92.252. Instead, as an alternative
   requirement, HOME funds must be used in accordance with 24 CFR part 92, as
   revised by this Appendix and the HOME-ARP Notice, including the rent
   requirements contained in each.

10. HOME prohibited activities and fees. HUD is waiving provisions in 24 CFR
    92.214 and providing alternative requirements related to prohibited activities and
    fees, as follows:

   (1) Operating Cost Assistance. 24 CFR 92.214(a)(6) is waived, and 24 CFR
       92.214(a)(1) is waived to the extent that it conflicts with the following alternative
       requirements:
           a. A participating jurisdiction may pay ongoing operating assistance or
              capitalize an operating cost assistance reserve for HOME-ARP-assisted
              units restricted for occupancy by qualifying populations in a project where
              the participating jurisdiction determines in its underwriting that the reserve
              is necessary to maintain the HOME-ARP units’ long-term operational
              feasibility. However, HOME-ARP funds cannot be used for both a
              capitalized operating cost assistance reserve and ongoing payments for
              operating cost assistance during the minimum compliance period. The
              allowable amount of the reserve shall not exceed the amount determined
              by the participating jurisdiction to be necessary to provide operating cost
              assistance for HOME-ARP units restricted for occupancy by qualifying
              populations for the 15-year HOME-ARP minimum compliance period.

           b. The operating cost assistance reserve for HOME-ARP units for qualifying
              households must be held by the project owner in a separate interest-
              bearing account and sized, based on an analysis of projected deficits
              remaining after the expected payments toward rent by qualifying
              households are applied to the units’ share of operating costs. Funds in a
              capitalized operating cost assistance reserve can only be drawn to address
              operating deficits associated with HOME-ARP units restricted for
              occupancy by the qualifying populations. The participating jurisdiction
              must, no less than annually, review the operating cost assistance reserve
              account to determine that the account is appropriately sized based on the
              projected operating deficits of units restricted for occupancy by qualifying
              households. A participating jurisdiction must use the definition of
              operating costs in the HOME-ARP Notice in its calculation of operating
              deficits to determine the amount of HOME-ARP funds needed for an
              operating cost assistance reserve or when providing operating cost
              assistance. The participating jurisdiction may require the project owner to


                                        19
           enter into a deposit account control agreement for the operating cost
           assistance reserve where the participating jurisdiction must approve
           disbursements from the account.

       c. The participating jurisdiction must require the project owner to request
          written approval from the participating jurisdiction prior to disbursing
          funds from the project operating cost assistance reserve. The participating
          jurisdiction must review each requested distribution from the operating
          cost assistance reserve, including supporting documentation, to determine
          that the distribution is reasonable and necessary to cover the operating
          deficit associated with units occupied by qualifying households.

       d. A participating jurisdiction may provide operating cost assistance to a
          HOME-ARP rental project to cover an operating deficit associated with
          HOME-ARP units restricted for occupancy by qualifying households
          except for when an operating cost assistance reserve is already established
          for the project. Operating cost assistance reserve and operating cost
          assistance cannot be provided beyond the HOME-ARP budget period, as
          described in Section VIII.C.3 of the HOME-ARP Notice. Unexpended
          operating cost assistance reserve amounts remaining at the end of the
          minimum compliance period of the HOME-ARP units must be returned in
          accordance with Section VI.B.23 of the HOME-ARP Notice. During the
          HOME-ARP minimum compliance period and prior to the end of the
          HOME-ARP budget period, a participating jurisdiction may invest
          additional HOME-ARP funds to provide operating cost assistance but is
          prohibited from investing additional HOME-ARP funds for capital costs
          except within the 12 months after project completion

(2) Eligible Costs for Operating Cost Assistance. 24 CFR 92.206 and 24 CFR
    92.214(a)(9) are waived to the extent that they conflict with the following
    alternative requirement.

       a. For purposes of the operating cost assistance, operating costs include costs
          for administrative expenses, property management fees, insurance,
          utilities, property taxes, and maintenance of a unit that is designated as a
          HOME-ARP-assisted unit and required to be occupied by a qualifying
          household. Operating costs must be reasonable and appropriate for the
          area, size, population(s) served, and type of project.
       b. Project administrative expenses include payroll costs, which are gross
          salaries and wages paid to employees assigned to the property, including
          payroll taxes, employee compensation, and employee benefits; employee
          education, training, and travel; advertising; and general administrative
          costs which are costs for goods and services required for administration of


                                    20
              the housing, including rental or purchase of equipment, supplies, legal
              charges, bank charges, utilities, telephone/internet services, insurance, and
              other administrative costs that are reasonable and customary for the
              general administration of a rental unit occupied by qualifying populations.
              HOME-ARP permits the pro-rated staffing costs of a Resident Services
              Coordinator to be included in the operating costs allocated to a HOME-
              ARP unit for low-income or qualifying households if such costs are not
              already paid by another source. Typically, the role of a Resident Services
              Coordinator is to arrange community activities for residents and link
              residents to outside service agencies as needed.
          c. Property management fee includes the total fee paid to a management
             agent by the owner for the day-to-day management of a HOME-ARP
             rental unit restricted for occupancy by qualifying populations. A
             management agent must cover its costs of supervising and overseeing
             operations of a HOME-ARP unit out of the fee they receive.
          d. A reserve for replacement must be based on the useful life of each major
             system and expected replacement cost in a HOME-ARP project.
             Scheduled payments to a reserve for replacement of major systems
             included in the operating costs allocated to a HOME-ARP unit restricted
             for a qualifying household may be made from the operating cost assistance
             reserve. A reserve for replacement allocated to the HOME-ARP units may
             also be capitalized in the initial year of the minimum compliance period of
             the HOME-ARP units. HOME-ARP funds cannot be used to both
             capitalize a reserve for replacement and provide payments to the reserve
             for replacement from a capitalized operating reserve during the minimum
             compliance period.

              Supportive services costs are not eligible operating costs of HOME-ARP
              units, however, qualifying households occupying HOME-ARP rental units
              may receive supportive services through the HOME-ARP supportive
              services eligible activity.

   (3) Prohibited fees. 24 CFR 92.214(b) is waived only to the extent that it conflicts
       with the alternative requirement that a participating jurisdiction may allow such
       occupancy fees or charges that are customary and reasonable if such fees or
       charges comply with 24 CFR 578.77(b).

11. Alternative requirements for Tenant-based rental assistance. The requirements
    of section 212(a)(3) (42 U.S.C. 12742(a)(3)), 24 CFR 92.209, 24 CFR 92.252(d), and
    24 CFR 92.504(c)(5) are waived. The following alternative requirements apply:

       (1) General Requirements. HOME-ARP funds may be used to provide tenant-
           based rental assistance to qualifying households (“HOME-ARP TBRA”).


                                        21
HOME-ARP TBRA is a form of rental assistance that is attached to the
household and not a particular rental unit. Therefore, the HOME-ARP TBRA
assisted household may choose to move to another unit with continued
HOME-ARP TBRA as long as it continues to meet the program eligibility
requirements. If a HOME-ARP TBRA assisted household chooses to move,
the rental assistance contract terminates and a new rental assistance contract
for the new unit will be executed according to HOME-ARP TBRA
requirements. The HOME-ARP TBRA assisted household must notify the
participating jurisdiction before moving in order to receive continued HOME-
ARP TBRA.

   a. Tenant Selection. Only individuals and families in the qualifying
      populations are eligible to receive HOME-ARP TBRA assistance.
      Consistent with the alternative requirements listed below and Section
      IV.C of the HOME-ARP Notice, a participating jurisdiction may use a
      continuum of care’s coordinated entry process, a coordinated entry
      process and other referral agencies, or a waitlist to select qualifying
      households for HOME-ARP TBRA. Participating jurisdictions may
      establish a system of preferences that includes a preference for one or
      more of the qualifying populations, such as homeless. Preferences for
      one or more of the qualifying populations must be disclosed in the
      HOME-ARP allocation plan, as provided in the HOME-ARP Notice
      and this Appendix. The participating jurisdiction must select
      qualifying households for HOME-ARP TBRA in accordance with
      written tenant selection policies and criteria that are based on local
      housing needs established in the HOME-ARP allocation plan. The
      participating jurisdiction must follow written tenant selection policies
      and criteria that:
   b. Limit eligibility to households that meet one of the HOME-ARP
      qualifying populations definitions in accordance with HOME-ARP
      requirements. Preferences for households in one or more of the
      HOME-ARP qualifying populations, if any, must comply with the
      preferences and/or method of prioritization in the participating
      jurisdiction’s HOME-ARP allocation plan and the participating
      jurisdiction’s policies and procedures, if any, and must not violate
      nondiscrimination requirements in 24 CFR 92.350.
   c. If the participating jurisdiction selects TBRA applicants off a waiting
      list, it must provide for the selection of households from a written
      waiting list in the chronological order of their application, insofar as is
      practicable.
   d. Give prompt written notification to any rejected applicant of the
      grounds for any rejection, and
   e. Comply with the VAWA requirements as described in 24 CFR 92.359.




                             22
       f. Finally, the participating jurisdiction may offer, in conjunction with
          HOME-ARP TBRA assistance, a simultaneous award of services in
          accordance with Section VI.D of the HOME-ARP Notice, as well as
          provide particular types of other nonmandatory services that may be
          most appropriate for persons with a special need or a particular
          disability.

(2) Tenant Protections. Participating jurisdictions must verify that there is an
    executed lease between the qualifying household that receives HOME-ARP
    TBRA and the owner of the rental unit or a between a qualifying household
    that receives HOME-ARP TBRA and a HOME-ARP sponsor with a sublease
    between the qualifying households and the HOME-ARP sponsor, in
    accordance with 24 CFR 92.253(a). A HOME-ARP sponsor is a nonprofit
    organization that provides housing or supportive services to qualifying
    households and facilitate the leasing of a HOME-ARP rental unit to a
    qualifying household or the use and maintenance of HOME-ARP tenant-based
    rental assistance by a qualifying household. Participating jurisdictions may
    permit a HOME-ARP sponsor, as defined in Section VI.B.18 of the Notice, to
    execute a lease or master lease with a project owner. The HOME-ARP
    sponsor must then sublease a unit to a qualifying household. The lease
    between the qualifying household and the rental unit owner or the sublease
    between the HOME-ARP sponsor` and the qualifying household cannot
    contain any of the prohibited lease terms specified in 24 CFR 92.253(b).

(3) Eligible Costs. Eligible costs under HOME-ARP TBRA include rental
    assistance, security deposit payments, and utility deposit assistance to
    qualifying households. HOME-ARP funds may be used to pay for up to
    100% of these eligible costs. A participating jurisdiction may use HOME-
    ARP TBRA funds to provide loans or grants to qualifying households for
    security deposits for rental units regardless of whether the participating
    jurisdiction provides any other HOME-ARP TBRA assistance. The amount
    of funds that may be provided for a security deposit may not exceed the
    equivalent of two months’ rent for the unit. Utility deposit assistance is an
    eligible cost only if rental assistance or a security deposit payment is provided
    with HOME-ARP TBRA. Costs of inspecting the housing are also eligible as
    costs of HOME-ARP TBRA. Administration of HOME-ARP TBRA is
    eligible only under general management oversight and coordination at 24 CFR
    92.207(a), except that the costs of inspecting the housing and determining the
    income eligibility of the family are eligible project costs under HOME tenant-
    based rental assistance.

(4) Ineligible Costs. HOME-ARP TBRA may not be used to pay for the
    homebuyer program as defined at 24 CFR 92.209(c)(2)(iv).

(5) Portability of Assistance. A participating jurisdiction may require the HOME-
    ARP TBRA assisted household to use HOME-ARP TBRA within the



                                 23
        participating jurisdiction's boundaries or may permit the household to use the
        assistance outside its boundaries consistent with the requirements in 24 CFR
        92.209(d).

    (6) Term of Rental Assistance Contract. The participating jurisdiction must
        determine the maximum term of the rental assistance contract. The rental
        assistance contract continues until the end of the rental assistance contract
        term, as determined by the participating jurisdiction, or until the lease or
        sublease is terminated, whichever occurs first. The term of the rental
        assistance contract may be renewed, subject to the availability of HOME-ARP
        funds. The term of the rental assistance contract must begin on the first day of
        the term of the lease or sublease.

    (7) Maximum Subsidy. The participating jurisdiction must establish policies for
        the allowable maximum subsidy, which may differ from the maximum
        subsidy requirements at 24 CFR 92.209(h). Participating jurisdictions may
        provide up to 100 percent subsidy for rent, security deposit payments, and
        utility bills. The participating jurisdiction must also establish policies for
        determining any household contribution to rent based on a determination of
        the qualifying household’s income.

    (8) Rent Standard. Consistent with 24 CFR 92.209(h)(3), participating
        jurisdictions must also establish a rent standard for HOME-ARP TBRA by
        unit size that is based upon local market conditions or the Section 8 Housing
        Choice Voucher program under 24 CFR part 982. The participating
        jurisdiction must determine whether the rent for a HOME-ARP TBRA
        household complies with the rent standard established by the participating
        jurisdiction for the HOME-ARP program and must disapprove a lease if the
        rent does not meet the participating jurisdiction’s rent standard for HOME-
        ARP TBRA.

(9) Housing Quality Standards. Housing occupied by a household receiving HOME-
    ARP TBRA must comply with all housing quality standards required in 24 CFR
    982.401 (or successor inspection standards issued by HUD) unless the tenant is
    residing in a HOME or HOME-ARP unit, in which case the participating
    jurisdiction may defer to initial and ongoing inspection standards.

(10) Program Operation. The participating jurisdiction may operate HOME-ARP
     TBRA itself or may contract with a PHA or other entity with the capacity to
     operate a rental assistance program. In either case, the participating jurisdiction or
     entity operating the program must approve the lease. HOME-ARP TBRA may be
     provided through an assistance contract with (1) an owner that leases a unit to a
     qualifying household; (2) the qualifying household, or (3) an owner and the
     qualifying household in a tri- party contract. In the case of HOME ARP TBRA
     provided in coordination with a HOME ARP sponsor, as described below, the
     participating jurisdiction may require that payments are made directly to the



                                       24
    HOME-ARP sponsor that will make rental payments to the owner on behalf of
    the qualifying household or require payments directly to the owner of the unit.

(11) HOME ARP TBRA with a HOME ARP Sponsor. HOME ARP-TBRA may be
     provided in coordination with a HOME-ARP TBRA sponsor. A HOME-ARP
     TBRA sponsor is a nonprofit organization that provides housing or services to
     HOME-ARP TBRA qualifying households and facilitates the leasing of a HOME-
     ARP rental unit to a qualifying household or the use and maintenance of HOME-
     ARP TBRA on behalf of a qualifying household. A HOME-ARP sponsor may
     make rental subsidy payments and a security deposit payment on behalf of a
     qualifying household. Under HOME-ARP TBRA, a qualifying household may
     reside in housing leased by a HOME-ARP sponsor if there is a sublease that
     complies with HOME-ARP lease requirements between the HOME-ARP sponsor
     and the qualifying household.

(12) Rental Assistance Contract. There must be a rental assistance contract between
     the participating jurisdiction and at least one of the following.
          i. HOME-ARP sponsor;
         ii. Qualifying household; or
        iii. Owner of the housing.

    Rental subsidy payments are made on behalf of the HOME ARP-TBRA
    household pursuant to a rental assistance contract. The rental assistance contract
    continues until the lease is terminated. Regardless of the role of the sponsor, the
    household has the right to continued HOME-ARP TBRA assistance if it chooses
    to move from the unit.
    The HOME-ARP sponsor may only receive the TBRA subsidy directly from the
    participating jurisdiction on behalf of the qualifying household if the rental
    assistance contract is between the HOME-ARP sponsor and the participating
    jurisdiction or the HOME-ARP sponsor and the participating jurisdiction have
    entered into a written agreement as outlined below. The HOME-ARP sponsor
    must make rental subsidy payments to the owner on behalf of the qualifying
    household per the terms and conditions of the HOME-ARP TBRA contract or
    written agreement with the participating jurisdiction. When the HOME-ARP
    TBRA qualifying household moves to a new rental unit, the HOME-ARP sponsor
    is not required to continue its sponsor relationship with the HOME-ARP TBRA
    assisted household for the new rental unit but may do so with the consent of the
    HOME-ARP TBRA household.
    The participating jurisdiction must establish policies and procedures regarding
    termination of HOME-ARP TBRA assistance for qualifying households who are
    absent from the rental unit where a HOME-ARP sponsor is leasing the rental unit
    and subleasing to the qualifying household or providing HOME-ARP TBRA
    rental subsidy payments on behalf of the household.




                                     25
           (13) Lease and Sublease. Participating jurisdictions must verify that each
                household that receives HOME-ARP TBRA assistance has an executed lease
                that complies with the tenant protection requirements of the HOME-ARP
                Notice. The lease agreement may be between the project owner and the
                HOME-ARP TBRA household, or participating jurisdictions may permit a
                HOME-ARP sponsor to execute a lease for an individual unit or a master
                lease with an owner for more than one unit restricted for occupancy by
                HOME-ARP TBRA households. If the lease agreement is between the
                HOME-ARP sponsor and owner, the HOME-ARP sponsor must execute a
                sublease agreement with a HOME-ARP TBRA household. The sublease
                between the HOME-ARP sponsor and the HOME-ARP TBRA household
                must meet the tenant protection requirements of the HOME-ARP Notice.

           (14) Written Agreement with HOME-ARP Sponsor. The participating jurisdiction
                must enter into a written agreement with the HOME-ARP sponsor if the
                HOME-ARP TBRA rental assistance contract is not with the HOME-ARP
                sponsor and the HOME-ARP sponsor will receive the HOME-ARP TBRA
                subsidy directly from the participating jurisdiction on behalf of the qualifying
                household. The written agreement must specify the requirements for the
                HOME-ARP sponsor receiving the HOME-ARP TBRA subsidy on behalf of
                the qualifying household and the HOME-ARP sponsor’s obligation to provide
                the HOME-ARP TBRA payment to the owner for the unit’s required rent.


INCOME TARGETING

     12. Alternative requirement to HOME rental income targeting requirements. HUD
         is waiving section 215(a)(1)(B) and (C) of NAHA (42 U.S.C. 12745(a)(1)(B) and
         (C)) and 24 CFR 92.216. For HOME-ARP rental units, the following alternative
         requirements shall apply:
         (1) 30% Requirement. Not more than 30 percent of the total number of rental units
             assisted with HOME-ARP funds by the participating jurisdiction may be
             restricted to households that are low-income as defined in 24 CFR 92.2. These
             units may only be located in projects containing HOME-ARP units restricted for
             occupancy by qualifying households. The remainder of the total HOME-ARP
             rental units assisted with HOME-ARP funds by the participating jurisdiction must
             be restricted for occupancy by qualifying households in accordance with the
             HOME-ARP Notice.
         (2) Low-Income Households. The HOME-ARP rental units occupied by low-income
             households must be occupied by low-income households and bear a rent no
             greater than the lesser of -
             a. the Fair Market Rent for existing housing for comparable units in the area, as
                 established by HUD, or




                                             26
              b. a rent equal to 30 percent of the income of a family at 65 percent of median
                 income for the area, as determined by HUD, with adjustments for the number
                 of bedrooms in the unit).

      13. HOME tenant-based rental assistance income targeting requirements. HUD is
          waiving section 212(a)(3)(A)(ii) of NAHA (42 U.S.C. 12742(a)(3)(A)(ii)) and 24 CFR
          92.216 requirements for income targeting of HOME tenant-based rental assistance and
          imposing an alternative requirement that all persons assisted with HOME-ARP TBRA
          must be qualifying households upon admission.


F. SUBPART F - PROJECT REQUIREMENTS
     1. Maximum per-unit subsidy amount and the waiver and alternative requirement
        for underwriting and subsidy layering. The requirements of 24 CFR 92.250(a)
        shall not apply to HOME-ARP funds because subsection (c)(1) of ARP states that the
        underlying statutory requirements for cost limits in section 212(e) of NAHA (42
        U.S.C. 12742(e)) do not apply to HOME-ARP funds. Additionally, the underwriting
        and subsidy layering requirements in 24 CFR 92.250(b) shall not apply to HOME-
        ARP rental project activities and are waived. Lastly, the requirements of section 212
        of NAHA (42 U.S.C. 12742) and 24 CFR 92.214(a) are waived to the extent that they
        conflict with the alternative requirements below. HUD is specifying the following
        alternative requirements:
        (1) Underwriting and Subsidy Layering Guidelines. Participating jurisdictions must
            develop standardized underwriting guidelines for HOME-ARP rental projects.
            These guidelines must provide for underwriting that accommodates and is
            appropriate for different types of projects. All participating jurisdictions are
            required to develop and implement standardized underwriting guidelines for
            HOME-ARP that require the following:

              a. An examination of the sources and uses of funds for the project and a
                 determination that costs are reasonable. In examining a project’s proposed
                 sources and uses, a participating jurisdiction must determine the amount of
                 HOME-ARP development subsidy required to fill the gap between other
                 committed funding sources and the cost to develop the project.

              b. An assessment of the current market demand for the proposed project. For
                 HOME-ARP units for qualifying households, a market assessment is not
                 required. Rather, the participating jurisdiction can demonstrate that there is
                 unmet need among qualifying populations for the type of housing proposed
                 through Continuum of Care data, public housing and affordable housing
                 waiting lists, point-in-time surveys, housing inventory count, or other relevant
                 data on the need for permanent housing for the qualifying populations. For
                 projects containing units restricted for occupancy by low-income households


                                              27
   or market-rate households, the participating jurisdiction must conduct a
   market assessment in accordance with 24 CFR 92.250(b)(2). A third-party
   market assessment completed by the developer or another funder meets this
   requirement, but the participating jurisdiction must review the assessment and
   acknowledge in writing that it accepts the assessment’s findings and
   conclusions. The market assessment and the participating jurisdiction’s
   written acknowledgement must be retained for recordkeeping purposes.

c. Review of and determination that the developer’s experience and financial
   capacity are satisfactory based on the size and complexity of the project.
   When assessing the developer, the participating jurisdiction must review, at
   minimum, prior experience with similar projects and the current capacity to
   develop the proposed project. When determining whether the developer has
   the financial capacity to undertake the project, the participating jurisdiction
   should examine financial statements and audits to determine the developer’s
   net worth, portfolio risk, pre-development funding, and liquidity.

d. Firm written financial commitments for the project.

e. A careful review of the project’s operating budget, including the assumptions,
   projections of a project’s net operating income, and reasonably expected
   increases in revenue and expenses during the minimum compliance period, to
   determine if any HOME-ARP-funded operating cost assistance is necessary
   and if applicable, an operating cost assistance reserve is sized appropriately.
   Operating income of the project must be sufficient to cover operating
   expenses through the minimum compliance period. For HOME-ARP units for
   qualifying households, the proforma or projections should include any
   anticipated ongoing operating cost assistance or draws from an operating cost
   assistance reserve, if applicable, that will offset operating deficits associated
   with those units to demonstrate sufficient operating support. If project-based
   vouchers or project-based rental assistance will be awarded, this analysis must
   include that rental assistance revenue because operating cost assistance cannot
   be used for units for qualifying households with project-based vouchers or
   project-based rental assistance. A participating jurisdiction’s underwriting
   standards may permit projects to generate reasonable net operating income
   throughout the minimum compliance period. However, HOME-ARP
   operating cost assistance may only be used to offset operating deficits, in
   accordance with the requirements of the HOME-ARP Notice. Net operating
   income resulting from HOME-ARP operating cost assistance is not permitted
   and must be prohibited in the written agreement between the participating
   jurisdiction and the owner.




                                 28
   f. An assessment of the project’s overall viability through the minimum
      compliance period based on the households (i.e. qualifying households, low-
      income households, market-rate households) it will serve.

(2) Developer Fee. A developer fee is a permitted development cost under the
    HOME-ARP program, but the participating jurisdiction must review the fee and
    determine that it is reasonable. A participating jurisdiction may set limits on the
    developer fee and other fees (e.g., asset management fee, property management
    fee) to be paid by HOME-ARP funds that differ from other funding sources (e.g.,
    Low-Income Housing Tax Credit underwriting standards).
(3) Underwriting and Subsidy Layering Review Standards. Before the HOME-ARP
    funds can be committed to a HOME-ARP rental project, participating
    jurisdictions must evaluate the project to determine the amount of HOME-ARP
    capital subsidy and operating cost assistance necessary to provide quality
    affordable housing that meets the requirements of the HOME-ARP Notice and is
    financially viable for the minimum 15-year HOME-ARP compliance period. The
    participating jurisdiction must evaluate the project in accordance with
    underwriting and subsidy layering guidelines it has developed for HOME-ARP
    projects.
(4) Underwriting and Subsidy Layering Commitment Requirements. The participating
    jurisdiction’s project underwriting must include an in-depth review of underlying
    project assumptions, development sources and uses, and projected operating
    income and expenses, and the project’s long-term financial viability to determine
    the project’s need for HOME-ARP assistance while preventing over-subsidization
    of the project. Participating jurisdictions must take a holistic approach to
    underwriting that examines the overall feasibility of the entire project to
    determine that the property will be financially sustainable for the duration of the
    15-year HOME-ARP compliance period.
   For projects that will receive operating cost assistance through a capitalized
   operating cost assistance reserve or on-going operating cost assistance for a
   specific period, the on-going operating cost assistance or operating cost assistance
   reserve must be included in the underwriting. Unless placed into an operating
   cost assistance reserve, operating cost assistance committed to a project for a
   specific period cannot be provided beyond the budget period, as described in
   Section VIII.C.4 of the HOME-ARP Notice. HOME-ARP units that have
   commitments for project-based rental assistance must be underwritten with the
   projected rental assistance and not with operating cost assistance. An operating
   cost assistance reserve must be sized based on an analysis of projected operating
   deficits remaining after the expected payments toward rent by qualifying
   households are applied to the HOME-ARP unit's share of actual operating costs.
   However, the participating jurisdiction, through its underwriting, must also
   determine that the HOME-ARP capital and operating subsidies do not result in
   over-subsidization of the project.




                                     29
2. Property Standards. The property standards in 24 CFR 92.251 shall apply to all
   HOME-ARP rental activities except that –
   The requirements in 24 CFR 92.251(c)(3) shall not apply and are waived because
   homeownership is not an eligible activity for HOME-ARP funds.
   HOME-ARP rental units must comply with the ongoing property condition standards
   of 24 CFR 92.251(f) throughout the compliance period as demonstrated by an on-site
   inspection within 12 months of project completion and an on-site inspection at least
   once every three years thereafter as required by 24 CFR 92.504(d)(1)(ii).
3. Lease-up of HOME-ARP rental units. The requirement in 24 CFR 92.252 that
   states that HUD will require the participating jurisdiction to repay HOME funds
   invested in any housing unit that has not been rented to eligible tenants 18 months
   after the date of project completion is waived. Instead, as an alternative requirement,
   if the HOME-ARP units are not occupied by eligible qualifying households or low-
   income households, in accordance with the unit restrictions, within six months
   following project completion, the participating jurisdiction, as applicable, must
   submit to HUD information on its efforts to coordinate with a CoC, homeless service
   providers, social service and other public agencies to fill units for qualifying
   households or must submit marketing information and, if appropriate, a marketing
   plan to fill units for low-income households. The participating jurisdiction must repay
   any HOME-ARP funds invested in units that are not rented to eligible qualifying or
   low-income households within 12 months of project completion.

4. Rent limitations, initial rent schedule, and utility allowances for HOME-ARP
   rental housing. The requirements in 24 CFR 92.252(a)-(d) are waived and the
   following alternative requirements shall apply.
   (1) Rent limitations for units restricted for occupancy by Qualifying Households. In
       no case can the HOME-ARP rents exceed 30% of the adjusted income of a
       household whose annual income is equal to or less than 50% of the median
       income for the area, as determined by HUD, with adjustments for number of
       bedrooms in the unit. HUD will publish the HOME-ARP rent limits on an annual
       basis.

       Notwithstanding the foregoing, a unit that receives a Federal or state project-
       based rental subsidy and is occupied by a very low-income household that pays as
       a contribution to rent no more than 30 percent of the household’s adjusted
       income, may charge the rent allowable under the Federal or state project-based
       rental subsidy program (i.e., the tenant rental contribution plus the rental subsidy
       allowable under that program). If a household receives tenant-based rental
       assistance, the rent is the rent permissible under the applicable rental assistance
       program (i.e., the tenant rental contribution plus the rental subsidy allowable
       under that rental assistance program).



                                        30
      The rent limits for HOME-ARP qualifying populations include the rent plus the
      utility allowance established pursuant to Section VI.B.13.d of the HOME-ARP
      Notice.

   (2) Rent limitations – low-income households. HOME-ARP rental units occupied by
       low-income households must comply with the rent limitations in 24 CFR
       92.252(a) (i.e., the lesser of the Fair Market Rent for existing housing for
       comparable units in the area, as established by HUD, or a rent equal to 30 percent
       of the income of a family at 65 percent of median income for the area, as
       determined by HUD, with adjustments for number of bedrooms in the unit).
       Notwithstanding the foregoing, when a household receives assistance from a
       Federal tenant-based rental assistance (e.g. housing choice vouchers), the rent is
       the rent permissible under the applicable rental assistance program (i.e., the tenant
       rental contribution plus the rent subsidy allowable under the rental assistance
       program). The rent limits for low-income households apply to the rent plus the
       utility allowance established pursuant to Section VI.B.13.d of the HOME-ARP
       Notice.

   (3) Rent limitations – Single Room Occupancy (SRO) Units. A HOME-ARP rental
       project may consist of SRO units. For the purposes of HOME-ARP rental
       activities, a SRO unit is defined as a unit that is the primary residence of the
       occupant(s) and must at least contain sanitary facilities but may also contain food
       preparation facilities. A project’s designation as a SRO cannot be inconsistent
       with the building’s zoning and building code classification.

      If the SRO units have both sanitary and food preparation facilities, the maximum
      HOME-ARP rent is based on the zero-bedroom fair market rent. If the SRO unit
      has only sanitary facilities, the maximum HOME-ARP rent is based on 75 percent
      of the zero-bedroom fair market rent. The rent limits for SRO units must also
      include the utility allowance established pursuant to Section VI.B.13.d of the
      HOME-ARP Notice.

   (4) Initial Rent Schedule and Utility Allowance. The participating jurisdiction must
       establish maximum allowances for utilities and services and update the
       allowances annually. The participating jurisdiction may adopt the utility
       allowance schedule of the PHA.
       The participating jurisdiction must review and approve the HOME-ARP rents
       proposed by the owner, subject to the HOME-ARP rent limitations. For HOME-
       ARP units where the tenant is paying utilities and services (e.g., trash collection),
       the participating jurisdiction must determine that the rent for the unit does not
       exceed the maximum rent minus the monthly allowance for utilities and services.
5. Affordability requirements and limited waiver and alternative requirement to
   period of affordability requirements. The requirement that affordability


                                        31
   restrictions must remain in place for the amount of time in the table specifying the
   minimum period of affordability in 24 CFR 92.252(e) is waived. HUD is specifying
   that as an alternative requirement, HOME-ARP-assisted rental units must comply
   with the requirements of the HOME-ARP Notice in serving the qualifying households
   and, to the extent applicable, low-income households, for a minimum period of 15
   years, irrespective of the amount of HOME-ARP funds invested in the project or the
   development activity being undertaken. Additionally, HUD is specifying the
   following alternative requirements to the use restriction requirements in 24 CFR
   92.252(e)(1):
   (1) Units restricted for occupancy by qualifying populations must be occupied by
       households that meet the definition of a qualifying population at the time of initial
       occupancy. The household’s contribution toward rent during this period must be
       affordable in accordance with the HOME-ARP Notice. The rents for these units
       must comply with the rent limitations established in the HOME-ARP Notice,
       including the rent provisions specified in 24 CFR 92.252(i)(2) for households
       whose income increases above 80 percent of area median income and whose
       contribution to rent complies with the requirements in Section VI.B.15 of the
       HOME-ARP Notice.

   (2) Units available for low-income households must be continuously occupied by
       households who are income eligible. The rents for these units must comply with
       the rent limitations established in the HOME-ARP Notice, including the rent
       provisions specified in 24 CFR 92.252(i)(2) for households whose income
       increases above 80 percent of area median income.

   (3) If a project-based rental assistance Housing Assistance Payments (HAP) contract
       is awarded to a HOME-ARP rental project, a participating jurisdiction must
       impose a minimum compliance period that is the greater of 15 years or the term of
       the HAP contract. Participating jurisdictions are also encouraged to extend
       restrictions for occupancy of the HOME-ARP units in accordance with the
       requirements in this section to match eligible HAP contract renewals.

6. Adjustment of HOME rent limits for an existing project. The requirements of 24
   CFR 92.252(g) are waived.

7. Tenant income restrictions and tenant rental contribution requirements for
   HOME-ARP rental projects and limited waiver and alternative requirements.
   The requirements at 24 CFR 92.203 and 24 CFR 92.252(h) and (i) shall apply except
   that they are waived to the extent that they differ from the following alternative
   requirements:
   (1) Household income at Initial Occupancy – Qualifying Households. The
       participating jurisdiction must require all HOME-ARP rental units be restricted
       for occupancy by eligible households throughout the minimum compliance
       period. Qualifying households are eligible for admission to HOME-ARP rental


                                        32
   units solely by meeting the definition of one of the qualifying populations (i.e.
   HOME-ARP does not impose income restrictions on units restricted for
   qualifying populations). If there is no income requirement in the qualifying
   population’s definition, a participating jurisdiction is not required to perform an
   initial determination of household income except as necessary to determine an
   affordable rental contribution by the qualifying household or to establish
   eligibility for another funding source in the unit that imposes income restrictions
   (e.g., LIHTC).

(2) Household income in Subsequent Years – Qualifying Households. Each year
    during the compliance period, starting 1 year after initial occupancy, the
    participating jurisdiction must use the definition of annual income as defined in
    24 CFR 5.609 to examine the income of qualifying households to determine the
    household’s contribution to rent. For low-income households, the participating
    jurisdiction must use the definition of annual income as defined in 24 CFR 5.609
    to examine the household’s income at initial occupancy and each subsequent year
    during the compliance period to determine the household’s ongoing income
    eligibility and applicable rental contribution.
    a. Qualifying populations. - For purposes of establishing the qualifying
        household’s rental contribution after initial occupancy, a participating
        jurisdiction must examine a HOME-ARP qualifying household’s income
        using 24 CFR 92.203(a)(1)(i) or (iii), starting 1 year after initial occupancy.
        Each year during the minimum compliance period, the owner must examine
        the household’s annual income in accordance with any one of the options in
        24 CFR 92.203(a)(1) specified by the participating jurisdiction. A project
        owner who re-examines household income through a statement and
        certification in accordance with 24 CFR 92.203(a)(1)(ii), must examine the
        income of each household, in accordance with 24 CFR 92.203(a)(1)(i), every
        sixth year of the compliance period. Otherwise, an owner who accepts the
        household’s statement and certification in accordance with 24 CFR
        92.203(a)(1)(ii) is not required to examine the household’s income unless
        there is evidence that the household’s written statement failed to completely
        and accurately state information about the household’s size or income.

   b. Over-income – Temporary noncompliance. HOME-ARP-assisted units
      restricted for low-income households continue to qualify as HOME-ARP
      rental housing despite a temporary noncompliance caused by increases in the
      incomes of existing households if actions satisfactory to HUD are taken so
      that all vacancies are filled in accordance with HOME-ARP requirements
      until the noncompliance is corrected.

   c. Changes in income – Qualifying households. A household that met the
      definition of one of the HOME-ARP qualifying populations at initial


                                     33
   occupancy and whose annual income at the time of income re-certification is
   above 50 percent of median income for the area but at or below 80 percent of
   the median income for the area must pay the rent specified in 24 CFR
   92.252(a).

d. Changes in income – Low-income Households or Qualifying households. A
   household that is not low-income at the time of income re-certification (i.e.,
   whose income is above 80 percent of the median income for the area) must
   pay rent that complies with the over income regulatory requirements at 24
   CFR 92.252(i)(2).

e. Household income – Low-income Households. In accordance with 24 CFR
   92.252(h), the income of each low-income household must be determined
   initially in accordance with 24 CFR 92.203(a)(1)(i), and each year following
   the initial determination during the minimum compliance period in
   accordance with any one of the options in 24 CFR 92.203(a)(1) specified by
   the participating jurisdiction. An owner who re-examines household income
   through a statement and certification in accordance with 24 CFR
   92.203(a)(1)(ii), must examine the income of each household, in accordance
   with 24 CFR 92.203(a)(1)(i), every sixth year of the minimum compliance
   period. Otherwise, an owner who accepts the household’s statement and
   certification in accordance with 24 CFR 92.203(a)(1)(ii) is not required to
   examine the household’s income unless there is evidence that the household’s
   written statement failed to completely and accurately state information about
   the household’s size or income.

f. Alternative Requirement for Households Assisted by Other Programs.
   Notwithstanding the alternative requirements specified above or the
   provisions of 24 CFR 92.203, if a family is applying for or living in a HOME-
   ARP-assisted rental unit, and the unit is assisted by a Federal or State project
   based rental subsidy then a participating jurisdiction must accept the public
   housing agency, section 8 project owner, or Continuum of Care recipient or
   subrecipient’s determination of the family’s annual income and adjusted
   income under that program’s and does not need to obtain source
   documentation in accordance with 24 CFR 92.203(a)(1) or calculate the
   annual income of the family. If a family is applying for or living in a HOME-
   ARP-assisted rental unit, and the family is assisted by a Federal tenant-based
   rental assistance program (e.g., housing choice vouchers, etc.) then a
   participating jurisdiction may choose to accept the rental assistance provider’s
   determination of the family’s annual and adjusted income under that
   program’s rules without need for review under 24 CFR 92.203(a)(1).




                                 34
8. Tenant selection in HOME-ARP rental housing projects. Except for affirmative
   marketing requirements in 24 CFR 92.351 and VAWA requirements, the
   requirements in 24 CFR 92.252(k) and 24 CFR 92.253(d) are waived to the extent
   that they differ from the following alternative requirements.
   (1) Use of Coordinated Entry System or Project-Specific Waitlists. In accordance
       with Section IV.C of the HOME-ARP Notice, participating jurisdictions must
       determine whether an owner may use a Continuum of Care’s Coordinated Entry
       System, a Continuum of Care’s Coordinated Entry and other referral sources, or a
       project-specific waitlist to select qualifying households for HOME-ARP units
       restricted for occupancy by qualifying populations in accordance with the HOME-
       ARP Notice. The participating jurisdiction may also use a waiting list to receive
       referrals from a CoC CE and other referral agencies for a project or activity,
       where a CoC CE or other referral agency refers an applicant that is placed on the
       waiting list for that project or activity in chronological order. Participating
       jurisdictions will make this determination on a project-by-project basis.
       Regardless of which method is selected, in all cases, the participating jurisdiction
       must use a project-specific waitlist when selecting households to occupy units
       restricted for occupancy by low-income households. Any preferences among
       qualifying households must be disclosed in the HOME-ARP allocation plan
       through the participating jurisdiction’s public participation process in accordance
       with Section V.C of the HOME-ARP Notice. The written agreement between the
       participating jurisdiction and the project owner must specify the method the
       owner must use for selecting qualifying households for admission to HOME-ARP
       units.

      The owner of a HOME-ARP rental project must adopt and follow written tenant
      selection policies and criteria for HOME-ARP units that.

              a. Limit eligibility to households that meet one of the HOME-ARP
                 qualifying populations definitions or low-income households in
                 accordance with HOME-ARP requirements. Preference for
                 households must comply with the participating jurisdiction’s
                 preferences and the participating jurisdiction’s policies and procedures
                 for applying the preferences, if any, and must not violate
                 nondiscrimination requirements in 24 CFR 92.350.

              b. Do not exclude an applicant with a voucher under the Section 8
                 Housing Choice Voucher Program (24 CFR 982), or an applicant
                 participating in a HOME, HOME-ARP or other Federal, state, or local
                 tenant-based rental assistance program because of the status of the
                 prospective tenant as a holder of such a certificate, voucher, or
                 comparable tenant-based assistance document.



                                        35
              c. Limit eligibility or gives a preference to a particular qualifying
                 population or segment of the qualifying population if permitted in its
                 written agreement with the participating jurisdiction (and only if the
                 limitation or preference is described in the participating jurisdiction's
                 HOME-ARP allocation plan). A preference for households in one or
                 more of the HOME-ARP qualifying populations must comply with the
                 participating jurisdiction’s determined preference(s) and the
                 participating jurisdiction’s policies and procedures for applying the
                 preference(s), if any;

              d. Any limitation or preference must not violate nondiscrimination
                 requirements in 24 CFR 92.350. If the participating jurisdiction
                 requires the use of a project-specific waitlist to select qualifying
                 households and/or low-income households for occupancy of HOME-
                 ARP units, provide for the selection of households from a written
                 waiting list in the chronological order of their application, insofar as is
                 practicable.

              e. Give prompt written notification to any rejected applicant of the
                 grounds for any rejection, and

              f. Complies with the VAWA requirements as described in 24 CFR
                 92.359.

   (2) Use of preferences for Qualifying Households. Any preferences for qualifying
       households must be disclosed in the HOME-ARP allocation plan through the
       participating jurisdiction’s public participation process. The written agreement
       between the participating jurisdiction and the project owner must specify the
       method the owner must use for prioritizing applicants for admission to HOME-
       ARP units.

9. Tenant protections in HOME-ARP rental units. The requirements of Section 225
   of NAHA (42 U.S.C. 12755) and 24 CFR 92.253(a)-(c) shall apply to HOME-ARP
   rental projects except to the extent that they differ from the following alternative
   requirements:
   (1) Use of Master Leases. Section 225 of NAHA (42 U.S.C. 12755) and 24 CFR
       92.253(a) are waived to the extent that they are interpreted as barring an owner
       from leasing a unit to a nonprofit organization that would sublease that unit to a
       qualifying household or to the extent that it is interpreted as barring an owner of a
       HOME-ARP unit from executing a master lease with a nonprofit organization for
       HOME-ARP units restricted for occupancy by qualifying households. As an
       alternative requirement, an owner may execute a lease or master lease with a
       nonprofit organization, known as a HOME-ARP sponsor. A HOME-ARP


                                        36
          sponsor is a nonprofit organization that provides housing or supportive services to
          qualifying households and facilitates the leasing of a HOME-ARP rental unit to a
          qualifying household or the use and maintenance of HOME-ARP TBRA by a
          qualifying household. Participating jurisdictions may permit a HOME-ARP
          sponsor to lease a HOME-ARP unit from an owner or execute a master lease with
          the owner of a HOME-ARP project for HOME-ARP units restricted for
          occupancy by qualifying households. The HOME-ARP sponsor may then
          sublease the HOME-ARP rental unit to the qualifying household. The sublease
          between the HOME-ARP sponsor and the qualifying household must comply with
          the rent limitations and tenant protection requirements of this Notice

       (2) Termination of tenancy. HUD is applying the requirements of 24 CFR 92.253(c)
           to termination of tenancy and, as an alternative requirement, also applying the
           protections of 24 CFR 92.253(c) to termination of Master Leases that effectuate
           the tenancy of qualifying households. HUD is also specifying the following
           alternative requirement for termination of tenancy for qualifying households in
           projects that capitalized operating cost assistance reserves or where there is a
           current contract for the participating jurisdiction to provide operating cost
           assistance to the project. In those cases, an owner may not terminate the tenancy
           or refuse to renew the lease of a qualifying household because of the household’s
           inability to pay rent during the compliance period. A qualifying household’s
           inability to pay rent shall mean that the qualifying household cannot pay more
           than 30 percent of the qualifying household’s income toward rent, based on an
           income determination made by the participating jurisdiction in the last 30 days.

          To terminate or refuse to renew tenancy for any household occupying a HOME-
          ARP unit, the owner must serve written notice upon the tenant (and the HOME-
          ARP sponsor if the lease is between an owner and sponsor), specifying the
          grounds for the action at least 30 days before termination of tenancy. In the case
          of a sublease, to terminate or refuse to renew tenancy of a qualifying household,
          the HOME-ARP sponsor, in accordance with the policy established by the
          participating jurisdiction, must notify the participating jurisdiction in advance of
          serving written notice to the qualifying household and must serve written notice
          upon the qualifying household at least 30 days before termination of tenancy,
          specifying the grounds for the action.

       (3) Prohibited Lease Terms. The requirements in 24 CFR 92.253(b) that prohibit
           owners from placing certain terms in their lease agreements shall continue to
           apply. HUD is also specifying an alternative requirement that the prohibited lease
           terms in 24 CFR 92.253(b) may not be placed into a sublease between a HOME-
           ARP sponsor and a qualifying household.

G. SUBPART G - COMMUNITY HOUSING DEVELOPMENT ORGANIZATIONS


                                           37
    The requirements in sections 232, 233, 234(a) of NAHA (42 U.S.C. 12772, 12773,
    12774(a)) and 24 CFR 92.300, 92.301, 92.302, and 92.303 are waived and do not apply to
    HOME-ARP.

H. . SUBPART H - OTHER FEDERAL REQUIREMENTS
     1. Nondiscrimination, affirmative marketing, and minority outreach program
        requirements. The requirements of 24 CFR 92.350 and 24 CFR 92.351 shall apply to
        all HOME-ARP activities, including Non-Congregate Shelter and Supportive Services
        activities. Section 3205, subsection (d)(4) of the ARP states that the Secretary may not
        waive or specify alternative requirements for any provision or regulation related to fair
        housing or nondiscrimination.
    2. Environmental review requirements and labor standards. The requirements of 24
       CFR 92.352 and 24 CFR 92.354 shall apply to all eligible HOME-ARP activities,
       including Non-Congregate Shelter and Supportive Services activities. Subsection (d)(4)
       of ARP states that the Secretary may not waive or specify alternative requirements to
       labor standards and environment.
    3. Applicability of lead-based paint requirements. The Lead-Based Paint Poisoning
       Prevention Act (42 U.S.C. 4821-4846), the Residential Lead-Based Paint Hazard
       Reduction Act of 1992 (42 U.S.C. 4851-4856), and implementing regulations at 24 CFR
       Part 35, subparts A, B, J, K, M, and R apply to HOME-ARP-assisted activities.
        For the HOME-ARP Non-Congregate Shelter activity, a project must comply with 24
        CFR part 35, Subpart K when the HOME-ARP activity is acquisition only. HOME-
        ARP NCS projects that involve rehabilitation of pre-1978 facilities, whether the
        rehabilitation is funded with HOME-ARP or other funds, must comply with the
        requirements of 24 CFR part 35, Subpart J.
    4. Conflicts of interest requirements. The requirements of 24 CFR 92.356 shall apply to
       all participating jurisdictions, State recipients, and subrecipients engaging in any
       HOME-ARP activities. For purposes of implementing HOME-ARP provisions for Non-
       Congregate Shelters, owners and developers of HOME-ARP Non-Congregate Shelters
       shall be subject to 24 CFR 92.356(f). The following alternative requirements shall apply
       to all participating jurisdictions, State recipients, and subrecipients engaging in any
       HOME-ARP activities.
           (1) Written Standards of Conduct. Consistent with current regulations, participating
               jurisdictions, State recipients, and subrecipients must maintain written standards
               of conduct covering the conflicts of interest and organizational conflicts of
               interest requirements under the HOME-ARP Notice and 2 CFR 200.318. In
               addition to current regulatory requirements, HUD is requiring that all
               participating jurisdictions, State recipients and subrecipients maintain written
               standards of conduct that also provide for internal controls and procedures to
               ensure a fair and open selection process for awarding HOME-ARP funds pursuant
               to the HOME-ARP Notice. These standards must include provisions on if and
               how Continuum of Care board members may participate in and/or influence
               discussions or resulting decisions concerning the competition or selection of an


                                                38
   award or other financial benefits made pursuant to the HOME-ARP Notice,
   including internal controls on when funds may be awarded to the organization that
   the member represents.

(2) Organizational Conflicts of Interest. The provision of any type or amount of
    HOME-ARP TBRA or supportive services may not be conditioned on an
    individual’s or family's acceptance or occupancy of a shelter or housing unit
    owned by the participating jurisdiction; State recipients; the subrecipient; or a
    parent, affiliate, or subsidiary of the subrecipient. No subrecipient may, with
    respect to individuals or families occupying housing owned by the subrecipient,
    or any parent, affiliate, or subsidiary of the subrecipient, administer financial
    assistance that includes rental payments, utility deposits, security deposits, and/or
    first and last month’s rent pursuant to the HOME-ARP Notice. All contractors of
    the participating jurisdiction, State recipients, or subrecipient must comply with
    the same requirements that apply to subrecipients under this section.
(3) Requesting Exceptions to Organizational Conflicts of Interest. Any request for an
    exception to the organizational conflicts of interest provisions in the HOME-ARP
    Notice shall be in writing and shall be considered by HUD only after the
    participating jurisdiction or State recipient has provided the following:
        a. A written disclosure of the nature of the conflict, accompanied by an
            assurance that there has been public disclosure of the conflict and a
            description of how the public disclosure was made; and
        b. An opinion of the participating jurisdiction’s or State recipient's attorney
            that the interest for which the exception is sought would not violate State
            or local law.

(4) Granting Exceptions to Organizational Conflicts of Interest. HUD shall
    determine whether to grant an exception to the organizational conflicts of interest
    on a case-by-case basis when it determines that the exception will serve to further
    the purposes of HOME-ARP. HUD shall consider the following factors, as
    applicable, in determining whether to grant such an exception:
        a. Whether the exception would provide a significant cost benefit or an
           essential degree of expertise to the program or project which would
           otherwise not be available;
        b. Whether undue hardship will result to the participating jurisdiction, State
           recipient, subrecipient or the person affected when weighed against the
           public interest served by avoiding the prohibited conflict;
        c. Whether conditioning approval on changes to the participating
           jurisdiction, State recipient, or subrecipient’s policies or procedures can
           adequately address the organizational conflict of interest; and
       d. Any other factors relevant to HUD’s determination, including the timing
          of the requested exception.




                                     39
    5. Applicability of displacement, relocation, and acquisition requirements and waiver
       of one-for-one replacement requirements. The requirements of 24 CFR 92.353,
       which also implement the Uniform Relocation Assistance and Real Property Acquisition
       Act of 1970, as amended, (42 U.S.C. 4201 et seq.) (URA), the URA’s implementing
       requirements at 49 CFR part 24, and section 104(d) of the Housing and Community
       Development Act of 1974, as amended (42 U.S.C. 5304) and its implementing
       regulations at 24 CFR part 42, shall apply to all projects receiving HOME-ARP funds
       except for the following waiver and alternative requirement.. For purposes of the one-
       for-one replacement housing requirements of section 104(d)(2)(A)(i) and (ii) and (d)(3)
       (42 U.S.C. 5304(d)(2)(A)(i) and (ii) and 42 U.S.C. 5304(d)(3)) and 24 CFR 42.375,
       lower-income dwelling units shall not include single-room occupancy (SRO) units or
       residential hotel or motel units in jurisdictions where those units are considered dwelling
       units under state or local law
    6. Regulations on consultant activities. The requirements of 24 CFR 92.358 are not
       waived.
    7. Violence Against Women Act Requirements. The requirements of 24 CFR 92.359 are
       not waived.
I. SUBPART I - TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE
   Applicability of requirements on provision of Technical Assistance in support of
   HOME-ARP activities. The requirements of 24 CFR 92.400 are waived and shall not apply
   to the extent that they restrict the Department’s ability to provide Technical Assistance funds
   allocated to the Department under subsection(d)(2) of ARP without competition, and to the
   extent that their application of Subpart C of NAHA (42 U.S.C. 12781 et seq.) would restrict
   capacity building to affordable housing activities rather than the broader set of eligible
   HOME-ARP activities.

J. SUBPART J - REALLOCATIONS
   Reallocation of HOME-ARP Funds. The requirements of section 216 of NAHA (42 U.S.C.
   12746), section 217 of NAHA (42 U.S.C. 12747), 24 CFR 92.66, 24 CFR 92.107, 24 CFR
   92.450, 24 CFR 92.451(a), 24 CFR 92.452, 24 CFR 92.453 and 24 CFR 92.454 shall not
   apply to HOME-ARP funds and are waived to the extent they differ from the following
   alternative requirements for reallocations:
       (1) Participating Jurisdictions. For any participating jurisdiction that refuses to accept its
           allocation of HOME-ARP funds, does not have its HOME-ARP allocation plan
           accepted by HUD, or has its designation revoked during the period of availability of
           HOME-ARP funds, HUD shall reallocate the participating jurisdiction’s unspent
           HOME-ARP funds to the State jurisdiction in accordance with 24 CFR 92.451(b) and
           (c).
       (2) State Jurisdictions. For any State jurisdiction that refuses to accept its allocation of
           HOME-ARP funds, does not have its HOME-ARP allocation plan accepted by HUD,
           or has its designation revoked during the period of availability of HOME-ARP funds,
           HUD shall reallocate the State jurisdiction’s unspent HOME-ARP funds in


                                                 40
              accordance with 24 CFR 92.451(b) and (c). Insular areas. For any insular area that
              refuses to accept its allocation of HOME-ARP funds, does not have its HOME-ARP
              allocation plan accepted by HUD, or has its designation revoked during the period of
              availability of HOME-ARP funds, HUD shall reallocate the insular area’s unspent
              HOME-ARP funds proportionally to the remaining insular areas participating in the
              HOME-ARP program.
          (3) Annual Reallocation. Reallocations of funds pursuant to the above waivers and
              alternative requirements shall be performed annually, if practicable.

K. SUBPART K - PROGRAM ADMINISTRATION
     1. The HOME Investment Trust Fund. The requirements in 24 CFR 92.500 apply to
        HOME-ARP, except 92.500(b) is waived and the following alternative requirement is
        imposed:
              (b) Treasury Account. The United States Treasury account of the HOME
              Investment Trust Fund includes funds allocated to the participating jurisdiction
              under HOME-ARP and funds reallocated to the participating jurisdiction under
              subpart J of 24 CFR part 92.
                 The requirements in section 218(c)(2) of NAHA (42 U.S.C. 12748(c)(2)), 24 CFR
                 92.500(c)(2), (d)(1)(i)-(iii), and (d)(2) are waived and do not apply to HOME-
                 ARP.
       2. HOME Investment Partnership Agreement. The requirements in 24 CFR 92.501 are
          waived and the following alternative requirements are imposed:

                 Allocated and reallocated HOME-ARP funds will be made available pursuant to a
                 HOME-ARP Grant Agreement. The agreement requires that HOME-ARP funds
                 invested in HOME-ARP activities are repayable if the activity does not comply
                 with the requirements in the HOME-ARP Notice and any subsequent
                 amendments.
                 After the date of the HOME-ARP Notice, the participating jurisdiction and HUD
                 may enter into a HOME-ARP Grant Agreement for the use of its HOME-ARP
                 allocation pursuant to the HOME-ARP Notice. After the obligation date
                 identified in the HOME-ARP Grant Agreement, a participating jurisdiction may
                 use up to 5 percent of its HOME-ARP award for eligible administrative and
                 planning costs in 24 CFR 92.207. The participating jurisdiction may not incur
                 any costs or expend any funds for costs other than administrative and planning
                 costs before the HOME-ARP allocation plan is accepted by HUD as described in
                 the HOME-ARP Notice.
                 If the participating jurisdiction does not submit a HOME-ARP allocation plan, if
                 the participating jurisdiction’s plan is not accepted within a reasonable period of
                 time, as determined by HUD, or if the subrecipient or contractor administering a
                 participating jurisdiction’s entire HOME-ARP award is not included in the


                                                  41
           HOME-ARP allocation plan, in accordance with the HOME-ARP Notice, all
           HOME-ARP costs incurred by the participating jurisdiction (or its subrecipient or
           contractor) are ineligible costs and any HOME-ARP funds expended by the
           participating jurisdiction must be repaid to the participating jurisdiction’s HOME
           Investment Trust Fund Treasury account, in accordance with guidance from
           HUD.
3. Program disbursement and information system. The requirements in 24 CFR
   92.502(b) are waived to the extent they conflict with the alternative requirement that
   HOME-ARP investments for acquisition, new construction, or rehabilitation of housing
   or non-congregate shelter, the provision of tenant-based rental assistance, and the
   provision of supportive services must be set up as projects in the Integrated Disbursement
   and Information System. The requirements in 24 CFR 92.502(c)(3) are waived and do not
   apply to HOME-ARP.

4. Program income and repayments. A participating jurisdiction must comply with the
   requirements for program income and repayments in the HOME-ARP Notice. The
   requirements in 24 CFR 92.503 apply to the use of HOME-ARP funds, except that the
   requirements in 92.503(a)(2), (b)(3), (c)(3), (c)(4), and (d) are waived and the following
   alternative requirements apply:
   (1) Program income. If a jurisdiction is not a participating jurisdiction in HOME or
       HOME-ARP when the HOME-ARP program income is received, the funds must be
       remitted to HUD and reallocated, in accordance with 24 CFR 92.454 and the HOME-
       ARP Notice.
   (2) Repayments. A participating jurisdiction must repay HOME-ARP funds to the HOME
       Investment Trust Fund Treasury account. If the jurisdiction is not a participating
       jurisdiction for HOME or HOME-ARP at the time the repayment is made, the funds
       must be remitted to HUD and reallocated, in accordance with 24 CFR 92.454 and the
       HOME-ARP Notice.

5. Participating jurisdiction responsibilities; written agreements; on-site inspection.
   HUD waives 24 CFR 92.504, except for those provisions that reference the requirements
   of 24 CFR 92.350, 24 CFR 92.351, and 24 CFR 92.359, and imposes the following
   alternative requirements for 92.504:
           (a) Responsibilities. The participating jurisdiction is responsible for managing the
           day-to-day operations of its HOME-ARP-ARP program, ensuring that HOME-
           ARP funds are used in accordance with all program requirements and written
           agreements, and taking appropriate action when performance problems arise. The
           use of State recipients, subrecipients, or contractors does not relieve the
           participating jurisdiction of this responsibility. The performance and compliance
           of each contractor, State recipient, and subrecipient must be reviewed at least
           annually. The participating jurisdiction must have and follow written policies,
           procedures, and systems, including a system for assessing risk of activities and


                                            42
projects and a system for monitoring entities consistent with HOME-ARP Notice,
to ensure that the requirements of this part are met.
(b) Executing a written agreement. Before disbursing any HOME-ARP funds to
any entity, the participating jurisdiction must enter into a written agreement with
that entity. Before disbursing any HOME-ARP funds to any entity, a State
recipient, subrecipient, or contractor which is administering all or a part of the
HOME-ARP program on behalf of the participating jurisdiction, must also enter
into a written agreement with that entity. The written agreement must ensure
compliance with the requirements of the HOME-ARP Notice.
(c) Provisions in written agreements. The contents of the agreement may vary
depending upon the role the entity is asked to assume or the type of project
undertaken. The written agreement must contain the applicable minimum
provisions for a written agreement in the HOME-ARP Notice based on the project
or activity (e.g., HOME-ARP rental housing, non-congregate shelter, tenant-based
rental assistance, or supportive services) and the basic requirements and minimum
provisions by role described in this section.
   (1) State recipient. The provisions in the written agreement between the State
   and a State recipient will depend on the program functions that the State
   specifies the State recipient will carry out in accordance with 24 CFR
   92.201(b). The written agreement must require the State recipient to comply
   with State’s requirements, including underwriting, refinancing guidelines, and
   applicable requirements described in the HOME-ARP Notice.
       (i) Use of the HOME-ARP funds. The agreement with a State recipient
       must describe the amount and use of the HOME-ARP funds to administer
       one or more HOME-ARP programs, including the type and number of
       projects to be funded, tasks to be performed, a schedule for completing the
       tasks, duration of the agreement, and a budget for each program. These
       items must be in sufficient detail to provide a sound basis for the
       participating jurisdiction or State to effectively monitor performance under
       the agreement.
       (ii) Affordability. The agreement must require projects assisted with
       HOME-ARP funds to meet the requirements of the HOME-ARP Notice,
       as applicable, and must require repayment of the funds if the project does
       not meet the requirements for the specified time period.
       (iii) Program income. The agreement must state if program income is to
       be remitted to the State or to be retained by the State recipient for
       additional eligible activities.
       (iv) Uniform administrative requirements. The agreement must require the
       State recipient or subrecipient to comply with applicable uniform



                                 43
administrative requirements described in 24 CFR 92.505, as revised by
this Appendix to the HOME-ARP-ARP Notice.
(v) Project requirement. The agreement must require compliance with
requirements in the HOME-ARP Notice, in accordance with the type of
project assisted. The agreement must state whether the State is permitting
a preference for a qualifying population or segment of a qualifying
population. The written agreement must contain provisions requiring the
method of tenant selection to be used in accordance with the requirements
of the HOME-ARP Notice.
(vi) Other program requirements. The agreement must require the State
recipient to carry out each activity in compliance with the HOME-ARP
Notice and all Federal laws and regulations described in subpart H of 24
CFR part 92, except that the State recipient does not assume the State's
responsibilities for release of funds under 24 CFR 92.352 and the
intergovernmental review process in 92.357 does not apply to the State
recipient. If HOME-ARP funds are provided, the agreement must set forth
all obligations the State imposes on the State recipient in order to meet the
VAWA requirements under 24 CFR 92.359, including notice obligations
and any obligations with respect to the emergency transfer plan (including
whether the State recipient must develop its own plan or follow the State's
plan).
(vii) Affirmative marketing. The agreement must specify the State
recipient's affirmative marketing responsibilities in accordance with 24
CFR § 92.351.
(viii) Requests for disbursement of funds. The agreement must specify that
the State recipient may not request disbursement of HOME-ARP funds
under this agreement until the funds are needed for payment of eligible
costs. The amount of each request must be limited to the amount needed.
Program income must be disbursed before the State recipient requests
funds from the State.
(ix) Records and reports. The agreement must specify the particular
records that must be maintained and the information or reports that must
be submitted in order to assist the State in meeting its recordkeeping and
reporting requirements.
(x) Enforcement of the agreement. The agreement must provide for a
means of enforcement of affordable housing or non-congregate shelter
requirements by the State or the intended beneficiaries, if the State
recipient will be the owner at project completion of the affordable housing
or non-congregate shelter. The means of enforcement may include liens on
real property, deed restrictions, or covenants running with the land. The


                         44
   applicable requirements as described in the HOME-ARP Notice must be
   enforced by deed restriction. In addition, the agreement must specify
   remedies for breach of the HOME-ARP requirements. The agreement
   must specify that, in accordance with 2 CFR 200.338, suspension or
   termination may occur if the State recipient materially fails to comply with
   any term of the agreement. The State may permit the agreement to be
   terminated in whole or in part in accordance with 2 CFR 200.339.
   (xi) Written agreement. Before the State recipient provides funds to for-
   profit owners or developers, nonprofit owners or developers or sponsors,
   subrecipients, HOME-ARP owners, sponsors, or tenants (or landlords)
   receiving tenant-based rental assistance, or contractors who are providing
   services to the State recipient, the State recipient must have a written
   agreement with such entities that meets the requirements of this section
   and the HOME-ARP Notice.
   (xii) Duration of the agreement. The duration of the agreement will
   depend on which functions the State recipient performs (e.g., whether the
   State recipient or the State has responsibility for monitoring rental projects
   for the period of affordability) and which activities are funded under the
   agreement. The duration of the agreement must comply with the
   requirements of the HOME-ARP Notice.
   (xiii) Fees. The agreement must prohibit the State recipient and its
   subrecipients, community housing development organizations, and
   nonprofit organizations from charging servicing, origination, processing,
   inspection, or other fees for the costs of administering a HOME-ARP
   program, except as permitted by 24 CFR 92.214, as revised by the
   Appendix to the HOME-ARP Notice.
(2) Subrecipient. A subrecipient is a public agency or nonprofit organization
selected by the participating jurisdiction to administer all or some of the
participating jurisdiction's HOME-ARP programs to produce affordable
housing, non-congregate shelter, or provide tenant-based rental assistance or
supportive services. The agreement must set forth and require the subrecipient
to follow the participating jurisdiction's requirements, including requirements
for underwriting, refinancing guidelines, and requirements described in the
HOME-ARP Notice.
The agreement between the participating jurisdiction and the subrecipient
must include:
   (i) Use of the HOME-ARP funds. The agreement with a subrecipient must
   describe the amount and use of the HOME-ARP-ARP funds to administer
   one or more HOME-ARP-ARP programs, including the type and number
   of projects to be funded, tasks to be performed, a schedule for completing


                             45
the tasks, duration of the agreement, and a budget for each program.
These items must be in sufficient detail to provide a sound basis for the
participating jurisdiction or State to effectively monitor performance under
the agreement.
(ii) Program income. The agreement must state if program income is to be
remitted to the participating jurisdiction or to be retained by the
subrecipient for additional eligible activities.
(iii) Uniform administrative requirements. The agreement must require the
State recipient or subrecipient to comply with applicable uniform
administrative requirements described in 24 CFR 92.505 as revised by this
Appendix.
(iv) Other program requirements. The agreement must require the
subrecipient to carry out each activity in compliance with HOME-ARP
Notice and all Federal laws and regulations described in subpart H of 24
CFR part 92, except that the subrecipient does not assume the participating
jurisdiction's responsibilities for environmental review under 24 CFR
92.352 and the intergovernmental review process in 24 CFR 92.357 does
not apply. The agreement must set forth the requirements the subrecipient
must follow to enable the participating jurisdiction to carry environmental
review responsibilities before HOME-ARP funds are committed to a
project. If HOME-ARP funds are being provided, the agreement must set
forth all obligations the participating jurisdiction imposes on the
subrecipient in order to meet the VAWA requirements under 24 CFR
92.359, including notice obligations and obligations under the emergency
transfer plan.
(v) Affirmative marketing. The agreement must specify the subrecipient's
affirmative marketing responsibilities in accordance with 24 CFR 92.351.
(vi) Requests for disbursement of funds. The agreement must specify that
the subrecipient may not request disbursement of funds under the
agreement until the funds are needed for payment of eligible costs. The
amount of each request must be limited to the amount needed. Program
income must be disbursed before the subrecipient requests funds from the
participating jurisdiction.
(vii) Reversion of assets. The agreement must specify that upon expiration
of the agreement, the subrecipient must transfer to the participating
jurisdiction any HOME-ARP funds on hand at the time of expiration and
any accounts receivable attributable to the use of HOME-ARP funds.
(viii) Records and reports. The agreement must specify the particular
records that must be maintained and the information or reports that must



                         46
   be submitted in order to assist the participating jurisdiction in meeting its
   recordkeeping and reporting requirements.
   (ix) Enforcement of the agreement. The agreement must specify remedies
   for breach of the provisions of the agreement. The agreement must specify
   that, in accordance with 2 CFR 200.338, suspension or termination may
   occur if the subrecipient materially fails to comply with any term of the
   agreement. The participating jurisdiction may permit the agreement to be
   terminated in whole or in part in accordance with 2 CFR 200.339.
   (x) Written agreement. Before the subrecipient provides HOME-ARP
   funds to for-profit owners or developers, nonprofit owners or developers
   or sponsors, subrecipients, HOME-ARP owners, sponsors, tenants (or
   landlords) receiving tenant-based rental assistance, or contractors, the
   subrecipient must have a written agreement that meets the requirements of
   this section and the HOME-ARP Notice. The agreement must state if
   repayment of HOME-ARP funds or recaptured HOME-ARP funds must
   be remitted to the participating jurisdiction or retained by the subrecipient
   for additional eligible activities.
   (xi) Fees. The agreement must prohibit the subrecipient and any
   community housing development organizations from charging servicing,
   origination, or other fees for the costs of administering the HOME-ARP
   program, except as permitted by 24 CFR 92.214, as revised by this
   Appendix.
(3) For-profit or nonprofit housing owner, sponsor, or developer (other than
single-family owner-occupant). The participating jurisdiction may
preliminarily award HOME-ARP funds for a proposed project, contingent on
conditions such as obtaining other financing for the project. This preliminary
award is not a commitment to a project. The written agreement committing
the HOME-ARP funds to the project must meet the requirements of “commit
to a specific local project” in the definition of “commitment” in 24 CFR 92.2,
as revised by this Appendix and contain the following:
   (i) Use of the HOME-ARP funds. The agreement between the participating
   jurisdiction and a for-profit or nonprofit housing owner, sponsor, or
   developer must describe the address of the project or the legal description
   of the property if a street address has not been assigned to the property, the
   use of the HOME-ARP funds and other funds for the project, including the
   tasks to be performed for the project, a schedule for completing the tasks
   and the project, and a complete budget. These items must be in sufficient
   detail to provide a sound basis for the participating jurisdiction to
   effectively monitor performance under the agreement to achieve project
   completion and compliance with the HOME-ARP requirements.



                             47
(ii) Affordability. The agreement must require projects assisted with
HOME-ARP funds to meet the requirements of the HOME-ARP Notice,
as applicable, and must require repayment of the funds if the project does
not meet the requirements for the specified time period.
(iii) Project requirements. The agreement must require compliance with
requirements in the HOME-ARP Notice, in accordance with the type of
project assisted. The agreement must state whether the State is permitting
a preference for a qualifying population or segment of a qualifying
population. The written agreement must contain provisions requiring the
method of tenant selection to be used in accordance with the requirements
of the HOME-ARP Notice.
(iv) Property standards. The agreement must require the housing or
shelter to meet the property standards established in the HOME-ARP
Notice upon project completion. The agreement must also require owners
of rental housing or shelter assisted with HOME-ARP funds to maintain
the project in compliance with the HOME-ARP Notice for the duration of
the affordability period.
(v) Other program requirements. The agreement must require the owner
or developer to carry out each project in compliance with the following
requirements of the HOME-ARP Notice:
       (A) The agreement must specify the owner or developer's
       affirmative marketing responsibilities as enumerated by the
       participating jurisdiction in accordance with 24 CFR 92.351.
       (B) The federal requirements and nondiscrimination established in
       24 CFR 92.350.
       (C) Any displacement, relocation, and acquisition requirements
       imposed by the participating jurisdiction consistent with 24 CFR
       92.353 and the HOME-ARP Notice.
       (D) The labor requirements in 24 CFR 92.354.
       (E) The conflicts of interest provisions prescribed in the HOME-
       ARP Notice.
       (F) If HOME-ARP funds are being provided, the agreement must
       set forth all obligations the participating jurisdiction imposes on
       the owner in order to meet the VAWA requirements under 24 CFR
       92.359, including the owner's notice obligations and owner
       obligations under the emergency transfer plan.
(vi) Records and reports. The agreement must specify the particular
records that must be maintained and the information or reports that must


                         48
   be submitted in order to assist the participating jurisdiction in meeting its
   recordkeeping and reporting requirements.
   (vii) Enforcement of the agreement. The agreement must provide for a
   means of enforcement of the HOME-ARP rental housing or non-
   congregate shelter requirements by the participating jurisdiction and the
   intended beneficiaries. This means of enforcement may include liens on
   real property, deed restrictions, or covenants running with the land. The
   applicable requirements in the HOME-ARP Notice must be imposed by
   deed restrictions, covenants running with the land, use restrictions, or
   other mechanisms approved by HUD under which the participating
   jurisdiction has the right to require specific performance. In addition, the
   agreement must specify remedies for breach of the provisions of the
   agreement.
   (viii) Requests for disbursement of funds. The agreement must specify that
   the developer may not request disbursement of funds under the agreement
   until the funds are needed for payment of eligible costs. The amount of
   each request must be limited to the amount needed.
   (ix) omitted
   (x) Duration of the agreement. The agreement must specify the duration of
   the agreement in accordance with the HOME-ARP Notice. If the project
   assisted under this agreement is rental housing, the agreement must be in
   effect through the compliance period required by the participating
   jurisdiction, but in no case less than the minimum compliance period in
   the HOME-ARP Notice.
   (xi) Fees. The agreement must prohibit project owners from charging fees
   that are not customarily charged in rental housing such as laundry room
   access fees, and other fees. However, rental project owners may charge
   reasonable application fees to prospective tenants may charge parking fees
   to tenants only if such fees are customary for rental housing projects in the
   neighborhood; and may charge fees for services such as bus transportation
   or meals, as long as such services are voluntary.
(4) Contractor. The participating jurisdiction selects a contractor through
applicable procurement procedures and requirements. The contractor provides
goods or services in accordance with a written agreement (the contract). For
contractors who are administering all or some of the participating
jurisdiction's HOME-ARP programs or specific services for one or more
programs, the contract must include at a minimum the following provisions:




                             49
   (i) Use of the HOME-ARP funds. The agreement must describe the use of
   the HOME-ARP funds, including the tasks to be performed, a schedule for
   completing the tasks, a budget, and the length of the agreement.
   (ii) Program requirements. The agreement must provide that the
   contractor is subject to the requirements in 24 CFR part 92 and the
   HOME-ARP Notice that are applicable to the participating jurisdiction,
   except 24 CFR 92.505 and 92.506 do not apply, and the contractor cannot
   assume the participating jurisdiction responsibilities for environmental
   review, decision making, and action under 24 CFR 92.352. Where the
   contractor is administering only a portion of the program, the agreement
   must list the requirements applicable to the activities the contractor is
   administering. If applicable to the work under the contract, the agreement
   must set forth all obligations the participating jurisdiction imposes on the
   contractor in order to meet the VAWA requirements under 24 CFR
   92.359, including any notice obligations and any obligations under the
   emergency transfer plan.
   (iii) Duration of agreement. The agreement must specify the duration of
   the contract in accordance with the HOME-ARP Notice. Generally, the
   duration of a contract should not exceed two years.
(5) HOME-ARP owner tenant receiving tenant-based rental or security
deposit assistance. When a participating jurisdiction provides assistance to a
HOME-ARP owner, sponsor, or tenant, the written agreement, including the
rental assistance contract or security deposit contract, must comply with the
HOME-ARP Notice.
(6) Community housing development organization or nonprofit organization
receiving assistance for operating expenses. The agreement must describe the
use of HOME-ARP funds for operating expenses; e.g., salaries, wages, and
other employee compensation and benefits; employee education, training, and
travel; rent; utilities; communication costs; taxes; insurance; equipment; and
materials and supplies. If the community housing development organization or
nonprofit organization is not also receiving funds for a HOME-ARP project,
the agreement must provide that the community housing development
organization or nonprofit organization is expected to receive funds for a
project within 24 months of the date of receiving the funds for operating
expenses, and must specify the terms and conditions upon which this
expectation is based and the consequences of failure to receive funding for a
project.
(7) waived and omitted.
(8) Technical assistance provider to develop the capacity of community
housing development organizations or nonprofit organizations in the


                             50
   jurisdiction. The agreement must identify the specific nonprofit
   organization(s) to receive capacity building assistance. The agreement must
   describe the amount and use (scope of work) of the HOME-ARP funds,
   including a budget, a period of performance, and a schedule for completion.
   (9) Supportive Services Providers. If participating jurisdictions are using a
   supportive services provider, participating jurisdictions must document in
   their written agreement with supportive service providers whether they are
   authorizing McKinney-Vento supportive services, homelessness prevention
   services, Housing Counseling services or some combination of the three.
   Only the supportive services that are authorized in the written agreement may
   be provided to program participants and only program participants that are
   eligible for those supportive services may be served. As such, supportive
   services providers must demonstrate through their documentation that the
   individuals served were eligible to receive the supportive services that were
   authorized under the written agreement in order for those costs to be eligible
   While all qualifying households are eligible to receive supportive services
   under this activity, the participating jurisdiction must establish requirements
   for documenting eligible costs for an individual or family in a qualifying
   population (as defined in Section IV.A of this Notice) as McKinney-Vento
   supportive services, homelessness prevention services, or Housing
   Counseling.
   If a person is homeless, then the person is eligible to be provided the
   supportive services as McKinney-Vento supportive services for the costs
   allowable in Section VI.D.4.c below. If a person is housed and the supportive
   services are intended to help the program participant regain stability in the
   program participant’s current permanent housing or move into other
   permanent housing to achieve stability in that housing then the person is
   eligible for homelessness prevention services for the costs allowable in
   Section VI.D.4.c.i below. Housing Counseling services may be provided
   regardless of whether a person is homeless or currently housed.
(d) On-site inspections and financial oversight.
   (1) Inspections. The participating jurisdiction must inspect each rental housing
   project at project completion and during the compliance period to determine
   that the project meets the property standards of 24 CFR 92.251. The
   participating jurisdiction must inspect each non-congregate shelter at project
   completion and as needed, during the restricted use period, to determine that
   the project meets the property standards, in accordance with the HOME-ARP
   Notice.
       (i) Completion inspections. Before completing the project in the
       disbursement and information system established by HUD, the


                                 51
participating jurisdiction must perform an on-site inspection of HOME-
ARP rental housing or non-congregate shelter to determine that all
contracted work has been completed and that the project complies with the
property standards, as described in the HOME-ARP Notice.
(ii) Ongoing periodic inspections of HOME-ARP-assisted rental
housing. During the period of affordability, the participating jurisdiction
must perform on-site inspections of HOME-ARP assisted rental housing
to determine compliance with the property standards of 24 CFR 92.251
and to verify the information submitted by the owners in accordance with
the requirements of 24 CFR 92.252, as revised by this Appendix and the
HOME-ARP Notice. The inspections must be in accordance with the
inspection procedures that the participating jurisdiction establishes to meet
the inspection requirements of 24 CFR 92.251.
       (A) The on-site inspections must occur within 12 months after
       project completion and at least once every 3 years thereafter during
       the compliance period.
       (B) If there are observed deficiencies for any of the inspectable
       items in the property standards established by the participating
       jurisdiction, in accordance with the inspection requirements of 24
       CFR 92.251, a follow-up on-site inspection to verify that
       deficiencies are corrected must occur within 12 months. The
       participating jurisdiction may establish a list of non-hazardous
       deficiencies for which correction can be verified by third party
       documentation (e.g., paid invoice for work order) rather than re-
       inspection. Health and safety deficiencies must be corrected
       immediately, in accordance with 24 CFR 92.251. The participating
       jurisdiction must adopt a more frequent inspection schedule for
       properties that have been found to have health and safety
       deficiencies.
       (C) The property owner must annually certify to the participating
       jurisdiction that each building and all HOME-ARP- assisted units
       in the project are suitable for occupancy, taking into account State
       and local health, safety, and other applicable codes, ordinances,
       and requirements, and the ongoing property standards established
       by the participating jurisdiction to meet the requirements of 24
       CFR 92.251.
       (D) Inspections must be based on a statistically valid sample of
       units appropriate for the size of the HOME-ARP-assisted project,
       as set forth by HUD through notice. For projects with one-to-four
       HOME-ARP-assisted units, participating jurisdiction must inspect



                         52
                         100 percent of the HOME-ARP-assisted units and the inspectable
                         items (site, building exterior, building systems, and common areas)
                         for each building housing HOME-ARP-assisted units.
                  (iii) Annual inspections. Tenant based rental assistance (TBRA). All
                  housing occupied by tenants receiving HOME-ARP tenant-based rental
                  assistance must meet the standards in 24 CFR 982.401 or the successor
                  requirements as established by HUD. The participating jurisdiction must
                  perform annual on-site inspections of rental housing occupied by tenants
                  receiving HOME-ARP-assisted TBRA to determine compliance with
                  these standards.
              (2) Financial oversight. During the period of affordability, the participating
              jurisdiction must examine at least annually the financial condition of HOME-
              ARP-assisted rental projects with 10 units or more to determine the continued
              financial viability of the housing and must take actions to correct problems, to
              the extent feasible.
6. Applicability of uniform administrative requirements. The requirements of 24 CFR
   92.505 apply to the use of HOME-ARP funds, except HUD waives 24 CFR 92.505 to the
   extent that it conflicts with the following:
   The requirements of 2 CFR part 200, as amended, apply to participating jurisdictions,
   State recipients, and subrecipients receiving HOME-ARP funds, except for the following
   provisions: 24 CFR 200.306, 200.307, 200.308 (not applicable to participating
   jurisdictions), 200.311 (except as provided in 24 CFR 92.257), 200.312, 200.329,
   200.333, and 200.334. The provisions of 2 CFR 200.305 apply as modified by 24 CFR
   92.502(c) and the HOME-ARP Notice. If there is a conflict between definitions in 2 CFR
   part 200 and 24 CFR part 92, as revised by the HOME-ARP Notice, the definitions in 24
   CFR part 92, as revised by the HOME-ARP Notice, govern. Moreover, if there is a
   conflict between the provisions of 2 CFR part 200 and the provisions of the HOME-ARP
   Notice, the provisions of the HOME-ARP Notice govern.
   Where regulations in 24 CFR part 92 refer to specific regulations of 2 CFR part 200 that
   were or are renumbered or revised by amendments to 2 CFR part 200, the requirements
   that apply to the use of HOME-ARP funds are the applicable requirements in 2 CFR part
   200, as amended, notwithstanding the renumbered regulatory reference.
7. Confidentiality. 24 CFR 92.504 and 24 CFR 92.508(a)(3) are waived only to the extent
   that they conflict with the following alternative requirements:
   Confidentiality Requirements. The participating jurisdiction, subrecipients, owners,
   contractors, must develop, implement, and maintain written procedures to require that –
          All records containing personally identifying information of any individual or
           family who applies for and/or receives HOME-ARP assistance will be kept secure
           and confidential;



                                           53
       The address or location of any NCS or HOME-ARP rental housing exclusively
        for individuals fleeing or attempting to flee domestic violence, dating violence,
        sexual assault, stalking, or human trafficking will not be made public, except as
        necessary where making the address or location public does not identify
        occupancy of the NCS or HOME-ARP rental housing, when necessary to record
        use restrictions or restrictive covenants in accordance with Section VI.B or VI.E,
        or with written authorization of the person or entity responsible for the operation
        of the NCS or HOME-ARP rental housing; and
     The address or location of any program participant that is a fleeing or attempting
        to flee domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, stalking, or human
        trafficking will not be made public, except as provided under a privacy policy of
        the participating jurisdiction consistent with state and local laws and any other
        grant conditions from other federal grant programs regarding privacy and
        obligations of confidentiality.
Documenting status of a qualifying population that is fleeing or attempting to flee
domestic violence, dating violence, stalking, sexual assault, or human trafficking:
     If an individual or family qualifies because the individual or family is fleeing or
        attempting to flee domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, stalking, or
        human trafficking then acceptable evidence includes an oral or written statement
        by the qualifying individual or head of household seeking assistance that they are
        fleeing that situation. An oral statement may be documented by either –
             o a written certification by the individual or head of household; or
             o a written certification by a victim service provider, intake worker, social
                worker, legal assistance provider, health-care provider, law enforcement
                agency, legal assistance provider, pastoral counselor, or an intake worker
                in any other organization from whom the individual or family sought
                assistance.
The written documentation need only include the minimum amount of information
indicating that the individual or family is fleeing or attempting to flee domestic violence,
dating violence, sexual assault, stalking, or human trafficking and need not include any
additional details about the conditions that prompted the individual or family to seek
assistance.


All entities assisted by HOME-ARP funds must develop, implement, and maintain
written procedures to require that –

   a. All records containing personally identifying information of any individual or
      family who applies for and/or receives HOME-ARP assistance will be kept secure
      and confidential;

   b. The address or location of any NCS or HOME-ARP rental housing exclusively
      for individuals fleeing or attempting to flee domestic violence, dating violence,
      sexual assault, stalking, or human trafficking will not be made public, except as
      necessary where making the address or location public does not identify


                                         54
           occupancy of the NCS or HOME-ARP rental housing, when necessary to record
           use restrictions or restrictive covenants in accordance with Section VI.B or VI.E,
           or with written authorization of the person or entity responsible for the operation
           of the NCS or HOME-ARP rental housing; and

       c. The address or location of any program participant that is a fleeing or attempting
          to flee domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, stalking, or human
          trafficking will not be made public, except as provided under a privacy policy of
          the participating jurisdiction consistent with state and local laws and any other
          grant conditions from other federal grant programs regarding privacy and
          obligations of confidentiality.

       Documenting status of a qualifying population that is fleeing or attempting to flee
       domestic violence, dating violence, stalking, sexual assault, or human trafficking:

           a. If an individual or family qualifies because the individual or family is fleeing
                 or attempting to flee domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault,
                 stalking, or human trafficking then acceptable evidence includes an oral or
                 written statement by the qualifying individual or head of household seeking
                 assistance that they are fleeing that situation. An oral statement may be
                 documented by either –
              i.     a written certification by the individual or head of household; or
             ii.     a written certification by a victim service provider, intake worker, social
                     worker, legal assistance provider, health-care provider, law enforcement
                     agency, legal assistance provider, pastoral counselor, or an intake worker
                     in any other organization from whom the individual or family sought
                     assistance.

           The written documentation need only include the minimum amount of
           information indicating that the individual or family is fleeing or attempting to flee
           domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, stalking, or human trafficking
           and need not include any additional details about the conditions that prompted the
           individual or family to seek assistance.
8. Recordkeeping.
   Each participating jurisdiction must establish and maintain sufficient records to enable
   HUD to determine whether the participating jurisdiction has met the requirements of the
   HOME-ARP Notice. The recordkeeping requirements in 24 CFR 92.508 apply to
   HOME-ARP, except 92.508(a)(2) for program records, (a)(3) for project records, (a)(4)
   for financial records, and 92.508(c) for period of record retention are waived and HUD
   imposes the following alternative requirements for program, project, financial, and period
   of record retention:

   (1) Program Records:
       a. Records evidencing that all HOME-ARP funds used by a participating jurisdiction
          for TBRA, supportive services, and acquisition and development of non-
          congregate shelter units benefit individuals and families in qualifying populations.



                                             55
   b. Records evidencing that not less than 90 percent of affordable rental housing units
      acquired, rehabilitated, and/or constructed with HOME funds by a participating
      jurisdiction are occupied by households in the qualifying populations.

   c. Records documenting compliance with the 15 percent limitation on administrative
      and planning costs.

   d. Records documenting compliance with the 5 percent limitation on CHDO and
      non-profit operating and capacity building costs.

   e. The underwriting and subsidy layering guidelines adopted in accordance with
      Section VI.B.10 of the HOME-ARP Notice that support the participating
      jurisdiction's HOME-ARP allocation plan certification.

   f. If existing debt is refinanced for multifamily rehabilitation projects, the HOME-
      ARP refinancing guidelines established in the HOME-ARP Allocation Plan.

   g. If HOME-ARP funds are used for TBRA, records supporting the participating
      jurisdiction's written selection policies and criteria; supporting documentation for
      preferences for specific categories of individuals with disabilities; and records
      supporting the rent standard and minimum tenant contribution established in
      accordance with Section VI.C.7 and 8 of the HOME-ARP Notice.

   h. Confidentiality.

           i. The participating jurisdiction’s written policies and procedures for
              maintaining confidentiality of qualifying households as individuals or
              families fleeing, or attempting to flee domestic violence, dating violence,
              sexual assault, stalking, or human trafficking in accordance with Section
              VIII.H

           ii. The participating jurisdiction’s written policies and procedures for
               maintaining confidentiality in compliance with the VAWA protections
               contained in 24 CFR Part 5, Subpart L.

(2) Project Records: participating jurisdictions are required to retain the following
    records for HOME-ARP-assisted projects, as specified by activity type.
    a. A full description of each project assisted with HOME-ARP funds, including the
        location (address of project), form of HOME-ARP assistance, and the units,
        families, or qualifying households assisted with HOME-ARP funds, subject to the
        confidentiality requirements in the HOME-ARP Notice and this Appendix.
    b. The source and application of funds for each project, including supporting
        documentation in accordance with 2 CFR 200.302; and records to document the
        eligibility and permissibility of the project costs, including the documentation of



                                        56
     the actual HOME-ARP-eligible development costs of each HOME-ARP-assisted
     unit as defined in the HOME-ARP Notice.
c.   Records (i.e., written agreements) demonstrating compliance with the written
     agreement requirements in Section VIII.B. of the HOME-ARP Notice.
d.   Records (e.g., inspection reports) demonstrating that each HOME-ARP rental
     project meets the property standards in Section VI.B.11 of the HOME-ARP
     Notice at project completion and through the applicable minimum compliance
     period. In addition, during a HOME-ARP rental project’s minimum compliance
     period, records demonstrating compliance with the property standards and
     financial oversight pursuant to 24 CFR 92.504(d) and the operating cost
     assistance reserve management and oversight required by Section VI.B.22 of the
     HOME-ARP Notice.
e.   Records (e.g., inspection reports) demonstrating that each unit occupied by a
     qualifying household receiving HOME-ARP TBRA, meets the housing quality
     standards of Section VI.C.9 of the HOME-ARP Notice at initial occupancy and
     throughout the household’s term of assistance.
f.   Records (e.g., inspection reports) demonstrating that each NCS project meets the
     property and habitability standards of SectionVI.E.7., of the HOME-ARP Notice
     at project completion and throughout the applicable restricted use period.
g.   Records demonstrating that each qualifying household is eligible for HOME-ARP
     assistance based on the requirements of the ARP and Section IV of the HOME-
     ARP Notice.
h.   Records demonstrating that each household qualifying as homeless, records that
     meet the requirements in 24 CFR 576.500(b)(1), (2), (3), or (4), as applicable
     (except that youth aged 24 and under must not be required to provide third-party
     documentation to show they are homeless to receive any shelter, housing, or
     services for which ESG or CoC Program funds may be used to supplement the
     HOME-ARP assistance) ;
i.   Records demonstrating that each household qualifying as “at risk of
     homelessness,” records that meet the requirements in 24 CFR 576.500(c)(1) or
     (2), as applicable, and include the following documentation of annual income:
       (i) Income evaluation form containing the minimum requirements specified
              by HUD and completed by the recipient or subrecipient; and
      (ii) Source documents for the assets held by the household and income
              received over the most recent period for which representative data is
              available before the date of the evaluation (e.g., wage statement,
              unemployment compensation statement, public benefits statement, bank
              statement);
     (iii) To the extent that source documents are unobtainable, a written statement
              by the relevant third party (e.g., employer, government benefits



                                    57
           administrator) or the written certification by the recipient's or
           subrecipient's intake staff of the oral verification by the relevant third
           party of the income the household received over the most recent period for
           which representative data is available; or
   (iv) To the extent that source documents and third party verification are
           unobtainable, the written certification by the household of the amount of
           income the household received for the most recent period representative of
           the income that the household is reasonably expected to receive over the
           3-month period following the evaluation.
j. Records demonstrating compliance with the household income requirements in
   accordance with Section VI.B.12 of the HOME-ARP Notice for each HOME-
   ARP rental project.
k. Records demonstrating that each HOME-ARP rental and NCS project meets the
   minimum compliance period or restricted use period described in Sections
   VI.B.17 and VI.E.9 respectively, of the HOME-ARP Notice.
l. Records demonstrating that for each HOME-ARP rental housing unit or for each
   household receiving HOME-ARP TBRA, compliance with the tenant protection
   requirements of Sections VI.B.18 and VI.C. 2, respectively, of the HOME-ARP
   Notice. For HOME-ARP TBRA or rental projects under a master lease, the
   participating jurisdiction must retain records demonstrating that a master lease for
   housing leased by a HOME-ARP sponsor and each sublease between a qualifying
   household and HOME-ARP sponsor complies with the tenant and participant
   protections of 24 CFR 92.253 and the HOME-ARP Notice. Records must be kept
   for each household.
m. Records demonstrating compliance with the return of the HOME-ARP rental
   capitalized operating cost assistance reserve and/or the NCS replacement reserve
   at the end of the compliance or restricted use period in accordance with Sections
   VI.B.23 and VI.E.10 respectively, of the HOME-ARP Notice.
n. Records demonstrating that each HOME-ARP rental and each NCS project meets
   the underwriting and subsidy layering or due diligence requirements of Section
   VI.B.10 or VI.E.6 of the HOME-ARP Notice.
o. Records demonstrating that each HOME-ARP rental housing project meets the
   rent limitations of Sections VI.B.13 and VI.B.15 of the HOME-ARP Notice for
   the 15-year minimum compliance period. Records must be kept for each
   household assisted.
p. Records demonstrating that each multifamily HOME-ARP rental housing project
   involving rehabilitation with refinancing complies with the refinancing guidelines
   established in accordance with 24 CFR 92.206(b).
q. Records demonstrating that a site and neighborhood standards review was
   conducted for each HOME-ARP rental housing project involving new



                                    58
   construction under Section VI.B. of the HOME-ARP Notice to determine that the
   site meets the requirements of 24 CFR 983.57(e)(2) and (e)(3), in accordance with
   24 CFR 92.202.
r. Records demonstrating that any conversion of HOME-ARP NCS complies with
   the requirements established by Section VI.E. of the HOME-ARP Notice,
   including that conversion of NCS only occurred after the end of the applicable
   minimum use period defined in Section VI.E.11.
s. For all HOME-ARP NCS projects the following documents must be maintained,
   as applicable:
     (i) Purchase contract, closing documents, settlement statement and title work
           for acquisitions.
    (ii) Appraisal or other estimation of value to justify acquisition expenditure.
   (iii) Architectural and engineering contracts and completed designs, plans, and
           specifications for rehabilitation and new construction activities.
   (iv) Invoices, pay requests, and proof of payment for all project expenditures.
    (v)    Proof of insurance.
   (vi) Project and program audits.
t. For all HOME-ARP Supportive Services projects pursuant to McKinney-Vento or
   Homelessness Prevention Supportive Services:
     (i) Records demonstrating which types of Supportive Services the
           participating jurisdiction is offering program participants.
    (ii) Records, where applicable, demonstrating compliance with the
           termination of assistance requirement as described in section VI.D.5. of
           the HOME-ARP Notice.
   (iii) Records of all solicitations of and agreements with subrecipients and
           contractors, records of all payment requests by and dates of payments
           made to subrecipients, and documentation of all monitoring and sanctions
           of subrecipients, as applicable including any findings and corrective
           actions required.
   (iv) Records of all procurement contracts and documentation of compliance
           with the procurement requirements in 2 CFR part 200, subpart D, and
           Section VIII.D of the HOME-ARP Notice.
    (v)    Records evidencing the use of the written procedures required under
           Section VI.D.2 and records evidencing compliance with Section IV.C.2.
   (vi) Records of all leases, subleases, and financial assistance agreements for
           the provision of rental payments, documentation of payments made by the
           participating jurisdiction to owners, HOME-ARP sponsor, or qualifying
           households for the provision of financial assistance for rental payments,
           and supporting documentation for these payments, including dates of
           occupancy by qualifying individuals and families.



                                   59
      (vii)   Records that document the monthly allowance for utilities (excluding
              telephone) used to determine compliance with the rent restriction.
     (viii) Records of the types of services provided under the participating
              jurisdiction’s program and the amounts spent on these services.
      (ix) Records demonstrating subrecipient compliance with the recordkeeping
              requirements in Section VIII.F. of the HOME-ARP Notice.
   u. For all HOME-ARP Housing Counseling Services projects as defined in 24 CFR
      part 5, each participating housing counseling agency must maintain a
      recordkeeping and reporting system in accordance with 24 CFR 214.315 and 24
      CFR 214.317. The system must permit HUD to easily access all information
      needed for a performance review.
   v. For all HOME-ARP-assisted nonprofit operating expense and capacity building
      assistance activities:
        (i) Records concerning the use of funds for nonprofit operating expense and
              capacity building assistance must be maintained to enable HUD to
              determine whether the participating jurisdiction has met the requirements
              of Section VI.F. of the HOME-ARP Notice.
       (ii) Written agreements between the participating jurisdiction and the
              nonprofit organization providing nonprofit operating expense assistance or
              capacity building assistance must be retained for five years after the
              agreement terminates.

(3) Financial records:
    a. Records, in accordance with 2 CFR 200.302, identifying the source and
       application of HOME-ARP funds. Identification must include, as applicable, the
       Assistance Listing program title and number (formerly Catalogue of Federal
       Domestic Assistance), Federal award identification number and year, name of the
       Federal agency, and name of the pass-through entity, if any.

   b. Records concerning the HOME Investment Trust Fund Treasury account and
      local account required to be established and maintained by the HOME-ARP
      Notice, including deposits, disbursements, balances, supporting documentation
      and any other information required by IDIS.

   c. Records identifying the source and application of program income and
      repayments.

   d. Records demonstrating adequate budget control and other records required by 2
      CFR 200.302, including evidence of periodic account reconciliations.

(4) Program administration records:
    a. Records demonstrating compliance with the written agreements required by
       Section VIII.B. of the HOME-ARP Notice.


                                      60
   b. Records demonstrating compliance with the applicable uniform administrative
      requirements required by Section VIII.D. of the HOME-ARP Notice.

   c. Records documenting required inspections, monitoring reviews and audits, and
      the resolution of any findings or concerns.

(5) Records concerning other Federal requirements:
    a. Equal opportunity and fair housing records.

          (i) Data on the extent to which each racial and ethnic group, and single-
              headed households by gender of household head) have applied for,
              participated in, or benefited from, any program or activity funded in whole
              or in part with HOME-ARP funds.

         (ii) Documentation that the participating jurisdiction submitted a certification
              that it will affirmatively further fair housing consistent with 24 CFR 5.152
              (HUD’s Interim Final Rule entitled “Restoring Affirmatively Furthering
              Fair Housing Definitions and Certifications,” (86 FR 30779, June 10,
              2021), as amended established the AFFH definition, codified at 24 CFR
              5.151 and the AFFH certification, codified at 24 CFR 5.152, available at.
              https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2021/06/10/2021-
              12114/restoring-affirmatively-furthering-fair-housing-definitions-and-
              certifications)

         (iii) Records demonstrating compliance with the nondiscrimination and equal
               opportunity requirements of 24 CFR 92, Subpart H.

   b. Affirmative marketing and MBE/WBE records.
         (i) Records demonstrating compliance with the affirmative marketing
             procedures and requirements of 24 CFR 92.351.

         (ii) Documentation and data on the steps taken to implement the jurisdiction's
              outreach programs to minority-owned (MBE) and female-owned (WBE)
              businesses including data indicating the racial/ethnic or gender character
              of each business entity receiving a contract or subcontract of $25,000 or
              more paid, or to be paid, with HOME-ARP funds; the amount of the
              contract or subcontract, and documentation of participating jurisdiction's
              affirmative steps to assure that minority business and women's business
              enterprises have an equal opportunity to obtain or compete for contracts
              and subcontracts as sources of supplies, equipment, construction, and
              services.

   c. Records demonstrating compliance with the environmental review requirements
      of 24 CFR 92.352, 24 CFR part 58, and the HOME-ARP Notice including flood
      insurance requirements.
   d. Records demonstrating compliance with the requirements of 24 CFR 92.353 and
      the provisions of Section VII.F. of the HOME-ARP Notice regarding


                                       61
   displacement, relocation, and real property acquisition, including but not limited
   to:

      (i) project occupancy lists identifying the name and address of all persons
          occupying the real property on the date described in 24 CFR
          92.353(c)(2)(i)(A), moving into the property on or after the date described
          in 24 CFR 92.353(c)(2)(i)(A), and occupying the property upon
          completion of the project;

      (ii) lists of all individuals or families occupying hotels and motels and other
           nonresidential properties acquired, rehabilitated, and/or demolished and
           newly constructed to become HOME-ARP NCS or HOME-ARP rental
           housing that qualify for assistance under the HOME-ARP Notice as
           members of a qualifying population, as well as records indicating whether
           such persons were assisted by the HOME-ARP program by the
           participating jurisdiction following the closure of the nonresidential
           properties because of HOME-ARP activities

      (iii) lists of all individuals or families occupying HOME-ARP NCS that were
            converted during the required use period that qualify for assistance under
            the HOME-ARP Notice, as well as records indicating whether moving
            costs or advisory services were provided as part of HOME-ARP
            administrative costs or under the HOME-ARP supportive services activity
            in Section VI.D of the HOME-ARP Notice, and records indicating
            whether such persons were assisted by the HOME-ARP program by the
            participating jurisdiction following the conversion of the HOME-ARP
            NCS units.

      (iv) Documentation that the participating jurisdiction has and followed a
           RARAP in accordance with 24 CFR 92.353 and 24 CFR 42.325.

i. Records demonstrating compliance with the labor requirements of 24 CFR
   92.354, including contract provisions and payroll records.

j. Records demonstrating compliance with the lead-based paint requirements of 24
   CFR part 35, subparts A, B, J, K, M and R, as applicable.

k. Records supporting compliance with conflict of interest requirements in 24 CFR
   92.356, as revised by Section VII.H. of the HOME-ARP Notice, as well as
   documentation of any exceptions granted by HUD or a state participating
   jurisdiction, as applicable, to the conflict of interest provisions in 24 CFR 92.356,
   as revised by Section VII.H. of the HOME-ARP Notice.

l. Records demonstrating compliance with debarment and suspension requirements
   in 2 CFR part 2424.

m. Records concerning intergovernmental review, as required by 24 CFR 92.357.



                                     62
   n. Records of emergency transfers requested under 24 CFR 5.2005(e) and 24 CFR
      92.359 pertaining to victims of domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault,
      or stalking, including data on the outcomes of those requests.

   o. Documentation of actions undertaken to meet the requirements of 24 CFR part 75
      which implements section 3 of the Housing Development Act of 1968, as
      amended (12 U.S.C. 1701u).

(6) State Recipients and Subrecipients: A participating jurisdiction that distributes
    HOME-ARP funds to State recipients or subrecipients must require the State
    recipients or subrecipients to keep the records required by paragraphs 1. program
    records, 2. project records, 3. financial records, 4. program administration records,
    and 5. records concerning other federal requirements of this Section of the Notice,
    and such other records as the participating jurisdiction determines to be necessary to
    enable the participating jurisdiction to carry out its responsibilities under the HOME-
    ARP Notice. The participating jurisdiction need not duplicate the records kept by the
    State recipients or subrecipients. The participating jurisdiction must keep records
    concerning its annual review of the performance and compliance of each State
    recipient and subrecipient as required under24 CFR 92.504(a).

(7) Period of record retention: All records pertaining to HOME-ARP funds must be
    retained for five years, except as provided below.

   a. For rental housing projects, records may be retained for five years after the project
      completion date; except that records of individual tenant income verifications,
      project rents and project inspections must be retained for the most recent five-year
      period, until five years after the affordability period terminates.

   b. For HOME-ARP TBRA projects, records must be retained for five years after the
      period of rental assistance terminates.

   c. Written agreements must be retained for five years after the agreement terminates.

   d. Records covering displacements and acquisition must be retained for five years
      after the date by which all persons displaced from the property and all persons
      whose property is acquired for the project have received the final payment to
      which they are entitled in accordance with 24 CFR 92.353.

   e. If any litigation, claim, negotiation, audit, monitoring, inspection, or other action
      has been started before the expiration of the required record retention period
      records must be retained until completion of the action and resolution of all issues
      which arise from it, or until the end of the required period, whichever is later.

(8) Access to records: The participating jurisdiction must provide citizens, public
    agencies, and other interested parties with reasonable access to records, consistent




                                         63
      with applicable state and local laws and any other applicable grant conditions from
      other federal grant programs regarding privacy and obligations of confidentiality.

      The participating jurisdiction, subrecipient, contractor, or owner may create a
      program participant identifier code or number that can be used on a file and
      maintained internally, in such a way that the number itself does not inadvertently
      identify the program participant, (i.e. no use of initials, date of birth, or other pieces
      of information that might suggest who the program participant is.) The “key” or
      “cypher” for the program participant identifier code would itself be confidential and
      would not leave the provider. In the circumstance of HUD programs, the Unique
      Personal Identification Number which is generated within the comparable database
      could be used with auditors to identify records of services to distinct individuals,
      subject to the below requirement.

      HUD and the Comptroller General of the United States, any of their representatives,
      have the right of access to any pertinent books, documents, papers or other records of
      the participating jurisdiction, state recipients, and subrecipients, in order to make
      audits, examinations, excerpts, and transcripts. If a provider of services or operator of
      an NCS is subject to state or local laws or other federal grant programs that require
      that HUD not be given access to records detailing PII of victims, then auditors or
      evaluators may be given access to representative files without any sharing of
      individual identifying information.

9. Performance reports. Requirements in 24 CFR 92.509 are waived and HUD imposes
   the requirements in the Reporting and Performance Reports section in the HOME-ARP
   Notice as an alternative requirement.

          The participating jurisdiction must submit reports in a format and at such time as
          prescribed by HUD. In addition, HUD and Office of the Inspector General (OIG)
          staff must be given access, upon reasonable notice, to all information related to
          the selection, award, and use of HOME-ARP funds.

          Each participating jurisdiction must enter the required HOME-ARP data elements
          timely in IDIS.

          1.      For HOME-ARP rental activities, the participating jurisdiction must enter
          complete project completion information when it completes the activity in IDIS,
          except the assisted units can be marked vacant until they are occupied by eligible
          households.

          2.      For HOME-ARP NCS activities, the participating jurisdiction must enter
          complete project completion information when it completes the activity in IDIS.
          In addition, the participating jurisdiction must report the disposition of any
          HOME-ARP-assisted NCS activity that is converted to another eligible use at the
          time of conversion.




                                            64
               3.     For HOME-ARP TBRA activities, the participating jurisdiction reports
               beneficiary information in IDIS at the time assistance is provided.

               4.      For HOME-ARP Supportive Services activities, the participating
               jurisdiction must report in IDIS quarterly, by the 30th day after the end of each
               calendar quarter, on the number of homeless and not homeless households
               assisted with supportive services and, housing counseling, and/or homelessness
               prevention including the race and ethnicity, household size, and household type of
               the households assisted.

               HUD will issue guidance about reporting on HOME-ARP activities in the
               participating jurisdiction’s consolidated annual performance and evaluation report
               (CAPER) required under 24 CFR 91.520, at a later date.

L. SUBPART L - PERFORMANCE REVIEWS AND SANCTIONS
   1. Performance reviews. HUD waives 24 CFR 92.550 and imposes the following
      alternative requirements:
          HUD will review the performance of each participating jurisdiction in carrying out its
          responsibilities for the use of HOME-ARP funds and its compliance with the
          requirements of the HOME-ARP Notice. Such reviews may take the form of remote
          or on-site monitoring, review of IDIS data or reports, assessment of documents
          requested from the participating jurisdiction, subrecipient, or other entity carrying out
          HOME-ARP activities, and inquiries resulting from external audit reports, media
          reports, citizen complaints, or other sources of relevant information. HUD may also
          review a participating jurisdiction’s timely use of HOME-ARP funds for eligible
          activities, including the progress of expenditures for individual projects or activities,
          the requirement to place a project in service in accordance with requirements in the
          HOME-ARP Notice, and compliance of HOME-ARP rental housing and NCS with
          the 4-year deadline for completing projects.

           If HUD preliminarily determines that a participating jurisdiction has not met a
           requirement of the HOME-ARP Notice or an applicable requirement of the HOME
           regulations at 24 CFR Part 92, as revised by this Appendix, HUD will communicate
           its determination in writing and provide the participating jurisdiction with the
           opportunity to demonstrate, based on substantial facts, documentation, and data, that
           it has done so. HUD may extend any time period it provided to the participating
           jurisdiction to demonstrate its compliance if upon request of the participating
           jurisdiction, HUD determines that is it infeasible for the participating jurisdiction to
           provide a full response within the prescribed period.
           If the participating jurisdiction fails to demonstrate to HUD's satisfaction that it has
           met the requirement, HUD will take corrective or remedial action in accordance with
           this section or 24 CFR 92.552.

   2. Corrective and remedial actions. HUD waives 24 CFR 92.551 and imposes the
      following alternative requirements:




                                                65
       Corrective or remedial actions for a performance deficiency (e.g., failure to meet a
       provision of the HOME-ARP Notice or an applicable provision of 24 CFR Part 92)
       will be designed to prevent a continuation of the deficiency; mitigate, to the extent
       possible, its adverse effects or consequences; and prevent its recurrence. HUD may
       impose corrective or remedial actions including but not limited to the following:
       1. HUD may instruct the participating jurisdiction to submit and comply with
          proposals for action to correct, mitigate and prevent a performance deficiency,
          including:
          a. Preparing and following a schedule of actions for carrying out the affected
              activities, consisting of schedules, timetables, and milestones necessary to
              implement the affected activities;
          b. Establishing and following a management plan that assigns responsibilities for
              carrying out the remedial actions;
          c. Canceling or revising activities likely to be affected by the performance
              deficiency, before expending HOME-ARP funds for the activities;
          d. Reprogramming HOME-ARP funds that have not yet been expended from
              affected activities to other eligible activities;
          e. Reimbursing its HOME-ARP grant in any amount not used in accordance
              with the requirements of the HOME-ARP Notice;
          f. Suspending disbursement of HOME-ARP funds for affected activities; and
          g. Establishing procedures to ensure compliance with HOME-ARP
              requirements.

       2. HUD may also:
          a. change the method of payment from an advance to a reimbursement basis and
             may require supporting documentation to be submitted for HUD review for
             each payment request before payment is made;
          b. determine the participating jurisdiction to be high risk and impose special
             conditions or restrictions on the use of HOME-ARP funds in accordance with
             2 CFR 200.208; and
          c. take other remedies that may be legally available, including remedies under 2
             CFR 200.339 and 200.340.

       3. The requirements in 92.551(c)(2) are also revised to the updated regulatory
          references to 2 CFR part 200, as amended, that have been renumbered.


M. CONSOLIDATED SUBMISSIONS FOR COMMUNITY PLANNING AND
   DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMS (24 CFR PART 91)

    1. Consultation requirements for HOME-ARP allocation plan. 24 CFR 91.100 and
       24 CFR 91.110 are waived and the following alternative requirements shall apply to
       HOME-ARP allocation plan submissions.


                                            66
   (1) Before developing its HOME-ARP allocation plan, a participating jurisdiction
       must consult with agencies and service providers whose clientele include the
       HOME-ARP qualifying populations to identify unmet needs and gaps in housing
       or service delivery systems. In addition, a participating jurisdiction should use
       consultation to determine the HOME-ARP eligible activities currently taking
       place within its jurisdiction and potential collaborations for administering HOME-
       ARP. This consultation will provide a basis for the participating jurisdiction’s
       strategy for distributing HOME-ARP funds for eligible activities to best meet the
       needs of qualifying populations.

   (2) At a minimum, a participating jurisdiction must consult with the Continuum of
       Care (s) serving the jurisdiction’s geographic area, homeless and domestic
       violence service providers, public housing agencies (PHAs), public agencies that
       address the needs of the qualifying populations, and public or private
       organizations that address fair housing, civil rights, and the needs of persons with
       disabilities. State participating jurisdictions are not required to consult with every
       PHA or Continuum of Care within the state’s boundaries; however, local
       participating jurisdictions must consult with all PHAs and Continuum of Cares
       within the jurisdiction’s boundaries. In its plan, a participating jurisdiction must
       describe its consultation process, list the organizations consulted, and summarize
       the feedback received from these entities.

2. Public participation requirements for HOME-ARP allocation plan. Section 105
   of NAHA (42 U.S.C. 12705), section 107 of NAHA (42 U.S.C. 12707), 24 CFR
   91.105, 24 CFR 91.115, 24 CFR 91.401 are waived and the following alternative
   requirements shall apply to HOME-ARP allocation plan submissions by participating
   jurisdictions.

   (1) Participating jurisdictions must provide for and encourage citizen participation in
       the development of the HOME-ARP allocation plan. Before submitting the
       HOME-ARP allocation plan to HUD, participating jurisdictions must provide
       residents with reasonable notice and an opportunity to comment on the proposed
       HOME-ARP allocation plan of no less than 15 calendar days. The participating
       jurisdiction must follow its adopted requirements for “reasonable notice and an
       opportunity to comment” for plan amendments in its current citizen participation
       plan except for where it conflicts with the requirements of this Appendix. In
       addition, participating jurisdictions must hold at least one public hearing during
       the development of the HOME-ARP allocation plan prior to submitting the plan
       to HUD.

   (2) For the purposes of HOME-ARP, participating jurisdictions are required to make
       the following information available to the public.
           a. The amount of HOME-ARP funds the participating jurisdiction will
               receive.



                                         67
          b. The range of activities the participating jurisdiction may undertake.

   (3) A participating jurisdiction must consider any comments or views of residents
       received in writing, or orally at a public hearing, when preparing the HOME-ARP
       allocation plan. In its plan, a participating jurisdiction must describe its public
       participation process, including any efforts made to broaden public participation
       and summarize the comments or views received. In its plan, the participating
       jurisdiction must also include a summary of comments received through the
       public participation process and any comments or views not accepted and the
       reasons why.

   (4) Throughout the HOME-ARP allocation plan public participation process, the
       participating jurisdiction must follow its applicable requirements and procedures
       for effective communication, accessibility, and reasonable accommodation for
       persons with disabilities and providing meaningful access to participation by
       limited English proficient (LEP) residents that are in its current citizen
       participation plan.

3. Alternative requirement to the Contents of the Consolidated Plan for Local
   Governments, States, Consortia, and Insular Areas. The requirements of section
   105(a), (b), (d)-(g) of NAHA (42 U.S.C. 12705(a), (b), (d)-(g)), section 107 of
   NAHA (42 U.S.C. 12707), 24 CFR Part 91, Subparts C and D are waived for HOME-
   ARP allocation plan submissions except to the extent that such provisions allow for
   the submission of the HOME-ARP allocation plan as part of a participating
   jurisdiction’s annual action plan submission for Fiscal Year 2021. 24 CFR 91.505 is
   also waived. 24 CFR 91.500 shall apply except as modified by alternative
   requirements stated below. The following alternative requirements shall apply to the
   contents, submission, and review of the HOME-ARP allocation plan.

   (1) General Requirement. The HOME-ARP allocation plan must describe the
       distribution of HOME-ARP funds and the process for soliciting applications
       and/or selecting eligible projects. The plan must also identify any preferences
       being established for eligible activities or projects. However, participating
       jurisdictions are not required to identify specific projects that will be funded in the
       HOME-ARP allocation plan.

   (2) Needs Assessment and Gaps Analysis. A participating jurisdiction must evaluate
       the size and demographic composition of qualifying populations within its
       boundaries and assess the unmet needs of those populations. In addition, a
       participating jurisdiction must identify any gaps within its current shelter and
       housing inventory as well as the service delivery system. A participating
       jurisdiction should use current data including point in time count, housing
       inventory count, or other data available through CoCs, and consultations with


                                         68
    service providers to quantify the individuals and families in the qualifying
    populations and their need for additional housing, shelter, or services. A
    participating jurisdiction should identify and consider the current resources
    available to assist qualifying populations, including congregate and non-
    congregate shelter units, supportive services, TBRA, and affordable and
    permanent supportive rental housing. A participating jurisdiction must consider
    the housing and service needs of qualifying populations, including but not limited
    to:
        (1) Sheltered and unsheltered homeless populations;
        (2) Those currently housed populations at risk of homelessness;
        (3) Other families requiring services or housing assistance to prevent
            homelessness; and
        (4) Those at greatest risk of housing instability or in unstable housing
            situations.

    A participating jurisdiction should include data in its HOME-ARP allocation plan
    that describes the qualifying populations. In addition, participating jurisdictions
    must include a narrative description that:

        a. Identifies the characteristics of housing associated with instability and an
           increased risk of homelessness if the participating jurisdiction will include
           such conditions under HUD’s definition of “other populations” as
           established in Section IV.A.2.g. of the HOME-ARP Notice.
        b. Identifies the participating jurisdiction’s priority needs for qualifying
           populations; and
        c. Explains how the participating jurisdiction determined the level of need
           and gaps in its shelter and housing inventory and service delivery systems.

(3) HOME-ARP Activities. The HOME-ARP allocation plan must describe how a
    participating jurisdiction will distribute HOME-ARP funds in accordance with its
    priority needs. The plan must describe the participating jurisdiction’s method for
    soliciting applications for funding and/or selecting developers, service providers
    and/or subrecipients and whether the participating jurisdiction will administer
    eligible activities directly. If the participating jurisdiction will provide any portion
    of its HOME-ARP administrative funds to a subrecipient or contractor prior to
    HUD’s acceptance of the participating jurisdiction’s HOME-ARP allocation plan
    because the subrecipient or contractor is responsible for the administration of the
    participating jurisdiction’s entire HOME-ARP grant, the plan must identify the
    subrecipient or contractor and describe its role and responsibilities in
    administering all of the participating jurisdiction’s HOME-ARP program.

    Participating jurisdictions must indicate in the HOME-ARP allocation plan the
    amount of HOME-ARP funding that is planned for each eligible HOME-ARP


                                      69
   activity type, including administrative and planning activities. In addition, a
   participating jurisdiction must demonstrate that any planned funding for non-
   profit operating assistance, as described in Section VI.F of the HOME-ARP
   Notice, non-profit capacity building, and administrative costs is within statutory
   limits. A participating jurisdiction must also include a narrative description about
   how the characteristics of its shelter and housing inventory and service delivery
   system and the needs identified in the participating jurisdiction’s gap analysis
   provided a rationale for its plan to fund eligible activities.

(4) HOME-ARP Production Housing Goals. The HOME-ARP allocation plan must
    estimate the number of affordable rental housing units for qualifying populations
    that a participating jurisdiction will produce or support with its HOME-ARP
    allocation. The plan must also include a narrative about the specific affordable
    rental housing production goal that the participating jurisdiction hopes to achieve
    and describe how it will address the participating jurisdiction’s priority needs.

(5) Preferences. The HOME-ARP allocation plan must identify whether the
    participating jurisdiction intends to give preference to one or more qualifying
    populations or a subpopulation within one or more qualifying populations for any
    eligible activity or project. For example, participating jurisdictions may include a
    preference for:
     homeless individuals and families as defined in the ESG and CoC Programs;
     individuals with special needs or persons with disabilities among qualifying
        individuals and families;
     a specific category of qualifying individuals and families (e.g., chronically
        homeless as defined in 24 CFR 91.5).
   Participating jurisdictions are not required to describe specific projects to which
   the preferences will apply in the HOME-ARP allocation plan. However, a
   participating jurisdiction must explain how the use of a preference or method of
   prioritization will address the unmet need or gap in benefits and services received
   by individuals and families in the qualifying population or category of qualifying
   population, consistent with participating jurisdiction’s needs assessment and gap
   analysis. The participating jurisdiction must also describe how it will still address
   the unmet needs or gaps in benefits and services of the other qualifying
   populations that are not included in a preference through the use of HOME-ARP
   funds.

   Preferences cannot violate any applicable fair housing, civil rights, and
   nondiscrimination requirements, including but not limited to those requirements
   listed in 24 CFR 5.105(a). The participating jurisdiction must comply with all
   applicable nondiscrimination and equal opportunity laws and requirements listed
   in 24 CFR 5.105(a) and any other applicable fair housing and civil rights laws and
   requirements when establishing preferences or methods of prioritization.



                                     70
(6) HOME-ARP Refinancing Guidelines. If a participating jurisdiction intends to use
    HOME-ARP funds to refinance existing debt secured by multifamily rental
    housing that is being rehabilitated with HOME-ARP funds, it must state its
    refinancing guidelines in accordance with 24 CFR 92.206(b)(2). The guidelines
    must describe the conditions under with the participating jurisdiction will
    refinance existing debt for a HOME-ARP rental project. At a minimum, the
    guidelines must:

      Establish a minimum level of rehabilitation per unit or a required ratio
       between rehabilitation and refinancing to demonstrate that rehabilitation of
       HOME-ARP rental housing is the primary eligible activity

      Require a review of management practices to demonstrate that disinvestment
       in the property has not occurred; that the long-term needs of the project can be
       met; and that the feasibility of serving qualified populations for the minimum
       compliance period can be demonstrated.

      State whether the new investment is being made to maintain current
       affordable units, create additional affordable units, or both.

      Specify the required compliance period, whether it is the minimum 15 years
       or longer.

      State that HOME-ARP funds cannot be used to refinance multifamily loans
       made or insured by any federal program, including the Community
       Development Block Grant program.

(7) Substantial Amendments to the HOME-ARP Allocation Plan. Participating
    jurisdictions must make a substantial amendment to the HOME-ARP allocation
    plan for changes in the method of distributing funds; to carry out an activity not
    previously described in the plan; or, to change the purpose, scope, location, or
    beneficiaries of an activity, including new preferences not previously described in
    the plan. In addition, the requirements for substantial amendments at 24 CFR
    92.63 apply to the HOME-ARP allocation plan for insular areas. Participating
    jurisdictions are not required to make a substantial amendment to describe
    individual projects selected for funding if the eligible activity is included in the
    participating jurisdiction’s plan. Participating jurisdictions must make the
    proposed substantial amendment public and provide for a 15-day public comment
    period prior to submission. Upon completion of the public comment period,
    participating jurisdictions must submit substantial amendments to HUD in
    accordance with the process for submitting the HOME-ARP allocation plan as
    described in Section V.D.



                                     71
(8) Certifications and SF-424. Participating jurisdictions must submit the required
    certifications in accordance with the requirements in the HOME-ARP Notice,
    including the following.
        (1) Affirmatively Further Fair Housing;
        (2) Uniform Relocation Act and Anti-displacement and Relocation Plan;
        (3) Anti-Lobbying;
        (4) Authority of Jurisdiction;
        (5) Section 3; and,
        (6) HOME-ARP specific certification that a participating jurisdiction will
            only use HOME-ARP funds for eligible activities and eligible costs.

   Participating jurisdictions must also submit the SF-424, SF-424B and SF-424D
   with the HOME-ARP allocation plan.

(9) HOME-ARP Submission and the eCon Planning Suite. Upon completion of the
    HOME-ARP allocation plan, a participating jurisdiction must submit the HOME-
    ARP allocation plan to HUD. To submit the HOME-ARP allocation plan,
    participating jurisdictions must follow the process to make an amendment to the
    Fiscal Year (FY) 2021 annual action plan. Once the FY 2021 annual action plan
    is reopened, a participating jurisdiction must upload a Microsoft Word or PDF
    version of the plan as an attachment next to the “HOME-ARP allocation plan”
    option on the AD-26 screen (for participating jurisdictions FY 2021 annual action
    plan is a Year 2-5 annual action plan) or the AD-25 screen (for participating
    jurisdictions whose FY 2021 annual action plan is a Year 1 annual action plan that
    is part of the 2021 consolidated plan), unless instructed by HUD to follow a
    different submission procedure. Participating jurisdictions are not required to
    make any other edits to the FY 2021 annual action plan or applicable consolidated
    plan screens in the eCon Planning Suite. For more information on how to upload
    an attachment in the eCon Planning Suite, participating jurisdictions can refer to
    the eCon Planning Suite Desk Guide.

(10) HUD Review of the HOME-ARP Allocation Plan. The participating jurisdiction
    must submit its HOME-ARP allocation plan to HUD for review in accordance
    with 24 CFR 91.500, as revised by this alternative requirement. Unless instructed
    otherwise by HUD, the HOME-ARP allocation plan will be considered received
    by HUD when the SF-424 is submitted electronically, which means that it is
    uploaded in the eCon Planning Suite as an attachment on AD-25 or AD-26 screen,
    as applicable, and the action plan status is changed to “Submitted for Review.”
    HUD will review a participating jurisdiction’s HOME-ARP allocation plan to
    determine that it is.
        (1) Substantially complete, and
        (2) Consistent with the purposes of ARP.



                                    72
   HUD may disapprove a participating jurisdiction’s HOME-ARP allocation plan in
   accordance with 24 CFR 91.500(b). HUD may also disapprove a HOME-ARP
   allocation plan or a portion of a plan if HUD determines that the plan is
   inconsistent with the purposes of ARP or substantially incomplete. A
   participating jurisdiction’s plan is inconsistent with ARP if it includes allocates
   HOME-ARP funds for uses other than a HOME-ARP eligible activity, as
   described in the HOME-ARP Notice. A participating jurisdiction’s plan is
   substantially incomplete if -

       a. The participating jurisdiction does not complete the required public
          participation or consultation or fails to describe those efforts in the plan;

       b. The participating jurisdiction fails to include the required elements
          outlined in the HOME-ARP Notice, including the amount of HOME-ARP
          funds for each eligible HOME-ARP activity type;

       c. The participating jurisdiction fails to identify and describe the
          responsibilities of the subrecipient or contractor administering all of its
          HOME-ARP award, if applicable; or,

       d. HUD rejects the participating jurisdiction’s HOME-ARP certification as
          inaccurate.

   In accordance with Section 105(c) of NAHA (42 U.S.C. 12705(c)) and 24 CFR
   91.500(a), if the participating jurisdiction’s HOME-ARP allocation plan is not
   disapproved within 45 days, then the plan is deemed approved 45 days after HUD
   receives the plan, and HUD shall notify the participating jurisdiction that the plan
   is accepted.

(11) Plan Disapproval. If HUD determines that the plan is substantially incomplete
    or that the plan is inconsistent with ARP, HUD will notify the participating
    jurisdiction in writing with the reasons for disapproval, in accordance with 24
    CFR 91.500(c). If a participating jurisdiction’s plan is disapproved, the
    participating jurisdiction may revise or resubmit the plan for HUD review within
    45 days after the first notification of disapproval. HUD will respond to accept or
    disapprove the resubmitted plan within 30 days of receiving the revisions or
    resubmission.

(12) Making the HOME-ARP Allocation Plan Public. Once HUD notifies a
    participating jurisdiction that the plan is accepted, the participating jurisdiction
    must make the final HOME-ARP allocation plan available to the public in
    accordance with the same requirements in the participating jurisdiction’s current
    citizen participation plan that are followed to make the participating jurisdiction’s


                                     73
       adopted consolidated plan and substantial amendments available to the public,
       including the availability of materials in a form accessible to persons with
       disabilities and translated materials in different languages to accommodate LEP
       persons, upon request.

4. Tenant preferences in HOME-ARP. The requirements of Section 225(d) of NAHA
   (42 U.S.C. 12755(d)), 24 CFR 91.220(l)(2)(vii), 24 CFR 91.320(k)(2)(vii), 24 CFR
   92.209(c), 24 CFR 92.252(k), 24 CFR 92.253(d), and 24 CFR 92.504(c)(3)(iii) shall
   not apply to HOME-ARP projects where they conflict with the following alternative
   requirements:

       A participating jurisdiction may establish reasonable preferences among the
       qualifying populations to prioritize applicants for HOME-ARP projects or
       activities based on the participating jurisdiction’s needs and priorities, as
       described in its HOME-ARP allocation plan. For example, a participating
       jurisdiction may set a preference among qualifying individuals and families for a
       HOME-ARP non-congregate shelter for individuals and families who are
       homeless; fleeing or attempting to flee domestic violence, dating violence, sexual
       assault, stalking, or human trafficking; and veterans and families with a veteran
       family member that meet the criteria of one of these prior qualifying populations,
       consistent with its HOME-ARP allocation plan.

       The participating jurisdiction must comply with all applicable nondiscrimination
       and equal opportunity laws and requirements listed in 24 CFR 5.105(a) and any
       other applicable fair housing and civil rights laws and requirements when
       applying preferences through its referral methods. Persons who are eligible for a
       preference must have the opportunity to participate in all HOME-ARP activities
       of the participating jurisdiction in which they are eligible under the HOME-ARP
       Notice, including activities that are not separate or different, and cannot be
       excluded because of any protected characteristics or preferential status.

       Targeted assistance: If HOME-ARP funds are used for TBRA, the participating
       jurisdiction may establish a preference for individuals with special needs or
       persons with disabilities among the HOME-ARP qualifying populations. Within
       the qualifying populations, participation may be limited to persons with a specific
       disability, if necessary, to provide effective housing, aid, benefit, or services as
       those provided to others in accordance with 24 CFR 8.4(b)(1)(iv). The
       participating jurisdiction may also provide a preference for a specific category of
       individuals with disabilities (e.g., persons with HIV/AIDS or chronic mental
       illness) within the qualifying populations if the specific category is identified in
       the participating jurisdiction’s HOME-ARP allocation plan as having unmet need
       and the preference is needed to narrow the gap in benefits and services received
       by such persons.




                                        74
5. Referral Methods for Projects or Activities
   A participating jurisdiction may use the referral methods described below to
   administer HOME-ARP assistance to qualifying individuals and families. Regardless
   of the referral method used by the participating jurisdiction, HUD holds the
   participating jurisdiction responsible for determining and documenting that
   beneficiaries meet the definition of a qualifying population or, for the portion of
   HOME-ARP rental units not restricted to qualifying populations, that beneficiaries
   are low-income.
   A participating jurisdiction may use the coordinated entry or coordinated entry
   process (CE) of a continuum of care (CoC) for referrals for projects and activities as
   described below. Under 24 CFR 578.3, a CE is a centralized or coordinated process
   designed to coordinate program participant intake assessment and provision of
   referrals within a defined area. HUD requires each CoC to establish and operate a CE
   with the goal of increasing the efficiency of local crisis response systems and
   improving fairness and ease of access to resources, including mainstream resources.
   A participating jurisdiction may permit a CoC CE to collect information and
   documentation required to determine whether an individual or family meets the
   criteria of a HOME-ARP qualifying population at any point in the coordinated entry
   process, (i.e., after or concurrently with the assessment and intake processes) as long
   as that information is not used to rank a person for HOME-ARP assistance other than
   as specified by the preferences or method of prioritization established by the
   participating jurisdiction, in accordance with HOME-ARP requirements. If the
   participating jurisdiction uses CE, the participating jurisdiction cannot require
   HOME-ARP victim service providers to use the CE but may permit them to do so.
   (1) Use of Expanded CE in HOME-ARP
       Under this referral method, a participating jurisdiction may use a CE established
       by a CoC operating within its boundaries for one or more projects or activities if
       the CE accepts all HOME-ARP qualifying populations eligible for those activities
       or projects, in accordance with the preferences and prioritization, if any,
       established or approved by the participating jurisdiction in its HOME-ARP
       allocation plan and imposed through the participating jurisdiction’s written
       agreements.

       Before using a CoC’s CE, participating jurisdictions should consider whether the
       CE covers the same service area as the HOME-ARP projects or activities that
       would use that CE. At a minimum, the participating jurisdiction must establish
       policies and procedures that describe the relationship of the geographic area(s)
       served by the project or activity to the geographic area(s) covered by the CoC CE
       and address how the CE will provide access and implement uniform referral
       processes in situations where a project’s geographic area(s) is broader than the
       geographic area(s) covered by the CE.




                                        75
       The participating jurisdiction must require a project or activity to use CE along
       with other referral methods (as provided in section b below) or to use only a
       project/activity waiting list (as provided in section c below) if:
           i. the CE does not have a sufficient number of qualifying individuals and
                families to refer to the participating jurisdiction for the project or activity;
           ii. the CE does not include all HOME-ARP qualifying populations; or,
           iii. the CE fails to provide access and implement uniform referral processes
                in situations where a project’s geographic area(s) is broader than the
                geographic area(s) covered by the CE.

   (2) Use of CE with Other Referral Methods
       The participating jurisdiction may use a CoC CE with additional referrals from
       outside organizations or project-specific waiting lists consistent with HOME-ARP
       requirements. If using a this referral method, the participating jurisdiction must
       establish or approve any preferences or prioritization criteria applied by a CoC CE
       or other referral sources. The participating jurisdiction may also use a waiting list
       to receive referrals from a CoC CE and other referral agencies for a project or
       activity, where a CoC CE or referral agency refers an applicant that is placed on
       the waiting list in chronological order.

       If applicable, a participating jurisdiction must establish policies and procedures
       for applying a participating jurisdiction’s established preferences and method of
       prioritization, if any, when accepting direct referrals from a CoC CE and other
       referral agencies, and must document that such the policies and procedures were
       followed for each applicant served.

   (3) Use of a Project/Activity Waiting List
       The participating jurisdiction may establish a waiting list for each HOME-ARP
       project or activity. All qualifying individuals or families must have access to
       apply for placement on the waiting list for an activity or project. Qualifying
       individuals or families on a waiting list must be accepted in accordance with the
       participating jurisdiction’s preferences, if any, consist with the HOME-ARP
       Notice or, if the participating jurisdiction did not establish preferences, in
       chronological order, insofar as practicable.

6. Limiting Eligibility to Subpopulations
   participating jurisdictions must follow all applicable fair housing, civil rights, and
   nondiscrimination requirements, including but not limited to those requirements listed
   in 24 CFR 5.105(a). This includes, but is not limited to, the Fair Housing Act, Title
   VI of the Civil Rights Act, Section 504 of Rehabilitation Act, HUD’s Equal Access
   Rule, and the Americans with Disabilities Act, as applicable.




                                          76
HOME-ARP rental housing or NCS may be limited to a specific subpopulation of a
qualifying population identified in Section IV.A. of this Notice, so long as admission
does not discriminate against any protected class under federal nondiscrimination
laws in 24 CFR 5.105 (e.g., the housing may be limited to homeless households and
at risk of homelessness households, veterans and their families, victims of domestic
violence, dating violence, sexual assault, stalking or human trafficking and their
families).
Recipients may limit admission to or provide a preference for HOME-ARP rental
housing or NCS to households who need the specialized supportive services that are
provided (e.g., domestic violence services). However, no otherwise eligible
individuals with disabilities or families including an individual with a disability who
may benefit from the services provided may be excluded on the grounds that they do
not have a particular disability.
Consistent with the statutory authority under ARP, HOME-ARP NCS may be
converted to permanent housing under the CoC program or used as shelters under the
ESG program, when all program and fair housing and nondiscrimination
requirements are met. As such, HOME-ARP NCS may need to limit eligibility to
households that are homeless and/or at risk of homelessness if the shelter will be
converted to permanent housing under the CoC program or used as an emergency
shelter in the ESG program.




                                     77
