                                                                                                Agenda/Notes
                                                      Office of Governor Kotek — Racial Justice Council (RJC)
                                                                         September 18, 2025 – Zoom Webinar
                                                                                              3:00 – 5:00 p.m.

CHAIR
 X    Governor Tina Kotek

MEMBERS
 X    Ana Molina                      X    Jimmy Howard                         E    Matt Newell-Ching
 X    Angela Uherbelau                X    Josie Silverman-Mendez               X    Melinda Del Rio
 X    Annie Valtierra-Sanchez         X    John Washington                      X    Mark Jackson
 X    Ciara Pressler                  X    Kim McCarty                          X    Paul Solomon
 X    Cynthia Richardson              X    Latiffe Amado                        X    Perla Medina Alvarez Lucio
 X    James Cador                          Marcus C Mundy                       X    Reyna Lopez
 X    Janice Mason                         Maria Elena Guerra “Meg”             X    Shay Huber
 X    James Alan Parker               X    Marin Arreola                        E    Tristen Edwards
 X    Jenny Pool Radway               E    Marisa/Mariesa Zapata

OTHER ATTENDEES
 X    Andre Bealer                    X    Javier Cervantes                          Shana McConville
 X    Ami Goswami                          Jesse Hyatt                               Svetha Ambati
      Amy Schlusser                        Johnna Timmes                             Taylor Smiley Wolfe
      Anca Matica                          Johnna Papaefthimiou                      Valerie Colas
      Aimee Fritsch                        Jim McKenna                               Vince Porter
      Bob Livingston                  X    KC Ledell                            X    Yasmin Solorio
 X    Chris Warner                         Kelly Brooks                         X    Kate Nass
      Doug Grafe                           Kristina Narayan                     X    Rachael Moser
      Danny Moran                     X    Matthew Tschabold                         Constantin Severe
      Rachel Currans-Henry                 Maya Crawford Peacock                     Brandy Hemsley
 X    Erik Cole                            Morgan Gratz-Weiser                  X    April Rohman
 X    Rachel Moser                    X    Melinda Gross, DAS                   X    Betsy Imholt, DAS
                                                                                X    Kate Nass, DAS



     Topic/Lead                                   Notes/Main Points                                   Decisions/
                                                                                                     Action Items
 Welcome and Roll            Javier takes roll call for Council members. Members provide
 Call                                                  introduction.

 New Director          Betsy Imholt: Been with DAS for three months. Been in state
 Presentation:         government for 30+ years. Grateful to be here. DAS does everything
 Dept. of              from landscaping to calculating your kicker. We also do publishing and
 Administrative        distribution, mail delivery, financial budgeting and accounting,
 Services, Director,   procurement, IT, policy work, fleet and car repairs, and many other
 Betsy Imholt          services for agencies. Our mission is to ensure our resources are used
                       efficiently. I work closely with Melinda Gross, who is on my team.

                       Kim: Can you expand on racial equity work your department is doing?

                       Betsy: Theres been a lot in last 5-6 years that has directed the department
New Director          via Executive Order and commitments with legislature. The work
Presentation: Dept.   Melinda and the team are doing has built a trusting environment. In those
of Administrative     sessions, there’s accountability and open dialogue. That is intense work
Services, Director,   going across the enterprise and haven’t experienced before. Really
Betsy Imholt          unique to Melinda and her team’s talents. Takes most of the time on our
                      team. Very impactful.
(Continued)
                      John: What work are you doing to improve relationships with small
                      business community?

                      Betsy: Most direct and obvious is to get procurement system fixed.
                      Theres a lot of money and potential that can benefit small businesses, if
                      they cant participate in it then it will be a hinderance.

                      Governor: The Business Roundtable notes have been communicated to
                      DAS. Betsy is also focused on technical challenges. Procurement is
                      important.

                      Mark: Is there any look at reimbursement model around the state? Lack
                      of reserve funds, doing services where you need to be reimbursed,
                      expectation around increasing admin percentage cap?

                      Betsy: We have a long list of system barriers, technology barriers, and
                      programmatic barriers – would add those to the mix for sure. Will take us
                      a while to get things to work. It is a system we are rebuilding from
                      ground up. We can do it with programmatic information in mind on
                      choices we can make along the way. Disparity study helps to inform that.

                      Governor: The goal is to pay people on time and to help people be
                      partners with the state.

                      Betsy: We have a policy on the books. It has been to pay within 45 days
                      and to hold onto it. Why? Because we make interest on that. We are
                      changing that and it will no longer be our point of view. The policy to       Future agenda
                      unwind that, it takes time.                                                   item: have
                                                                                                    Betsy return
                      James Alan Parker: Applaud your priority for procurement. Hope we             for update
                      can find ways to support your goal there.

                      Governor: We anticipate a return engagement in 6 months.

Presentation:         Melinda Gross: I want to talk about Racial Equity Impact Statements
Reintroducing the     (REIS). The budget starts in 2026, and we have a year to get work
Racial Equity         moving forward before new ‘27 year. We’ve done two rounds of REIS
Impact Statement      process. At this point we want to be intentional and bring you in earlier
Melinda Gross,        in the process to form what we hope to have in the REIS together.
Director of Office         Melinda shares power point “RJC – REIS Overview (9.18.25)
of Culture Change
                      REIS has to describe impact of programs for policies and budget
                      modifications on Oregonians who are Black, Indigenous or other people
                      of color. Budgets are a reflection of your moral values. If agencies aren’t
                      thinking of racial equity and its impacts then it will be hard to make
                      those changes. For 23-25 budget cycle, we did a phased approach. 27
                      agencies were identified to submit an REIS regarding specific programs
Presentation:        they had. For 2025-2027 year we had all executive branch agencies
Reintroducing the    submit and REIS and instead of program specific, we had them do it
Racial Equity        agency specific.
Impact Statement
Melinda Gross,       Office of Cultural Change reviews all budgets and makes
Director of Office   recommendations to the Governor. Agencies asked for support, and we
of Culture Change    worked with them on identifying a picture on how they are doing along
                     with their DEI work. Learnings from this include the quality and
(Continued)          information of REIS submitted differed, and there is room for
                     improvement on how REIS is used for budgetary items.
                     I want to hear your thoughts on how you would like to engage. I want to
                     plant the seed so we can develop what the process for upcoming budget
                     cycle. So many ways for you guys to engage, want to flag now before we
                     make decisions. Want to ensure folks can learn at a nice pace vs too fast.

                     Paul: Really timely as we are presenting later in the agenda on our
                     priorities. Thanks for sharing on 23-25 for REIS process. That year it felt
                     rushed; we want to engage earlier on in the process. I was unclear how
                     agencies went about determining which programs they were using. Our
                     committees had ideas on what programs were good, but they weren’t the
                     ones the agencies necessarily brought to our committees. Hungry to
                     engage with you, specifically for Criminal justice sphere.

                     Melinda G: Wasn’t around for 23-25 budget but this is the opportunity
                     to engage earlier. If you want programs or presentations, lets do it.
                     Would love REIS to be a tool for agencies to do before setting budgets.
                     Right now, they are doing it as the last thing in the process which means
                     they aren’t doing it before or as they are creating it. Would like your
                     support on thoughts and work together.

                     Angela: Love the intentionality and ensure the impact statements aren’t
                     just pushed aside. Wondering if other states are doing or leading in this
                     area to connecting impact to budget creation? Secondly, do legislators
                     have access or inform legislature as they look at GRB or other budgets
                     when it comes to decision making.

                     Melinda G: Don’t have insights on other states. Been thinking on how
                     we engage with other states and DEIB. Haven’t thought on the REIS
                     piece. We do have someone from media who wanted to know more about
                     REIS process. I want to engage with WA, CA, and CO. If you have other
                     states, let us know. When it comes to legislature, it’s not involved.

                     Andre: There currently is no official process.

                     Jimmy: Has there been a desire for touchpoints outside of budget
                     process just to check in? What did you get from the reports from those 27
                     agencies and what did they utilize the impact statements and future
                     budgeting?

                     Melinda G: We asked for progress reports last time. There were a few
                     agencies that continued work, even if they didn’t get funding directly.
                     Others shared progress reports, but we didn’t find out until two years
                     later. We do support agencies with DEI plans, but now they are also
                     required to do their budget. Maybe we do touchpoint work with DEI plan
                     and budget, also integrating the two possibly.

Presentation:        Melinda DR: With the political climate, financial constraints, and
Reintroducing the    federal impacts - does that change anything? Out in the community there
Racial Equity        is a big fear and people have scrubbed websites for example. This is
Impact Statement     great but reality of where we are…
Melinda Gross,
Director of Office   Melinda G: Can’t talk about budget if we aren’t talking on real impacts
of Culture Change    we’re experiencing. We’re in unprecedented times. Totally get it and feel
                     it. Folks working at the state in DEI have that anxiety or those just
(Continued)          working in the social justice work have that anxiety. We haven’t backed
                     down on DEI commitments. Agencies that get federal funding, for
                     example, are impacted but are adapting. Will be hard and challenging.
                     Theres a commitment from Oregon to continue to do the work. We are
                     exploring what our north start with DEI looks like. We might be adapting
                     to dig into the work stronger and be more specific on outcomes we are
                     looking for and making DEI language more accessible – naming what we
                     are working towards.

                     Melinda DR: Are there practice conversations or guidance on adapting?

                     Melinda G: That’s part of the north star work and how we are engaging
                     in next few months. Agencies that are outward facing are harder
                     impacted. Going to get that North Star work launched in the next few
                     months, if you’re interested in participating, would love to have you.

                     Governor: Anything you do for human beings applies. I appreciate how
                     we use and learn from it. Excited to hear from next steps. Going back
                     and thinking on how we can structure to make proposals for budget, we
                     are looking at budget reductions. How do we keep the North Star in a
                     budget constrained environment. While we are talking about building a
                     new year budget down the line, can we use that to make the best choices
                     possible.

                                          Housing and Homelessness Committee
RJC Priorities
                     Kim: Would like to come back to rental assistance as a priority. It’s an
Discussion:          extremely effective tool. Focus on housing development – see it as a continuum
Council Alignment    of need to ensure folks have that support for affordable housing.
and Committee
Report Outs          Marin: How is housing development and work going overall statewide?
a. Vote on the       Kim: Meg has more experience in housing development than I do. There was
   priorities        commitment from state and local jurisdictions like Portland and metro area.
                     Folks are committed to that goal and a good sign.

                     Governor: Whatever dollars that have been identified, we are trying to move as
                     fast as possible.

                                          Economic Opportunity Committee
                     Jan: Analyzing Agency Effectiveness – want to ensure people are receiving
                     Business Oregon dollars and key data. Want to work with Business Oregon on
                     recommendations.
                     Update on EO22-15 – disparity study and Office of Cultural Exchange. We
                     have worked to make recommendations for Governor to encompass language
                     and how we approach DEI and racial justice in this moment in time.
                     Workforce Workgroup: working to draft recommendations based on Future
                      Ready Oregon and providing a model for workforce development. Would like
RJC Priorities
                      to provide and strengthen workforce and talent expansion. Enabling completion
Discussion: Council   and retention for folks in those programs. Goal is to set recommendations so
Alignment and         Governor has them by 2026 first quarter.
Committee Report
Outs                                          Environmental Equity Committee
                      Ana: Many of our things were tied to budget and didn’t move forward
a. Vote on the        unfortunately. Want to maintain our current work.
   priorities         Environmental Restoration Funds – will start coming to Oregon and
                      conservation programs for pollution reduction efforts.
(Continued)           Resiliency efforts – want to actively engage and provide feedback.
                      Working with Env. Justice Council. Our climate justice movement is so small
                      that there’s an ongoing question on moving forward. So many of the same
                      people are being pulled into different spaces.

                      Jan: Have you thought on looking at Social Development Goals or EDGs
                      Environmental Social Governance? Would encourage you to look at those as
                      possible ways to talk to legislators to talk about environmental equity.

                      Ana: Our committee is so small we haven’t had an opportunity to invest and
                      talk about those conversations. Many of our members outside of the committees
                      interact with legislators, as a broader look at climate justice and wins were
                      under different leadership. Right now, it’s an educational endeavor.

                      Governor: In a budget constrained environment, Oregon Env. Restoration
                      Fund. There was a lot of thought to ensure it was used intentionally. It’s the
                      type of fund that could be easily tapped for other services, it’s nice that it’s
                      guarded to be used as intended. Glad it’s on the list.

                                        Health Equity and Human Services Committee
                      Josie: We have two overarching things to focus on in the coming months. We
                      can help with communicating decisions for folks on the ground and navigating
                      changes going forward.
                      Federal Medicaid and SNAP impacts. Been a lot of talk on data sharing and
                      protections, will want to continue monitoring what’s happening and be an agent
                      to communicate impacts on the ground.
                      Coordinated Care Organizations model – lots of concerns on future viability.
                      Want to be a partner for what comes next.
                      Healthier Oregon Program – want to monitor what goes on with enrollment and
                      utilization. Significant chilling effect with current climate and want to connect
                      on any changes that might be coming.

                      Marin: Behavioral health is a big issue. Want to continue monitoring and
                      ensuring equity. We have a workforce crisis when it comes to workers, we want
                      to ensure we promote bilingual bicultural therapists.
                      Residential Capacity and DHS funding and focusing on mental health.
                      Traditional Health Workers – during COVID they had a big impact.
                      Regional Health Equity Coalitions – also of interest.

                                             Criminal Justice Reform Committee
                      Paul: Affirming Sanctuary Laws –Want to ensure victims at risk are mindful
                      that they feel protected and safe in this community.
                      Policy on Medicaid 1115 Waiver – to allow state to begin providing services to
                      Oregon Health Plan.
                      Restorative Justice and reinforcing efforts – though we don’t have any asks in
                      short session. Want to keep legislators informed on our work and educate folks.

                      Annie: You mentioned there’s been more payments made on issues coming up
                      with Women in Custody. Where do I find that data.
                      Paul: Might defer to the Governor on that. Dept. of Corrections likely has that
RJC Priorities        on settlements paid out.
Discussion: Council
                    Governor: Has been significant ton last couple years. Gender informed
Alignment and       practices at Coffee Creek is trying to undo that.
Committee Report
Outs                Annie: We have talked to law enforcement in Southern Oregon on people in
                      custody and detaining. When some counties differ from others, what do we do
a. Vote on the        to remedy that?
   priorities
                      Paul: For deflection – I also chair Criminal Justice Commission. We have 28
(Continued)           programs across 36 counties. Hopeful that the commission will develop best
                      practice standards and something counties can adhere to. Want to ensure there
                      is accountability and parody.
                      For 1115 waiver, when people go into custody they lose benefits. And the
                      waiver gave 90 days. Not everyone stays a long time, and they are left with no
                      coverage. This is a big issue for folks in custody.

                      Governor: We have a shared goal and value on making this work. Generally,
                      it’s a confluence of many factors. 1115 was slow to start and we were finding
                      implementation challenges. The waiver benefits have an expiration. Will go
                      back to agency to see what considerations are in play to restart it and for us to
                      have a conversation about it. We should come back and see can we do this and
                      if so what can we do.

                                                     Education Committee
                      Mark: Want to educate elected officials and how these impacts and fiscal
                      impact of cuts affect the system. Even by district.
                      Accountability – ensuring we prioritize safety, civil rights, workforce priorities,
                      and system alignment. Seen significant reductions on some programs but want
                      to ensure we get rationale on why cuts were done on equity programs vs across
                      the board.

                      Cynthia: We’ve identified what we need for our students. When you put
                      actions into place, and then when funding is gone, we need to start over again.
                      We need stability. Those cuts have hurt us tremendously. Now everyone has to
                      go back to developing a plan to overcome the cuts.

                      Marin: Are you also looking at the budget? Read somewhere we are spending
                      about 35% on admin personnel and less on teachers. How do we improve our
                      system.

                      Mark: Not for that particular item. Our focus is primarily on cuts from equity.

                      Annie: Want to suggest adding a bit more to accountability. Where are we
                      trying to get accountability from – ex: teacher, students, system? Maybe more
                      defined for our communities.

                      Governor: Maybe “school district accountability”?

                      Mark: Thank you. We have to find accountability for district control, as it
                      impacts kids and families.

                      Andre: Thanks for the hard work, everyone. This was a lot of work and
                      intentionality based on passion that comes with these priorities. This makes us
                      even more powerful as we go into conversations with legislators and going into
                      legislative session.
                      Javier: Report outs are completed. With that said, as a package, are we
                      comfortable moving forward with using these?
RJC Priorities
Discussion: Council All present members in favor.
Alignment and       Andre: Those not in favor?
Committee Report
Outs                No member in opposition.
b. Vote on the        Jan: Gratitude for all those involved. Want to express that we are bold, and
   priorities         move forward with courage. The spirit behind RJC isn’t just about racial
                      justice, it’s really about justice in general. That’s why we have all these
(Continued)           committees. We need to have these conversations and look to each other to lift
                      our spirits. I appreciate the hard work and lead with heart. Be bold and be
                      courageous.

                      John: Applaud the work that went into the committees. Was optimistically
                      cautious. I like the CJRC work. Looking forward to selecting a committee.

                      Governor: This will be a greater conversation with our meeting in November.
HR1 Update
                      We have to talk about financing issues. We have done initial impact analysis.
a. Update and next    Its over $15B that will impact SNAP and Medicaid. Want to say thank you to
                      HEHS committee on their interaction on this and advising on values and how
steps
                      we set north stars and budget environments for our agencies (particularly
                      ODHS/OHA) to work together. It’s their interaction and the overlap. No
                      changes to eligibility or benefits have been made. Nothing has gone into effect.
                      Waiting for detailed guidance from USDA, supposed to get that by end of
                      September. Want to anticipate next few months will be very robust. If we have
                      to have a special meeting, we will do that. November meeting will be critical
                      for HR1 cuts and rebalancing budget. Want to thank you for engaging with
                      legislator over September legislative days and remind people we do not want to
                      go backwards.
Update Legislative
Engagement            Andre: There will be changes to the schedule. The legislature will be
Process, Andre        reconvening on the 29th and we will do work to rearrange those. We got a great
Bealer, Director of   list. We have our one pager and put together a schedule and snapshot on
Equity and Racial     background for legislators you’ll be meeting with. I will be out on leave to
Justice               welcome a new baby. Team is here to support.

                      Paul: Housing Stability Council Meeting – been working on it for a number of
Open Mic
                      years.

                      Annie: Food insecurity is big. Coming back and asking about the impact and
                      changes.

                      Governor: OHA has been doing community engagement webinars. Next one I
                      believe is Sept 30th.

                      Cynthia: Have submitted a special request of you, please consider it.

                      Governor: We have aligned with federal guidance for science based guidelines
                      for vaccines in the past, but now we have aligned with a few states to provide
                      recommendations based on science.

Announcement of       Javier: November 20th in Salem at State Library. Meeting adjourned at 5:00pm.
November 20th in-
person
meeting/Adjourn
Salem
  Materials
                                  RJC - REIS Overview    Racial Justice        RJC Legislative
                                      (9.18.25).pdf   Council Legislative P Priorities Endorseme



                                                               Zoom Chat
15:05:36 From Chris Warner, (he/him) Gov Kotek to Hosts and panelists:
        Chris Warner, Chief of Staff for Governor Kotek
15:05:44 From Andre Bealer (he/him) Office of the Governor to Hosts and panelists:
        Andre Bealer, Equity and Racial Justice Director
15:06:01 From Vince Porter to Hosts and panelists:
        Vince Porter Deputy Chief of Staff Public Administration
15:06:05 From Melinda Gross (she/her) | Dir. of Cultural Change (DAS) to Hosts and panelists:
        Melinda Gross (she/her), Director of Cultural Change with the Department of Administrative Services. Glad to be here with you!
15:06:05 From Valerie Colas (She/her) to Hosts and panelists:
        Valerie Colas, Public Safety Advisor
15:06:06 From April Rohman (they/them), Governor's Office to Hosts and panelists:
        April Rohman (they/them), Behavioral Health Advisor
15:06:07 From Yasmin Solorio, Gov Office (She/her) to Hosts and panelists:
        1.        Welcome and Roll Call          (5 mins)
        2.        New Director Presentation: Dept. of Administrative Services, Director, Betsy Imholt (15 mins)
        3.        Presentation: Reintroducing the Racial Equity Impact Statement Melinda Gross, Director of Office of Culture Change
(15 mins)
        4.        RJC Priorities Discussion: Council Alignment and Committee Report Outs (50 mins)
        a.        Vote on the priorities
        5.        HR1 Update (5 mins)
        a.        Update and next steps
        6.        Update Legislative Engagement Process, Andre Bealer, Director of Equity and Racial Justice (5 mins)
        7.        Open Mic (20 mins)
        8.        Announcement of November 20 in-person meeting/Adjourn (5 mins)
15:06:08 From Svetha Ambati (she/her), Governor's Office to Hosts and panelists:
        Svetha Ambati, Senior Housing Advisor
15:06:16 From Erik Cole to Hosts and panelists:
        Erik Cole, State Resilience Plan Manager, listening in and seeing how you do it!
15:06:18 From Yasmin Solorio, Gov Office (She/her) to Hosts and panelists:
        Yasmin Solorio, Executive Assistant
15:07:30 From Ami Goswami (she/her) Comm. Eng. Manager to Hosts and panelists:
        Ami Goswami (she/her), Community Engagement Manager
15:08:06 From Renee Klein to Hosts and panelists:
        Renee Klein, Budget and Policy Administrator, Department of Administrative Services Chief Financial Office
15:08:19 From Yasmin Solorio, Gov Office (She/her) to Hosts and panelists:
        1. Welcome and Roll Call
        2. New Director Presentation: Dept. of Administrative Services, Director, Betsy Imholt
        3. Presentation: Reintroducing the Racial Equity Impact Statement Melinda Gross, Director of Office of Culture Change
        4. RJC Priorities Discussion: Council Alignment and Committee Report Outs
        a. Vote on the priorities
        5. HR1 Update
        a. Update and next steps
        6. Update Legislative Engagement Process, Andre Bealer, Director of Equity and Racial Justice (5 mins)
        7. Open Mic
        8. Announcement of November 20 in-person meeting/Adjourn
15:11:15 From Chris Warner, (he/him) Gov Kotek to Hosts and panelists:
        Will be off camera for a bit.
15:16:57 From RJC Angela Uherbelau she/her to Hosts and panelists:
        Thank you Betsy - good to see you!
15:18:00 From Paul Solomon (he/him) to Hosts and panelists:
        How many employees are there at DAS? I don't have a good sense of how large the agency is.
15:19:50 From Betsy Imholt- DAS Director to Hosts and panelists:
        1000
15:25:27 From Betsy Imholt- DAS Director to Hosts and panelists:
        Always happy to come back and deep dive.
15:43:01 From Latiffe Amado (she,her,ella) to Hosts and panelists:
        hey all, apologies but I need to drive to a 4pm meeting so will be off camera umtil then and will see y'all in person in November.
15:43:26 From Andre Bealer (he/him) Office of the Governor to Hosts and panelists:
         Thank you, Latiffe.
15:49:13 From Betsy Imholt- DAS Director to Hosts and panelists:
         The Criminal Justice Commission prepares racial and ethnics for the legislature in some circumstances.
https://www.oregon.gov/cjc/CJC%20Document%20Library/AdultCJSystemRacialandEthnicStatementBackground.pdf
15:49:50 From Betsy Imholt- DAS Director to Hosts and panelists:
         correction: racial and ethnic impact statements
15:58:37 From Kim McCarty to Hosts and panelists:
         Hello Everyone, I have to leave early today . In regards to Housing and Homelessness our committee wants to keep insisting on
maintaining historic funding. This was mostly accomplished with the exception of the critical eviction prevention services and rent
assistance. We understand that with an expect deficit this will be a difficult ask but it is a critical request that is relevant to racial equity.
Here is a recap
16:03:59 From Kim McCarty to Hosts and panelists:
         Implementation of existing programs
         •        Rent Eviction Prevention
         •        Affordable Housing Preservation
         •        Permanent Supportive Housing Services Programs
         o        HHC provides feedback, input, and recommendations (example Senior Housing Initiative).

         Housing Development
         Learn more about agency programs such as (how are these programs performing; programs share data):
         •         Local Innovation and Fast Track (LIFT) Housing Program as a long-term effort
         •         Home Ownership
         •         Rental Support
         •         Eviction Prevention to Housing
         •         Development (from a previous priority)
         o         Desired Outcome: Advocate for maintained efforts to agencies.
16:07:41 From RJC Angela Uherbelau she/her to Hosts and panelists:
         Thank you Jan. A suggested edit to the document is specifying “Business Oregon” so legislators know that’s the agency to being
analyzed
16:08:24 From RJC Jan Mason, she/her to Hosts and panelists:
         �
16:36:04 From Governor Kotek (she/hers) to Hosts and panelists:
         Maybe add "School district accountability"?
16:40:07 From Cynthia Richardson to Hosts and panelists:
         Sorry I lost connection
16:52:52 From Shay Huber she/her RJC CJRC to Hosts and panelists:
         are you compensating travel time for in person meeting?
16:54:05 From Yasmin Solorio, Gov Office (She/her) to Hosts and panelists:
         More info to come on travel comp!
16:56:35 From RJC Jan Mason, she/her to Hosts and panelists:
         I will yield to other to speak for open mic. I'll email my questions regarding economic development from the state and also on
AI>
16:59:53 From Ana Molina - RJC & EEC to Hosts and panelists:
         Thank you so much everyone and the Governor for your updates.
Racial Equity Impact
Statements



Overview & RJC Engagement (9/18/25)
What is an REIS?

ORS 291.206: “As supplemental information, each agency request
budget shall include a racial impact statement, which must be
developed in consultation with the Racial Justice Council.

The racial impact statement must describe the impact of programs,
policies and budget modifications on Oregonians who are Black,
Indigenous or other people of color.

[Amended by 1969 c.173 §1; 2016 c.117 §15; 2021 c.612 §4]”
What is an REIS?


         RJC
                      More
                    Equitable
                    Budgets,
                   Resources &
                     Services
         REIS
REIS: Phased Approach

‘23-25                                           ‘25-27
     • 27 Agencies, Program Specific                  • All Executive Branch Agencies (~80),
     • 38 Questions (Appendix I, State of OR            Agency Specific
       Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion Action        • 4 Questions (adapted from Appendix
       Plan)                                            I, State of OR Diversity, Equity, and
     • In-Depth Presentations to the RJC and            Inclusion Action Plan)
       Feedback                                       • DEI Plan Submission
                                                      • Affirmative Action Plan Submission
                                                      • Progress report for the 27 agencies
                                                        who submitted an REIS the prior
                                                        biennium
                                                      • OCC Analysis integrated into CFO
                                                        Budget Analyst recommendations
Learnings

• RJC presentations & feedback:
    • Meaningful, with some agencies revising their program approach because of the feedback.
    • Big time commitment for both agencies and the RJC.
• Agencies submitted REIS statements, but the quality and information provided varied greatly.
• DEI practitioners completed the REIS portion (if an agency has one). It was not usually a
  collaborative effort.
• There is room for improvement on how the REIS is used for budgetary proposals.
• Budget analysts have asked for support in reviewing REIS’.
• More clarity around the goal or outcome of an REIS process is needed (e.g. – analysis tool to help
  shape a budget proposal; tool to review budgets and programs, etc.).
• Agencies need more support in REIS development.
RJC Engagement



Develop the REIS
                   Analyze & Provide
     Process                           Advise   Other?
                       Feedback
(REIS Workgroup)
Racial Justice Council Legislative Priorities

Codified into law in 2021, the Racial Justice Council (RJC) is composed of six
committees, with individuals from across Oregon consisting of people with unique
backgrounds and life experiences. The aim of the RJC is to build a way for the state
to better engage with, listen to, and support Oregon’s Black, Indigenous, people of
color, Tribal members, and immigrants and refugees. The RJC has been a critical
partner and advisor to Governor Kotek, helping to align priorities and the state’s
policies and operations with a racial justice and equity framework.


Housing and Homelessness
                                 ft
Theme: Impacts of Race-Based Housing Disparities
       ra
   Implementation of existing programs
   Housing Development


Economic Opportunity
Theme: Maintain existing equity-focused programs and build resilience of front-line
      D
communities to decide for themselves their economic opportunity and prosperity.
   Analyzing Agency Effectiveness
   Finalize Recommendations for an Updated Executive Order-22-15
   Workforce Workgroup: Implemented Recommendations for Future Ready Oregon
   and Modeling Workforce Development

Environmental Equity
Theme: Strengthen current policy and laws for the protection of vulnerable
populations and advocating cost-neutral fiscal impacts.
   Partner on Efforts Related to the Oregon Environmental Restoration Funds
   Engage on Resiliency Efforts
   Working with Environmental Justice Council
Health Equity and Human Services
Theme: Provide values and equity framework to consider as we move into a budget
constricted environment and inform how changes are communicated.
   Federal Medicaid & SNAP impacts to Oregon
   Coordinated Care Organizations
   Behavioral Health
   Healthier Oregon Program
   Traditional Health Workers
   Regional Health Equity Coalitions

Criminal Justice Reform
Theme: Accessibility, monitoring, and learning for the appropriate alignment of
criminal justice reform.
    Affirming Sanctuary Law
    Advocate and maintain 1115 Medicaid Waiver for People in Custody and
    Continuation




                                 ft
    Restorative justice and reinforcing efforts
    Track relevant criminal justice bills to prevent widening of penalization system
       ra
Education
Theme: Information and data sharing and collaboration.
   Messaging the Fiscal Impact of Cuts
   Accountability
      D

Meeting Calendar
The calendar of meetings can be found online at
https://www.oregon.gov/gov/policies/pages/racial-justice-council.aspx




Contact information

   Andre Bealer,                               Javier Cervantes,
   Director, Equity and Racial Justice         Advisor, Racial Justice Council
   Office of the Governor                      Office of the Governor
   Andre.Bealer@oregon.gov                     Javier.Cervantes@oregon.gov
                                                                             Racial Justice Council
                                                                              September 18, 2025

RJC Legislative Priorities Endorsement Voting Process

Like the advocacy letters process, the RJC will vote on whether to endorse the themes and
priorities presented by the six RJC Subcommittees as a Council. Voting on the priorities
identified by the RJC Subcommittees will be as follows:

•   Committee Co-Chairs will present their theme and priorities to the Council membership at
    the September 18 RJC Meeting.
            o Members will have the opportunity to ask questions and engage in discussion
                 upon the conclusion of each committee presentation.
•   Approval requires agreement from 2/3 of all committee members present at the September 18
    RJC Meeting.
            o If 2/3 agreement is not reached, the Council will have further discussion on
                 specific items of disagreement.
            o After all items have been discussed the Council will vote to approve.
            o If 2/3 agreement is not reached after the reconsideration discussion, the item of
                 disagreement is dropped from further consideration.
            o The package then returns for a full vote on the remaining items. To pass the
                 recommendation must receive 2/3 approval.
•   If the priority achieves the 2/3 agreement it is considered officially endorsed and the position
    of the RJC.
