  DIVERSITY, EQUITY, AND
  INCLUSION PLAN
  ADOPTED                | 2023-2027
  Oregon   Department    of Revenue
  Updated January 2025




           OREGON
      DEPARTMENT
Dayo:   REVENUE
Contact us for ADA accommodations or assistance in other languages.

www.oregon.gov/dor

503-378-4988 or 800-356-4222

questions.dor@oregon.gov



Comuniquese con nosotros para solicitar adaptaciones de la ADA (Ley sobre
Estadounidenses con Discapacidades) o asistencia en otros idiomas.

www.oregon.gov/dor

503-378-4988             o 800-356-4222

preguntas.dor@oregon.gov




2023-2027   DEI   PLAN   - 2
                   How       We      Partner with Sovereign                             Nations

Native American tribes hold unique political status and are recognized as sovereign governments. This
sovereignty means that tribes have the authority to govern themselves, manage their own affairs, and
make decisions independent of state laws. We recognize and respect the sovereign status of Oregon’s
            nine federally recognized tribes and their respective authorities on tribal lands.


  It is our policy to promote positive government to government relations through consultation with
 the tribes in areas where the development, implementation, and administration of agency programs
 may   affect tribal members,     lands,    activities, or interests.   We   believe that continuing to build on our
relationships with the tribes makes our agency more effective overall while supporting our work across
                                         the state and region.


   Oregon    personal income tax law relating to the taxation of Native Americans is found under ORS
 316.777    and   OAR   150-316-0595.      This statute   and the associated    administrative   rules exempt   certain
                                income earned        by Native Americans in Oregon.
QOur Commitment



Together, we collect the revenue that Oregon counts on. Fulfilling this mission requires us to ensure
dignity and inclusion for all. Inclusive practices help us understand and meet the unique needs of our
customers. Our responsibility is to adapt our systems, policies, practices, and procedures to serve all
our customers, and this plan is a testament to that commitment.



The department is committed to creating an inclusive environment where all employees are safe,
regardless of their identity. We value the diversity of our employees and the communities we serve.
By embracing diversity, we ensure that our organization reflects the community we serve.



Thank you for your dedication and support in making this plan a reality. Together, we will create a
more inclusive and equitable environment for everyone we serve and work with.




2023-2027   DEI   PLAN   - 4
  CONTENTS
      Introduction

Our committment to diversity,
equity, and inclusion.                              ;
                                      We are committed to
                                      bringing in the revenue
      Background                      that Oregon counts on.
How can we best serve all
Oregonians?



      Oregon's History
Acknowledges Oregon's past
and the actions perpetuating
inequalities.


      DEI Action Plan                                            Oregon tax dollars pay
The strategies and actions for the                               for the infrastructure
department.                                                      of our daily lives, of our
                                                                 loved ones’ lives, and the
      Monitoring and Evaluating                                  critical support systems for
          ;     ;                                                O        ,                 .
How we will monitor, evaluate, and                                regon’s most vulnerable
communicate    our success.



      Accomplishments

Action plan accomplishments and
completed work.


      Conclusion
Staying committed to this plan.

                                      We administer 63 revenue
      Appendix I: Resources           streams that support
DOR Strategic Plan, DOR Affirmative   bringing in money for
Action Plan, and Oregon's DEI         Oregon.
Action Plan.




                                                                                2023-2027   DEI   PLAN   -5
      Diversity means honoring
      and including people of
      different backgrounds,
      identities, and experiences
     collectively and as
      individuals.




                                              Racial Equity means
                                              closing the gaps so that
                                              race can no longer predict
                                              any person’s success,
                                              which simultaneously
                                              improves outcomes for all.
                                              To achieve racial equity,
                                              we must transform our
                                              institutions and structures
                                              to create systems that
                                              provide the infrastructure
                                              for communities to thrive
                                              equally.




                                                                            Inclusion is a state of
          ;                                                                 belonging when persons
      Equity acknowledges
                                                                            of different backgrounds,
     that not all people, or all
                                                                            experiences, and identities
     communities, are starting
                                                                            are valued, integrated,
     from the same             place     du
                                 place due
                                                                            and welcomed equitably
     to historic and current                                                       .
                                                                            as decision-makers,
     systems of    oppression.
      Y         PP                                                          collaborators, and
                                                                            colleagues.



2023-2027   DEI   PLAN   - 6
We are committed to diversity, equity, and
inclusion.

The State of Oregon is committed to establishing strong leadership to eradicate
racial and other forms of disparities in all aspects of state government.


Equity is about creating the conditions for all to have access to the resources
and   opportunities they need    to thrive, so identities cannot   predict outcomes.


The diversity, equity, and inclusion plan incorporates the State of Oregon’s
diversity, equity, and inclusion strategies into the Oregon Department of
Revenue.




Plan Update

This plan’s actions have been modified to reflect updates based on available
resources.   Legislative   requests for resources   were   not funded   during the 2023
legislative session to support some of the work in the original plan.         Progress
on completed action items can be found on page 24.




                                                                                          2023-2027   DEI   PLAN   -7
 Background

 As described in the State of Oregon's 2021 Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion Action Plan: A Roadmap to
 Racial Equity and Belonging, historically and currently underserved and under resourced communities
 in Oregon include Oregonians who identify as:


 e    Native American, members of Oregon’s nine                      e   Undocumented, Deferred Action for
      federally recognized tribes, American Indian,                      Childhood Arrivals (DACA) recipients,
      Alaska Natives                                                     “Dreamers,”    Nonimmigrant Visa Holders
 e     Black, African, African American                              e   Linguistically diverse,   English   language
 e     =6Latina, Latino, Latinx, Hispanic                                learners (ELL)
 e §=6 Asian                                                         e   Economically Disadvantaged
 e     §=Pacific Islander (including Compact of Free                 e   People with disabilities
      Association               Citizens)                            e   LGBTQIA2S+
 e     Immigrants,              Refugees, Asylum Seekers, Deferred   e   Farmworkers,    Migrant Seasonal Workers
      Status        Holders, Temporary        Protected   Status




We recognize that individuals often identify with multiple communities and are impacted by compounding
systems of oppression, also known as intersectionality. Using equity as a guiding principle means centering
the needs of community members who have been historically underserved and underrepresented. In
designing polices, practices, and processes that explicitly serve these culturally specific groups, the
department can create conditions that benefit all community members. By improving outcomes for
community members with the least access to resources and opportunities, the department is able to best
serve all Oregonians.




 2023-2027   DEI   PLAN   - 8
OREGON
HISTORY
This plan acknowledges and makes visible many historic instances of oppression and violence in our
state, specifically based on race and ethnicity. “The tax system is not race neutral, the tax system
reflects the attitudes, the biases,          and the economic             interests of those who       wrote   the tax laws and for
much   of our nation’s history it has been white mostly well-off men.”*


As depicted in the State of Oregon Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion Action Plan, the below timeline of
Oregon’s history illustrates some, but not all, statewide and federal policies and actions perpetuating
racial inequities.

                                      Policies and Actions                  Perpetuating        Racial Inequities
  1790            Naturalization Act: This act prohibited non-whites from accessing U.S. citizenship
                  by limiting it to white immigrants (primarily from Western Europe) who had resided
                  in the U.S. at least two years and with children under 21 years of age. The act also
                  granted citizenship to children born to U.S. citizens while abroad.

  1844             Exclusion: The first Black exclusion law in Oregon, adopted in 1844 by the Provisional
                  Government, mandated that Blacks attempting to settle in Oregon would be publicly
                  whipped — thirty-nine lashes, repeated every six months — until they departed.

  1855            Statehood: After the gold strikes in southern Oregon, pro-slavery forces advocated
                  forming a new state in southern Oregon and northern California. It failed when
                  Californians rejected the idea of reducing the size of their state.

  1856            Rogue River Indian Wars ended with the surviving Native Americans sent to two newly
                  created reservations: the Siletz and the Grand Ronde.


  1857            State Constitution: The Oregon constitution, adopted in 1857, banned slavery but also
                  excluded Blacks from legal residence, owning property, making contracts, voting, or
                  using the legal system.

   1859           Like earlier exclusion laws, the constitutional slavery ban adopted in 1857 took effect
                  when     Oregon     became a        state   in 1859.     It was   not retroactive,   which   meant   that it did
                  not apply to Black people who were legally in Oregon                        before the ban was adopted.

   1862           Color Tax: Oregon adopted a law requiring all residents who were Black, Chinese,
                  Hawaiian      (Kanakas),     and     Mulatto     (an archaic term       referring to people    of mixed      ethnic
                  heritage) to pay an annual tax of $5. If they could not pay this tax, the law empowered
                  the state to press them into service maintaining state roads for 50 cents a day. Also,
                  interracial marriages were banned in Oregon. It was against the law for whites to
                  marry anyone who was one-fourth or more Black.

   1866            Miscegenation: Oregon banned all interracial marriages, extending the 1862 law
                  to prevent whites from marrying anyone who was one-fourth or more Chinese, or
                  Hawaiian, and one-half or more Native American. It was previously illegal for white
                  and Black people to marry.
                                                                                                                   2023-2027   DEI   PLAN   - 9
  *The Racist Roots of Oregon's Tax System — Oregon   Center for Public Policy
            Year                                    Policies and Actions             Perpetuating          Racial Inequities
            1867                School Segregation:         Even though the total Black population in Oregon                       in the 1860s
                                numbered     128,    Portland    assigned     Black and      Mulatto    children    to a segregated              school.

                                No Citizenship: The         Oregon    Legislature    rescinded       the state’s ratification           of the
            1868
                                Fourteenth Amendment, endowing African Americans with citizenship — this despite
                                the fact that the amendment had just become federal law.

            1875                Page Act: This law prohibited the importation of unfree laborers and women brought
                                for “immoral purposes.” It was enforced primarily against Chinese due to anti-Chinese
                                xenophobia around the U.S. as an early effort to restrict Asian immigration via select
                                categories of persons whose labor was perceived as immoral or coerced.

                                Military Action: The Nez Perce Tribe clashed with the U.S. Army in their Wallowa
            1877
                                homeland    in northeast        Oregon.   Chief     Joseph    and   his people     refused      to go toa
                                reservation. Instead, Chief Joseph tried to lead 800 of his people to Canada                                and
                                freedom.
            1879                Chemawa Indian Boarding School opened in Salem, Oregon as the third such boarding
                                school in the nation. These schools were designed to assimilate Indian children
                                into white culture and teach them vocational skills. Students were prohibited from
                                speaking their Tribal languages or practicing any of their traditional customs or
                                culture.

                                By this date, the      U.S. government        had forced      most     Indigenous        and   Native     people     of
            18380
                                the   Northwest      onto   reservations.

                                Chinese Exclusion Acts: Due to anti-Chinese xenophobia and bigotry, the federal
            1882
                                government passed a 10-year moratorium on Chinese labor immigration, which was
                                renewed in 1892 for another 10 years as part of the Geary Act. Chinese Americans
                                already in the country challenged the constitutionality of the discriminatory acts, but
                                the federal government did not listen. The exclusion law was made permanent in 1902
                                with added restrictions requiring Chinese residents to register and obtain a certificate
                                of residence, or else face deportation. In China, merchants organized an anti-American
                                boycott in 1905, which the American government pressured the Chinese government
                                to suppress.   The     Chinese    Exclusion    Acts were      not repealed       until     1943.

                                Violence and Intimidation: Of the many acts of intimidation and violence committed
            1887
                                against early Chinese immigrants in the American West, one of the most brutal
                                occurred at Deep Creek on the Oregon side of the Snake River in Hells Canyon. In May
                                1887 as many as 34 Chinese gold miners were ambushed and murdered for their gold
                                by a gang of horse thieves and schoolboys in Wallowa County. Of the six men indicted:
                                Three men fled and were never caught, and three others were declared innocent by a
                                jury on September 1, 1888. No one was found guilty of the crime.
            1919                Redlining: Portland Board of Realty approved a “Code of Ethics” prohibiting realtors
                                and bankers from selling property in white neighborhoods to people of color or
                                providing mortgages for such purchases.

            1923                 Alien Land Laws: There was growing hostility towards Asian farmers, most notably
                                 Japanese farmers in the Hood River Valley. The Oregon Legislature, dominated
                                 by members of the Klan, passed a number of restrictive laws. The Alien Land Law
                                 prevented first generation Japanese Americans from owning or leasing land. The
                                 Oregon    Business     Restriction    Law allowed      cities to refuse      business         licenses to first
                                 generation Japanese Americans. Alien land laws grew in popularity in the West, even
                                 in states with very small, isolated Asian populations.

            1934                Non-unanimous          Jury Verdicts:     Oregon     voters    amended      their constitution            to allow for
                                non-unanimous jury verdicts in criminal cases. Its intent was to weaken the influence
                                of non-white jurors.

2023-2027   DEI   PLAN   - 10
                            Policies and Actions               Perpetuating             Racial Inequities
        Segregation: Oregon law officially segregated Mexican students on the basis of being
1935
        of “Indian” descent. It made clear to exempt “White Mexicans” those fair-skinned
        descendants of the Spaniards who do not have “Indian blood”.

        Oregon passed a number of laws restricting Indians, mostly concerning the possession
1937-
        of alcohol.
1945
1942    WWII:    Japanese         Americans    started to lose their homes,             livelihoods    and freedom,          and
        were    forced    to report to a facility to be relocated               to inland    internment    camps      for the
        duration of WWII.
        The Oregon        Plan:    In May    1942,   Malheur     County        became   the site of the first seasonal
        farm labor camp where internees went on leave from internment camps to work in the
        sugar beet fields. Numerous Japanese Americans remained in Malheur County after an
        order excluding them from the West Coast was lifted in January 1945, and remained
        in Malheur to build a sizeable Japanese American community in Ontario and Nyssa to
        this day.
        The Oregon House of Representatives passed a Joint Memorial calling on President
1945
        Roosevelt to prevent the return of Japanese Americans “for the duration of the
        present war with Japan.”

        Revision to Alien Land Law forbids Japanese nationals from purchasing or leasing
        land.*

1948    Redlining:    "Oregon        realtors followed       the “National        Realtors   Code”    (based    on an
        earlier state law) that proclaimed that a realtor shall never introduce into a
        neighborhood members of any race or nationality whose presence will be
        detrimental to property values.” This practice continued until the 1960s, when the
        civil rights movement
        led to the    Fair Housing Act and           later, in 1977,     to the Community         Reinvestment          Act,
        when the federal government began to address these racist wrongs. “But even then,
        communities of color — particularly African Americans — continued to be displaced as
        investments in urban renewal and community plans resulted in gentrification, which

1954    Treaty Termination: Congress terminated federal aid granted by treaties with 109
        tribes, dissolving the         Klamath,      Grand   Ronde,      and    Siletz reservations     and    sanctioning
        the selling of their Tribal lands. Tribes lost control of their land and water rights,
        oil, and other natural resources. The Secretary of the Interior was a former Oregon
        Governor.
        Two    police officers dumped           dead   opossums         at an African American-owned              restaurant
1981
        in Portland. The incident evoked ugly KKK imagery and touched off one of the most
        contentious disputes between police, city government, and the public. As a result, a
        citizen’s committee to review police actions in Portland was created.

1994    Measure       11 was passed          by Oregon voters to establish mandatory                  minimum      sentencing
        for several crimes;         it was    reaffirmed     in 2000.


        Oregon Driver’s License Bill: SB 1080 was passed requiring all applicants for Oregon
2008
        driver licenses, instruction permits, or identification cards to provide acceptable
        proof of U.S. citizenship or lawful presence in the country. This bill created significant
        hurdles for Oregonians, including citizens, to obtain driver license or identification
        cards.

         Measure 88 Defeated: The Oregon Alternative Driver Licenses Referendum subjected
 2014
         Senate Bill 833 to a popular vote through Measure 88. If it had been upheld, SB 833/
         M88 would have made 4-year driver licenses available to those who cannot prove legal
         presence in the United States. The campaign opposed to the referendum was managed
         by Oregonians for Immigration Reform, an anti-immigrants’ group in the state, as well
         as Protect      Oregon     Driver Licenses.
                                                                                                               2023-2027   DEI   PLAN   - 11
                                                    Policies and Actions   Perpetuating   Racial Inequities
       2022                     SB 1560 updates statutory references to individual who is not citizen or national of
                                United States to replace "alien" with "noncitizen."*

                                SB 1 created the Voluntary Self-Identification (VSI) of race and ethnicity program to
       2023
                                collect race and ethnicity information, which taxpayers and Oregonians can choose
                                to submit with their tax return. This will make Oregon the first state to collect such
                                information on tax returns.**




*SB 1560    (2022)   Enrolled       **SB   1 (2023) Enrolled
2023-2027   DEI   PLAN   - 12
ACTION
PLAN
The department examined and applied the State of Oregon DEI Action Plan’s ten strategies to the
planning process.




Strategy 1 — Agency Specific Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion Plan
The Oregon Counts on Us: Oregon Department of Revenue 2022-2027 Strategic Plan affirms the organizational
commitment to racial equity, diversity, equity, and inclusion. The State of Oregon is committed to establishing strong
leadership to eradicate racial and other forms of disparities in all aspects of state government. We look to center equity
in budgeting, planning, procurement, and policymaking. We work to strengthen public involvement through community
engagement, access to information, and decision-making opportunities. We work to improve equitable access to our
services, programs, and resources. We work to foster an inclusive workplace culture.


Through the strategic planning process we learned that many of the department’s customers face barriers that
interfere with their ability to voluntarily comply with the tax system, and appeal or pay amounts owed. Lack of trust in
the system, fear of taxes, complex tax situations, language barriers, inability to access tax help sites, and individual
hardships can prevent people from filing their taxes and from receiving other benefits they may be eligible for based on
tax filing status.


This Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion (DEI) Plan is a five-year plan. The DEI Plan will be monitored, evaluated, and
updated in alignment with the agency’s 2022-2027 Strategic Plan.



Action
  e e   e
 aan          1.1 Continue the department’s Revenue Committee on Diversity and Inclusion (RCDI). This commit-
 iw           tee acts as a steering committee for the Racial Equity Plan’s action plan. The committee’s mission is to
              foster a safe, diverse, and inclusive culture and improve equitable access to our services, programs,
              and resources for our employees and our customers.




                                                                                                       2023-2027   DEI   PLAN   - 13
   Strategy 2 — Agency Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion
   Infrastructure

   Department diversity, equity, and inclusion infrastructure is critical to the success of the implementation of DE!
   initiatives within the agency. The department embeds its DEI work across the agency to achieve its initiatives in
   this plan.



   Actions
            4         -



       fC) 22                2.1 Invest in data analysis to understand how our customers are experiencing the tax system. This
                             will be done through our Customer Experience Center of Excellence (CxCOE).




2023-2027       DEI   PLAN   - 14
Strategy 3 — Inclusive Communications

The focus for this strategy is to improve the accessibility of the department’s programs, activities, materials,
and media.



Actions

 Bs           3.1 Evaluate interpretation and translation service needs for each program. Determine gaps that exist
 FOS          and develop a plan for addressing gaps. To be considered for a future strategic plan.



       YP     3.2 Assess communication materials for racial bias and review to ensure materials reflect the diversity
 it=          of the community served.


       sez    3.3   Ensure communications are accessible, are messaged      in appropriate medium,     use trusted mes-
  «| ‘)       sengers, are trauma-informed, and involve communities in the development of communications.



   O         3.4 Language matters, be intentional in the words we use to identify, assist, and move the work.
  s          This work will be done by continuing to educate staff on best practices and providing them the tools
             they need to succeed



    ma *      3.5 Ensure the department       meets   Web   Content   Accessibility   Guidelines   (WCAG)   2.1    level AA
              accessibility requirements.




                                                                                                       2023-2027   DEI   PLAN   - 15
    Strategy 4 — Community Engagement

    We secured investments in our 2023-2025 budget for a community engagement program to provide outreach
    and opportunities for community members to be involved, collaborate, and co-create ideas and solutions with
    the department.



    Actions

       <a                 4.1 Continue to actively listen to the concerns of community members and culturally-specific
       \                  community-based organizations and invite them into the decision-making and budget processes. This
                          will be done by reaching out before or after our community engagement events to ensure they are
                          getting what they need and to receive feedback on how we can make improvements.



                          4.2 Appoint advisory boards and community-based groups to provide guidance on budget, policy, and
                          program development.
       ~O &




                          4.3 Continue to ensure community-based organizations understand how to access and participate
                          in decision-making and budget processes.



                          4.6 Continue to ensure community-based organizations understand how to access services for their
       eon |
        it's,
       77 /




                          clients or community members. This is done by attending state and county fairs, Veteran Stand Down
                          events, and other events to share information with organizations and community members.



                  )       4.7 Continue the feedback loop that was created so information coming from communities is doc-
                          umented,   shared with   DOR   leadership, and addressed.   Communicate   how   Revenue   incorporated
                          community input back to the community.




2023-2027   DEI   PLAN   - 16
Strategy 5 — Disaggregated Data as a Lever for Change
Confidentiality of taxpayer information and information security is critical to the work of the department. Under
current law tax returns do not include race or ethnicity data. Tax policy analysis across such demographic groups
is generally limited.


In 2021, the Oregon Legislature explored the possibility of the department allowing taxpayers to voluntarily
report their race and ethnicity as they file an annual personal income tax form. Under Senate Bill 1569 (2021),
the department would offer people a choice of race and ethnicity categories as developed by the Oregon Health
Authority for use on their Race, Ethnicity, Language, and Disability (REALD) forms.


During the 2023 legislative session, the Oregon Legislature passed Senate Bill 1, creating the Voluntary Self-
Identification (VSI) of race and ethnicity program. This law requires the department to offer people a choice of
submitting data on their race and ethnicity, based on categories as developed by the Oregon Health Authority
for use on their Race, Ethnicity, Language, and Disability (REALD) forms. The department created a form to
collect race and ethnicity information, which taxpayers and Oregonians can choose to submit with their tax
return, starting with tax year 2024. This will make Oregon the first state to collect such information on tax
returns. The department has also provided a way for people who don’t have a return-filing requirement, but
would like to submit their race and ethnicity information, to submit that information separately from a tax
return.


In January 2022, the department implemented a Racial Equity Impact Statement (REIS) process. It is important
to examine and understand the impact that administrative actions and policy decisions have on affected
customers. The racial impact statement process provides a way to formalize and focus analysis on communities
that have historically been harmed by unintended impacts of administrative actions and policies.




Actions
 PS          5.1 Prepare to collect customers race and ethnicity data since it has been authorized by the Oregon
             Legislature. This will go live for the 2025 tax season.

“@\>         5.2 Increase awareness of racial bias and equity impacts associated with new proposed revenue
             streams through conducting Racial Equity Impact Statements. This will be done by analyzing the pro-
             cess for effectiveness and providing training and guidance to employees on how to understand the
             impact of our decisions on underserved communities.




                                                                                                    2023-2027   DEI   PLAN   - 17
    Strategy 6 — Equitable Budget, Inclusive Budget Process and
    Investing in Target Communities

    The Oregon budget development process for the 2025-27 biennium changed in 2024. The instructions issued by
    the Governor’s Office and the Department of Administrative Services, Chief Financial Office (DAS CFO) instructed
    all State Agencies to work more collaboratively with both the Governor’s Office and DAS. Each State Agency met
    numerous times with their Governor’s Office policy advisor and their DAS CFO budget analyst to review, discuss,
    and ultimately get approval on all policy packages. This more integrated process allows the Governor’s Office to
    be a significant contributor to each agency’s budget request from the beginning of the budget development cycle.


    Governor Kotek has been mission-focused on increasing housing production and serving the needs of unsheltered
    or housing-insecure Oregonians, improving education outcomes for our youngest learners, and increasing access
    to behavioral health services. Additionally, her overarching goals include advancing racial justice and equity and
    improving the customer service Oregonians receive from their state government. To achieve these fundamental
    goals, her office has asked that executive branch agencies also focus on these core priorities, implementing
    existing programs, and coordinating closely with the Governor’s Office to align our efforts during the upcoming
    legislative session.


    To ensure there is a shared focus on ways government can best support low-income Oregonians and working
    families through more efficient program delivery, her office requests that agency budget and legislative requests
    continue to focus on improving core agency functions and deliverables (for example, information technology (IT),
    administration, etc.) to enhance customer service and outcomes.


     DOR has worked closely with the Governor’s Office and DAS CFO to ensure that its budget, including policy
    packages, advance customer service and improve core agency functions and deliverables.


    Currently, the department is aligning with the Governor’s Office’s direction on which agencies are to involve
    communities in the budget process. We were not one of the agencies selected but we will be reviewing this
    selection with every budget cycle to ensure we are in alignment.



    Actions
       Co)                6.1 Increase community engagement in the budget process.
                  A

       Cee
            A             6.2 Incorporate feedback from community into budget requests and department operations.
       ATA




2023-2027   DEI   PLAN   - 18
Strategy 7 — Contract Equity and Improving Agency
Procurement Processes

The department applies equitable contracting and purchasing practices to promote recovery and community
economic development for minority-owned, women-owned, service-disabled veteran-owned, and emerging small
businesses.



Actions

 ox         7.1 Ensure practices are in place to increase contracting opportunities for minority-owned, women-
 === amm    owned, service-disabled veteran-owned, and emerging small businesses (MWESB).


  F    .    7.2 Conduct proactive outreach with COBID vendors in Business Oregon’s database when contracting
  a    a    opportunities are available. This process is integrated into our procurement staff’s procedures.



  [=        7.3 Ensure that all procurement documents have a DEI (Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion) statement.
       id   This process is integrated into our procurement staff’s procedures.




                                                                                               2023-2027   DEI   PLAN   - 19
    Strategy 8 — Diversifying the Workforce and Creating an
    Inclusive Workplace

    The department invested in additional Human Resources capacity to understand our hiring practices and
    employee experiences for community of color. We had previously only used disaggregated data by race to track
    and monitor hiring processes, including recruitment, interview procedures, and hiring outcomes.



    Actions
             2 0
       qe                 8.1 Create a recruiting and marketing strategy for hiring people from historically and currently under-
                          served and under resourced communities in Oregon, those from non-traditional fields and academic
                          programs, and any intersection of these.


       a          DI      8.2 Continue to track, measure, and report changes in the demographics of agency employees to
        ul.               reach   parity with the diversity of Oregon.   Develop   a dashboard   to better understand   and   make
            —!—           decisions from the data.




2023-2027   DEI   PLAN   - 20
Strategy 9 — No tolerance for Racism, Hate, and
Discrimination

The department can help to ensure the safety of all Oregonians by protecting civil rights and taking active
measures against harassment, discrimination, racism, xenophobia, stigmatization, violence, and hate crimes.
Our agency’s values include seeking dignity and inclusion for all, that includes not tolerating racism, hate, or
discrimination toward our employees or our customers. The department has adopted clear processes for sharing
and reporting racial discrimination complaints.



Actions
 e   e        9.1 Continue to ensure the agency has structures in place to provide all staff with safe space to
(Cad)         com-municate concerns or ideas related to equity. Continuously monitor practice to ensure
              employees have a safe space; review agency policy every three years.


         NN   9.2   Continue to ensure a written and followed       internal process for responding to acts of racial
    Qe        discrimination   toward   Revenue   staff,   with   zero   tolerance   for   hostility,   macro    or         micro.
   ———        Continuously follow our internal    process for responding to acts of racial discrimination;              review
              agency policy every three years.




                                                                                                         2023-2027    DEI    PLAN    - 21
     Strategy 10 — Urgency, Transparency, and Accountability in All
     Operations
     The department must put in place real accountability and transparency in our equity-driven work. Without these
     two things, it is all too possible to deprioritize the urgent needs based on budget cycles and limited resources.
     Conditions will never be perfect. And while conditions may improve in the budget and through enterprise-level
     efforts, we must act on what we can do right now to reduce harm and help the people we serve.



     Actions
                      @
            eo /
        ,                     10.1 The department develops, tracks, measures, and analyzes performance and progress towards
                              equity actions in the DEI Plan. This is done monthly.
                  KXRKKS




                              10.2 The department reports on its progress towards taking the actions in the DEI Plan. This is done
                              yearly through annual reports.




2023-2027   DEI      PLAN   - 22
MVionitoring and Evaluating

Our DEI planning lifecycle will align with the department’s 2022-2027 Strategic Plan lifecycle including the
responsibilities and frequencies of monitoring and evaluating the implementation of the plan throughout the life
of the plan.


The strategic planning coordinator shall report quarterly progress to the Revenue Committee on Diversity and
Inclusion (RCDI). The strategic planning coordinator shall report annually to the Revenue Leadership Team on
progress and accomplishments.


The agency has included many of these strategies and actions in its Affirmative Action Plan to ensure alignment
across all strategic documents and clarity in our goals and focus.




Monitoring and Evaluating Schedule


e   Progress reports shared internally January, April, July, and October each year of the plan.


e   Annual Reports will be created in February of every year of the plan.


e   Plan actions will be updated in March of 2024 and 2026. New actions will be adopted in September of 2024
    and 2026.


e   =The plan will be updated in September of 2027 and adopted in 2028.




                                                                                                   2023-2027   DEI   PLAN   - 23
The following DEI Plan action items have been completed.


e       1.1 Restart the department’s Revenue Committee on Diversity and Inclusion (RCDI).


RCDI was restarted in January 2024 and has been meeting monthly. Quarterly, the committee discusses and           reviews
progress on action items in this plan. The committee’s mission is to foster a safe, diverse, and inclusive culture and
improve equitable access to our services, programs, and resources for our employees and our customers.


e       2.1 Invest in Human Resources capacity to understand how our hiring practices and employee experiences impact
        communities of color.


Secured resources to support this work through the 2023 legislative session. This work will be accomplished through
Strategy 8’s actions.


e       2.3 Review and improve the Oregon Department of Revenue’s external website navigation, level of
        program information provided, program contact information, and forms searchability.


Completed an external website migration to create a more modern, lean, and user-friendly customer experience with
our website.


e       3.1 Language access and literacy: Ensure multilingual Oregonians with limited English proficiency (LEP) and English
        language learners (ELL) have access to translated material in appropriate languages.


The agency currently offers written and verbal translation services as needed. This item is complete and is
now incorporated into our normal work functions.


e       3.3 Translate important information and guidance in a timely way. Information should be communicated clearly, in
        ways that are culturally and linguistically responsive to the intended community.

The agency currently offers written and verbal translation services as needed. The agency has a committee of
    bilingual employees who meet regularly to review and assist with translations. This item is complete and is now
    incorporated into our normal work functions.

    e   3.4 Shift focus from written to spoken word and other ways of sharing information: Language access also
         means not always relying on the written word to convey meaning, so consider video and audio recordings for
         communities who cannot read or write.


This is done through the agency’s social media platforms and providing information on the agency’s website. This
item is complete and is now incorporated into our normal work functions.


        2023-2027   DEI   PLAN   - 24
e   3.7 Align messaging with other agencies for mutually reinforcing vision and language about successes to set up
    the kind of repetition that is needed for people to feel the change happening and spread the word.


Communications aligns its messaging with the Department of Health Services (DHS), the Department of Employment,
other agencies. The team also participates in tasks forces to hear and share messages. This item is complete and is
now incorporated into our normal work functions.


e   3.9 Language matters, be intentional in the words we use to identify, assist, and move the work.


Communications updated the agency’s written style guide that incorporated greater guidance on language within it.
The team also created a writing training that is available to agency staff.


Human Resources provided information and instructions to agency staff on Microsoft’s accessibility tools.


e   4.1 Create infrastructure that actively listens to the concerns of community members and culturally-specific
    community-based organizations and invites them into the decision-making and budget processes.


Communications has created and integrated this infrastructure into their current processes by sending out a survey
or messages after community engagements. The team actively asks communities what they need prior to conducting
outreach. This includes how best to share the information and in which media.


e   4,2 Create a community engagement team to engage with community members and culturally-specific
    community-based organizations.


Communications updated the agency’s interested party list and made it easily available for agency staff. This list will be
updated regularly. A cross-divisional team was also created, and they meet regularly to work on outreach efforts.


e   4.5 Ensure community-based organizations understand how to access and participate in decision-making and
    budget processes.


The agency has aligned with the Governor’s Office direction on which agencies are to involve communities in the
budget process. Our agency was not selected and will continue to review this direction with each budget cycle.


e   4.6 Ensure community-based organizations understand how to access services for their clients or community
    members.


Communications has integrated this action item into their current processes which is done through their community
engagement events. The team provides information and handouts on different tax programs to help community
members understand how to access benefits. The team also added a toolkit to the agency’s external site so any
community members who are not able to attend the engagement events can access the information. The site also has
translated materials available to community member who may need it.




                                                                                                   2023-2027   DEI   PLAN   - 25
e     4.7 Create a feedback loop so information coming from communities is documented, shared with DOR leadership,
      and addressed. Communicate how Revenue incorporated community input back to the community.


After community engagement events, Communications sends out a survey or message to receive feedback. The team
also developed and uses a community engagement plan template to plan out the events and ensure the feedback is
shared, addressed, and communicated on every community engagement project.


e     6.1 Increase community engagement in the budget process.


The agency has aligned with the Governor’s Office direction on which agencies are to involve communities in the
budget process. Our agency was not selected and will continue to review this direction with each budget cycle.


e     6.2 Incorporate feedback from community into budget requests and department operations.


The agency has aligned with the Governor’s Office direction on which agencies are to involve communities in the
budget process. Our agency was not selected and will continue to review this direction with each budget cycle.


 e    8.1 Review and update position descriptions to include state equity vision, values, and goals and use gender
      neutral language.


 Position descriptions were to be updated by January 31, 2024. The agency’s Human       Resources has conducted an audit
and determined 75 percent of position descriptions are updated. The team will continue to work with managers to
ensure all position descriptions are updated.


 e    8.2 Build a comprehensive, inclusive, and accessible employee training program that enhances recruitment and
      retention, and positions employees to achieve success, including opportunities for promotion.


The agency completed this work through one of its strategic plan projects by creating a training list per classification
and posted it for access to all staff on the agency’s intranet. The agency also procured LinkedIn training and diversity,
equity, and inclusion training and posted them on intranet, as well as launched a mentorship program.


 Each division created onboarding plans and checklists for new employees.


 e    8.3 Create career development pathways for current employees, and knowledge retention and transfer
      processes for new employees.


 The agency completed this work through one of its strategic plan projects by creating a list of critical positions,
 updating procedures and workflows for areas of unique knowledge or experience in the agency, and creating cross-
 training and succession plan for highly technical positions.




2023-2027   DEI   PLAN   - 26
We are committed to diversity, equity,
and inciusion.

We are committed to transparent communication regarding the
progress in this plan. Internally, updates are shared quarterly with
the agency’s Revenue Committee on Diversity and Inclusion (RCDI)
and director. These quarterly meetings are essential in reviewing the
progress achieved, discussing challenges, and planning future actions.
The involvement of the director ensures the progress is monitored at
the highest level, fostering accountability and strategic oversight.


Externally, we communicate this plan’s progress to our partners and
customers through our annual reports. This comprehensive document
provides a detailed overview of the year’s achievements and future
plans. By sharing this information externally, we aim to provide
transparency and build trust with our partners. The annual reports
serve as an essential tool for sharing our commitment to diversity,
equity, and inclusion and our ongoing efforts to address systemic
inequalities.




                                                                         2023-2027   DEI   PLAN   - 27
APPENDIX
 Oregon Counts on Us: Oregon      Department of Revenue 2022-2027 Strategic Plan


State of Oregon Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion Action Plan:   A Roadmap to Racial Equity and Belonging


 Oregon      Department of Revenue 2023-25 Affirmative Action Plan




2023-2027   DEI   PLAN   - 28
OREGON   COUNTS ON US
