Environmental
Justice Council
Annual Report 2023

Submitted to the
Environmental Justice
Council
by the
OREGON
DEPARTMENT OF
ENERGY




January 2024
 ANNUAL ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE COUNCIL REPORT – 2023

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
The Oregon Department of Energy (ODOE) is in a period of growth and evolution. In 2021, ODOE
released its 2021-2024 Strategic Plan, which enabled the agency to set its direction; establish goals;
prioritize work; measure progress; and allocate limited time, resources, and attention – all while
fostering organizational cohesion, shared purpose, and common values. Key to this process was
updating the mission, vision, and values. This work was done in collaboration with peer organizations,
Tribal partners, and stakeholders, as well as ODOE staff. By writing the plan in partnership, it set the
foundation for meaningful engagement throughout the process and implementation.

The Strategic Plan led to ODOE’s Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion                ODOE recognizes the
Implementation Plan and Strategic Approach in June 2023 — a guiding              institutional power we
document to ensure diversity, equity, and inclusion (DEI) is embedded            have and the need to
throughout ODOE’s practices and culturally across the agency. As ODOE            meaningfully engage
prepares to receive an unprecedented amount of funding from the federal          with and prioritize
government to distribute across Oregon, we recognize the institutional           environmental justice
power we have and the need to meaningfully engage with and prioritize            communities in our
environmental justice communities in our state.                                  state.

ODOE continues to build DEI capacity and has created a Community Navigator Program and established
a Community Equity and Inclusion Analyst in support of this effort. With this new support, the agency
will be better able to meet the needs of environmental justice communities by prioritizing outreach,
resources, and technical assistance to Oregonians. While these positions continue to evolve, ODOE is
also navigating ways to be in conversation with organizations that uplift environmental justice
communities across the state. In partnership with the Coalition of Communities of Color, we have
developed a workgroup to ensure meaningful engagement throughout the federal grant process in
planning and shaping applications, reviewing implementation plans, and supporting metrics
development to ensure and demonstrate that benefits flow to environmental justice communities.

ODOE is also working to provide more cohesive and intentional internal opportunities for divisions and
programs to find leverage points and synergy around outreach and engagement. By creating an internal
Engagement Roundtable, ODOE is working to remove silos, reduce the burden placed on environmental
justice communities, and develop creative approaches to meaningful engagement. Throughout this
effort, ODOE must continue to consider the statutory authority, legislative budgetary allocations, and
available data in each program. This work, in combination with organizational growth and community
collaboration, will inform ODOE’s engagement framework that will be broadly applicable to the entire
agency.

ODOE is excited for the future. There is work to do and opportunities for growth. We appreciate that the
Environmental Justice Council can provide an invaluable perspective and tools that will be a part of
shaping ODOE’s progress. We are committed to participating in the process and look forward to the year
to come.




Oregon Department of Energy                                                                                i
  ANNUAL ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE COUNCIL REPORT – 2023


TABLE OF CONTENTS

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY .............................................................................................................................. i
AGENCY INTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................................... 1
AGENCY BUDGET AND REVENUE SOURCES ......................................................................................... 3
AGENCY DIVISIONS AND PROGRAMS .................................................................................................. 4
ADDRESSING ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE ISSUES (ORS 182.550 SECTION 1) ....................................... 13
PUBLIC PARTICIPATION AND MEANINGFUL INVOLVEMENT (ORS 182.535 SECTION 2) .................... 17
AGENCY ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE IMPACTS (ORS 182.550 SECTION 3) ......................................... 21
AGENCY ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE PROGRESS (ORS 182.550 SECTION 4 ....................................... 22
AGENCY ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE MAPPING TOOL INVOLVEMENT (ORS 182.550 SECTION 5) .... 23
LOOKING AHEAD ................................................................................................................................. 25
DEFINITIONS .......................................................................................................................................... 30
APPENDIX.............................................................................................................................................. 31
ACCESSIBLE LINKS USED IN DOCUMENT ............................................................................................. 32
FOR MORE INFORMATION ................................................................................................................... 34




Oregon Department of Energy                                                                                                                            ii
 ANNUAL ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE COUNCIL REPORT – 2023


AGENCY INTRODUCTION

About the Oregon Department of Energy

Our Mission
The Oregon Department of Energy helps Oregonians make informed decisions and maintain a resilient
and affordable energy system. We advance solutions to shape an equitable clean energy transition,
protect the environment and public health, and responsibly balance energy needs and impacts for
current and future generations.

Our Values
   • We listen and aspire to be inclusive and equitable in our work.
   • We are ethical and conduct our work with integrity.
   • We are accountable and fiscally responsible in our work and the decisions of our agency.
   • We are innovative and focus on problem-solving to address the challenges and opportunities in
       Oregon's energy sector.
   • We conduct our agency practices and processes in a transparent and fair way.

The Oregon Department of Energy achieves its mission by providing:
   • A Central Repository of Energy Data, Information, and Analysis
   • A Venue for Problem-Solving Oregon's Energy Challenges
   • Energy Education and Technical Assistance
   • Regulation and Oversight
   • Energy Programs and Activities

Agency Leadership
Janine Benner
Director
503-378-4040
janine.benner@energy.oregon.gov

Ruchi Sadhir
Associate Director
Strategic Engagement
& Tribal Liaison
971-209-0996
ruchi.sadhir@energy.oregon.gov

Todd Cornett
Assistant Director
Energy Facility Siting
503-428-2962
todd.cornett@energy.oregon.gov




Oregon Department of Energy                                                                          1
 ANNUAL ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE COUNCIL REPORT – 2023

Pandian Krishnaswamy
Assistant Director
Energy Development Services
503-508-1244
Pandian.Krishnaswamy@energy.oregon.gov

Max Woods
Assistant Director
Nuclear Safety & Emergency Preparedness
503-551-8209
maxwell.woods@energy.oregon.gov

Michael Williams
Assistant Director
Central Services
503-559-1914
michael.a.williams@energy.oregon.gov

Alan Zelenka
Assistant Director
Energy Planning & Innovation
541-228-6331
alan.zelenka@energy.oregon.gov

Environmental Justice Personnel
Lauren Rosenstein
Community Equity and Inclusion Analyst
Strategic Engagement Team
503-881-9790
lauren.rosenstein@energy.oregon.gov

Sarah Moehrke
Community Navigator
Strategic Engagement Team
503-508-2352
Sarah.moehrke@energy.oregon.gov

Advisory Boards and Commissions
   • Energy Facility Siting Council
   • Oregon Climate Action Commission
   • Oregon Hanford Clean-Up Board
   • Energy Advisory Work Group
   • Community Renewable Energy Grant Program Advisory Committee




Oregon Department of Energy                                        2
 ANNUAL ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE COUNCIL REPORT – 2023

AGENCY BUDGET AND REVENUE SOURCES

For the 2023-2025 biennium, the Oregon Department of Energy (ODOE) has an overall budget of $170.5
million and an operating budget of $53.1 million. The operating budget is funded as follows:
    • 16.1% Federal Funds
    • 27.0% General Funds
    • 11.1% Other Revenues
    • 9.0% Program Fees
    • 3.5% Charges for Services
    • 3.5% Small-Scale Energy Loan Program
    • 29.7% Energy Supplier Assessment

This budget supports five agency divisions (described in more detail below):
    • 32.0% Administrative Services
    • 20.3% Planning & Innovation
    • 30.2% Energy Development Services
    • 11.0% Energy Facility Siting
    • 6.5% Nuclear Safety and Emergency Preparedness

More information and infographics are available here: How-ODOE-Funded.pdf (oregon.gov)

In addition to ODOE’s legislatively approved budget, the agency anticipates receiving additional funding
from the federal government through the Inflation Reduction Act and Infrastructure Investment and
Jobs Act. This funding comes with additional guidance from the federal government directing how the
agency will prioritize spending. For example, President Joe Biden issued Executive Order 14008, Tackling
the Climate Crisis at Home and Abroad. The Office of Energy Justice and Equity describes Section 223 of
EO 14008 as establishing “...the Justice40 Initiative, which directs 40% of the overall benefits of certain
Federal investments – including investments in clean energy and energy efficiency; clean transit;
affordable and sustainable housing; training and workforce development; the remediation and
reduction of legacy pollution; and the development of clean water infrastructure – to flow to
disadvantaged communities (DACs).”

The Justice40 Initiative outlines the U.S. Department of Energy’s priorities as:
  1.   Decrease energy burden in disadvantaged communities (DACs).
  2.   Decrease environmental exposure and burdens for DACs.
  3.   Increase parity in clean energy technology (e.g., solar, storage) access and adoption in DACs.
  4.   Increase access to low-cost capital in DACs.
  5.   Increase clean energy enterprise creation and contracting (MBE/DBE) in DACs.
  6.   Increase clean energy jobs, job pipeline, and job training for individuals from DACs.
  7.   Increase energy resiliency in DACs.
  8.   Increase energy democracy in DACs.



Oregon Department of Energy                                                                               3
 ANNUAL ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE COUNCIL REPORT – 2023

As a beneficiary of federal funds, ODOE must ensure that 40 percent of all federal funding meets these
requirements. This federal requirement is consistent with ODOE’s commitment in our strategic plan to
build practices and processes to achieve more inclusive and equitable outcomes. ODOE recognizes the
responsibilities it has to all Oregonians and specifically to those who have been and continue to be
marginalized and excluded.


AGENCY DIVISIONS AND PROGRAMS

Administrative Services

The Administrative Services Division consists of the Director’s Office and Central Services. Central
Services provides core support functions such as budget development, cash flow monitoring, contract
development, grants management, financial services, purchasing, and facilities management. The
Director provides operational and policy leadership and direction for the department. The Director’s
Office functions include internal audit, communications, human resources, strategic engagement, and
government relations. The Director’s Office led the process to establish a 2021-2024 Strategic Plan for
the agency in 2020, which has focus areas that include “expanding and improving stakeholder
engagement” and “building practices and processes to achieve more inclusive and equitable outcomes.”
The Strategic Engagement Team was established in 2021 as part of implementing this strategic plan, and
this team has recently added new positions that center environmental justice communities – the
Community Equity and Inclusion Analyst and the Community Navigator.

Energy Planning and Innovation

The Energy Planning and Innovation (P&I) Division provides information, analysis, technical assistance,
and project management to inform policies and develop programs to achieve cost effective energy
efficiency, promote an equitable energy transition, expand the use of renewable and alternative energy
resources, promote sustainable transportation options, support more resilient energy infrastructure,
and combat climate change. The division includes two sections: Energy Efficiency and Conservation
supports the advancement of energy efficiency standards and codes and also provides analysis and
technical assistance to improve energy efficiency in the public, residential, commercial, industrial, and
agricultural sectors; and Energy Technology and Policy focuses on renewable energy resources, utility
planning, sustainable transportation, and climate change. This division also provides technical and
administrative support to the Oregon Climate Action Commission (formerly Oregon Global Warming
Commission).

                    The P&I team is made up of staff who are often tasked with analyzing or meeting
When the most       federal and state energy requirements while seeking opportunities to serve
vulnerable          Justice40 and environmental justice communities. This team cares deeply about
people and          their work and how it affects Oregonians. As they collect reporting data, it is not
areas of the        simply to check a box. There is constant consideration to understand how they, and
state are best
                    the programs, can best serve Oregonians who are most impacted by energy policies
served, all
Oregonians will
                    and decisions. The culture and values of the Energy Planning and Innovation team
benefit.            prioritize EJ communities with the understanding that when the most vulnerable
                    people and areas of the state are best served, all Oregonians will benefit.


Oregon Department of Energy                                                                                 4
 ANNUAL ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE COUNCIL REPORT – 2023

The team conducts research, analyzes data, and writes comprehensive policy analysis and
recommendations, which can be seen through various legislatively directed studies – some of which
specify outreach or engagement approaches such as forming advisory committees. While there is no
overarching statutory requirement to engage environmental justice communities, the P&I team
continually seeks guidance, information, and feedback to center the needs of EJ communities. By
intentionally seeking to include EJ communities in policy analysis, ODOE commits to centering the needs
of people and places that are the most burdened which will, in turn, have the greatest impact across the
state.

The importance of prioritizing environmental justice communities can be seen throughout the 2022
Biennial Energy Report in the ways ODOE reports coordinated efforts with Tribal governments, key state
agencies, local governments, the Environmental Justice Council, and the public. The report also
demonstrates how data are used, whenever possible, to better understand effects on specific
demographic communities based on income, race, disability, geography, and more. ODOE is seeking
ways to increase awareness and collected data that demonstrates the impacts of each demographic
community named in HB 4077’s definition of “environmental justice communities” through future
reports.

The team consistently seeks resources and tools that demonstrate the gaps of service and needs of EJ
communities through cross-agency policy and program discussions, utilizing data found through the
census and other government organizations, and collaborating with other agencies and organizations.
The P&I team tries to minimize the burden set on environmental justice communities to participate in
multiple programs, advisory groups, councils, and informational sessions, but also recognizes that
without participation, they may miss first-hand accounts, anecdotal personal stories, and the ability to
follow-up with relevant conversations. It is a complex balance, which both the team and the rest of
ODOE are working to achieve.

One approach the team is taking is to work closely with similar agencies to share information. The goal
of the team is to analyze data to inform policy. If there are other agencies who are doing similar work,
then collaborating across fields is vital to the success of individual policies and meeting the agency
mission.

The P&I team maintains Energy by the Numbers, a data-forward section of the agency’s Biennial Energy
Report. As described in the Biennial Energy Report, the data aim to help “...Oregonians make informed
decisions about their energy choices and advance solutions that will shape an equitable, clean energy
transition. ODOE serves as the state’s central repository of energy data, information, and analysis, and
fulfills this role through rigorous data collection, production standards, and quality assurance protocols.”

In alignment with the statutory requirements for the report, common data and analyses found in the
report include:
    • Energy consumption, expenditures, and costs
    • Generation and transmission
    • Production, imports, and exports
    • Energy sectors, markets, and jobs
    • Technologies and resources, including facilities


Oregon Department of Energy                                                                                5
 ANNUAL ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE COUNCIL REPORT – 2023

   •   Energy efficiency and conservation
   •   The effects of energy use, including greenhouse gas emissions

Beyond individual use, these data are available to organizations, municipalities, and the legislature to
support policy making decisions that demonstrate demographic and geographic priorities that lead to
energy efficiency and resiliency in communities who hold the greatest burden.

An example where this ethos is apparent is with the P&I team’s work to develop methods that include
environmental justice communities in the planning, delivery, and reporting of soon-to-be federally
funded Home Efficiency Rebate Program (HOMES) and Home Electrification and Appliance Rebate
(HEAR) Programs. The P&I program leads have partnered with ODOE grant experts internally to best
prepare and understand how the influx of federal funding might ensure that outcomes best serve
Oregonians. To better understand the needs of EJ communities throughout Oregon, the HOMES and
HEAR team presented specific information about the requirements and potential opportunities to the
Environmental Justice Leaders Workgroup, which is co-led by ODOE and the Coalition of Communities of
Color. This workgroup is made up of representatives of organizations who are in and serve Oregon’s
environmental justice communities. The goal of the presentation and discussion was to build a
conversation that led to answering questions that will determine how the grant application is written –
including how the funding is distributed and how ODOE can best support organizations throughout the
process. It is ODOE’s intention to continue to improve upon and use this model throughout the entirety
of the grant process for the HOMES and HEAR program and to replicate it as it is appropriate for other
federal funding opportunities.

Energy Development Services Incentives Programs

The Energy Development Services (EDS) Division administers energy incentive programs for households,
businesses, and the public sector to save energy and improve efficiency, support clean energy, and
increase energy resilience for Oregonians. These programs are both legislatively directed and state
funded as well as federally funded through grants from the U.S. Department of Energy and other federal
agencies. While the P&I staff have been leading efforts to engage and hear feedback on program design
before submitting federal grant applications, the EDS team implements and administers the federally
funded programs once the funds are received and staff are hired.

The Oregon Department of Energy currently hosts five active state-funded incentive programs: the
Oregon Solar + Storage Rebate Program, Energy Efficient Wildfire Rebuilding Incentive, Community
Renewable Energy Grant Program, Community Heat Pump Deployment Program, and Oregon Rental
Home Heat Pump Program.

Upcoming programs funded by federal grants through the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act and
the Inflation Reduction Act must comply with Justice40 Initiative requirements to direct 40 percent of
benefits to “disadvantaged communities” as defined by the Climate and Economic Justice Screening Tool
(CEJST). ODOE must also follow any federal guidance or legislative direction that further outlines funding
allocation requirements. It is ODOE’s intention to meet and work to surpass federal requirements where
possible to meet the needs of Oregon’s environmental justice communities.




Oregon Department of Energy                                                                                6
 ANNUAL ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE COUNCIL REPORT – 2023

Throughout ODOE’s state-funded incentive programs, staff develop outreach and engagement plans
before launching a program by hosting webinars and sending written communication. Many programs
were developed and launched during the pandemic, which made it difficult if not impossible to gather in
person. ODOE’s new Community Navigator Program provides more of an opportunity to visit people
where they are to gather information and report back to program staff. Looking to the future, ODOE
would like to encourage more in-person meetings with EDS programmatic staff present. In hosting
opportunities for feedback from the outset of a program, ODOE is better situated to provide appropriate
and culturally relevant communications and information sharing. Additionally, the EDS team continues
to find ways to reduce barriers to participation and increase incentives for environmental justice
communities.

   •   Oregon Solar + Storage Rebate Program (2023-OSSRP-Legislative-Report.pdf (oregon.gov)) was
       established by ODOE at the direction of HB 2618 in 2019. The legislation directed the department
       to develop a program to provide rebates for the purchase, construction, or installation of solar
       electric systems and paired solar and storage systems. While “environmental justice”
       communities were not referenced, HB 2618 requires that 25 percent of rebates be reserved for
       low- or moderate-income residential customers and low-income service providers. In the
       calendar year 2022, the program reserved or rebated 2,868 projects, representing over $8.90
       million in funds. $3.14 million, or 35 percent of the committed funding, was for projects owned
       by low- and medium-income owners or low-income service providers.

       This program includes follow-up engagement to better understand how to serve environmental
       justice communities and potential gaps by sending an anonymous survey to participants to learn
       more about demographic data, including race or ethnicity and if someone in the household has a
       disability. At the time of the Oregon Solar + Storage Rebate Program 2023 Report, ODOE had
       received 951 responses that demonstrated that there was disproportionate participation from
       people who identify as white. Note that this survey was sent to more than 3000 homeowners
       that participated in the program and received a rebate. ODOE is exploring ways to create more
       inclusive communications and program outreach to ensure environmental justice communities
       have access and can participate in programs.

   •   Energy Efficient Wildfire Rebuilding Incentive Program was developed after more than 5,000
       structures and over 1 million acres were burned in the 21 wildfires that devastated Oregon
       communities over Labor Day weekend in 2020. HB 5006 allocated about $10.8 million in General
       Fund dollars to ODOE to incentivize energy efficient rebuilding of residential and commercial
       structures that were destroyed in this geographic area. This program prioritizes environmental
       justice communities by providing higher incentives for low- and moderate-income households.

   •   Community Renewable Energy Grant Program was developed in HB 2021 to create a $50 million
       fund at ODOE to provide grants for planning and developing community renewable energy and
       energy resilience projects (the Legislature allocated an additional $20 million to the program in
       2023-2025). The program rules were created through feedback and support of the Community
       Renewable Energy Grant Program Advisory Committee, which includes representatives of
       environmental justice organizations. The Community Renewable Energy Grant Program is open
       to Oregon Tribes, public bodies, and consumer owned utilities. At least 50 percent of the grant



Oregon Department of Energy                                                                                7
 ANNUAL ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE COUNCIL REPORT – 2023

       funds must be awarded for projects that serve environmental justice communities, as defined in
       legislation. There were 39 awardees of this grant in 2023, including multiple community colleges
       and governments that qualify as Justice40’s disadvantaged communities.

   •   Heat Pump Incentive Programs were created in response to the heat dome event of 2021, during
       which at least 100 Oregonians died of heat-related illness—often in their own homes. The
       legislature passed SB 1536, which directed ODOE to develop a $10 million Community Heat
       Pump Deployment Program, create a $15 million Oregon Rental Home Heat Pump Program for
       installation of heat pumps by landlords, fund a $2 million grant for a community cooling center
       program for extreme heat events, and conduct a cooling needs study to identify existing
       cooling—as well as barriers to cooling access—in government supported housing.

       The heat pump programs, like other incentive and reimbursement programs, demonstrate that
       the non-income restricted funding is more quickly reserved, where the low- to moderate-income
       funding requires more community outreach. ODOE is continuing to analyze this data
       quantitatively and qualitatively to determine how to better support environmental justice
       communities in this program and all programs.

As more federal funds become available through the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act and the
Inflation Reduction Act, ODOE continues to work to better provide front-end information and gain
community feedback so that the agency can best structure programs to meet the needs of
environmental justice communities and remove barriers to access.

Energy Facility Siting

The Energy Facility Siting Division works with energy developers proposing new facilities and current
operators of energy facilities to meet the state’s energy needs by ensuring large electrical generating
facilities, transmission lines, and natural gas pipelines and other large energy facilities are built,
operated, and retired consistent with Oregon’s energy policy, as well as air, water, land use, cultural
resource, natural resource, safety, and other policies. This division provides staff support to the seven-
member Governor-appointed and Senate-confirmed Energy Facility Siting Council (EFSC), coordinates
the energy facility siting process, oversees compliance with existing facility site certificates, and
coordinates key federal energy siting projects for the state. The Division coordinates input about
proposed new facilities or amendments to existing facilities from other state agencies, tribes, local
governments, contractors, and the public.
The Oregon Department of Energy facilitates the Energy Facility Siting Council facility siting process,
which consolidates the statutes, rules, ordinances, regulations, policies, and permits of state agencies,
local governments, and Tribal governments (collectively known as Reviewing Agencies) into a single
review process. Potentially affected Tribal governments are identified after consultation with the
Legislative Commission on Indian Services. Reviewing Agencies are notified and requested to review and
provide comments throughout the process, and they are eligible to receive reimbursement for any time
spent reviewing and providing feedback.




Oregon Department of Energy                                                                              8
 ANNUAL ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE COUNCIL REPORT – 2023

The Review is a standards-based process that includes the following steps:
   1. Notice of intent (high level overview of the proposed project) submitted by developer
          a. Notice with public comment period
          b. Public informational meeting in the vicinity of the project
          c. Memo to Reviewing Agencies and a request to review and comment
   2. Project order (list of the applicable requirements that must be included in the application)
      completed by Siting Division staff
   3. Application for site certificate submitted by developer
          a. Review of preliminary application by the Department and Reviewing Agencies
          b. Notice to the public when application is deemed complete
          c. Public informational meeting in the vicinity of the project
   4. Draft proposed order (Department’s first recommendation of whether or not proposed project
      meets all requirements) completed by Siting Division Staff
          a. Public and reviewing agency notice with comment period
          b. Public hearing in the vicinity of the project and in front of EFSC
   5. Proposed order (Department’s second recommendation of whether or not proposed project
      meets all requirements, taking into consideration all comments received during the Draft
      Proposed Order stage) completed by Siting Division staff
   6. Contested case proceeding (run by an independent third-party hearing officer)
   7. Final order (and site certificate if the project is approved) approved by Energy Facility Siting
      Council
   8. Appeal to Oregon Supreme Court (who has six months to issue their final opinion)

Siting is a standards-based process which means there are formalized rules, governance, and legislation
that dictates what requirements must be met. It is the applicant’s burden to prove through a
preponderance of evidence that they meet all requirements. Siting standards include soil protection;
land use; protected areas; fish and wildlife habitat; historical, cultural, and archaeological resources;
wildfire prevention and risk mitigation, and more. Many of these standards intersect with environmental
justice communities geographically as well as with environmental justice concerns at large– though at
the time of the standards’ creation, ‘environmental justice’ was not a used framework.

The limitations of Siting’s substantive and procedural standards require the team to think linearly and in
terms of legal obligations. While the standards are immoveable, the team has found ways to engage
environmental justice communities in the process with the goal of eliciting more participation and
feedback from those who will be the most affected by a project. One way this may be seen is in the
effort of the team to provide as much lead time as possible for community participation through public
comment, information meetings, and hearing processes. While the rules dictate people must be given
21 days to comment on the Draft Proposed Order, the Siting team will set the comment period as high
as 60 days for more complicated and controversial projects. Additionally, they host meetings both in-
person and virtually to support multiple methods of participation, travel to project areas to reduce
location barriers, and hold hearings in the evening.




Oregon Department of Energy                                                                              9
 ANNUAL ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE COUNCIL REPORT – 2023

While the Siting team collects information, analyzes standards, and hosts meetings, the Energy Facility
Siting Council is the decision-making entity. The Council is not legally required to attend Draft Proposed
Order hearings, though because they so strongly value hearing directly from affected communities,
being present for these hearings is now a standard part of the process. A goal of the Energy Facility
                                                                              Siting Division is to provide
It is the goal of the Energy Facility Siting Division to provide culturally   culturally responsible and
responsible and respectful communications and opportunities for               respectful communications
participation throughout the process – an area they are continuing to         and opportunities for
explore while still fulfilling legal standard requirements.                   participation throughout
                                                                              the process.
Nuclear Safety and Emergency Preparedness

The Nuclear Safety & Emergency Preparedness (NSEP) Division works to protect the environment and
Oregonians from exposure to hazards by monitoring and engaging in radioactive waste cleanup activities
at the Hanford Nuclear Site; preparing and testing nuclear emergency preparedness plans; and
implementing Oregon’s radioactive waste disposal regulations. The Division also leads the agency’s work
on energy emergency preparedness; in the event of a petroleum shortage, the division will implement
the state’s Oregon Fuel Action Plan to manage fuel supply to emergency and essential services. Finally,
the Division is developing the Oregon’s Energy Security Plan, which assesses threats and risks to all
energy systems in Oregon and proposes measures to mitigate identified risks.

                                               Throughout the team’s work, an emphasis is placed on Tribal
The goal of the team is not to speak           engagement and ensuring formal Tribal representation on
for any Tribe or environmental justice
                                               advisory boards, councils, and commissions. The goal of the
community, but to understand the
needs of the communities to
                                               team is not to speak for any Tribe or environmental justice
provide support in removing barriers           community, but to understand the needs of the
and lead action.                               communities to provide support in removing barriers and
                                               lead action.

The NSEP team is also responsible for representing Oregon’s interest in the clean-up of the Hanford
Nuclear site. The Oregon Hanford Cleanup Board, which includes a representative of the Confederated
Tribes of the Umatilla Indian Reservation, met three times in 2023. The Hanford Natural Resources
Trustee Council, which is responsible for conducting the Natural Resources Damage Assessment (NRDA)
and Restoration at the Hanford site, actively worked on assessment and planning activities throughout
2023. The Council membership includes the Confederated Tribes of the Umatilla Indian Reservation, the
Nez Perce Tribe, and the Yakama Nation, in addition to the states of Oregon and Washington and federal
agencies.

The protection of the Columbia River and surrounding land is of the utmost importance for Oregon’s
Hanford cleanup policy and NRDA program. The efforts to protect this land are rooted in Indigenous and
Tribal ecological and cultural practices with the goal to return the area to place where people can
conduct traditional practice, as the Hanford site includes areas of religious significance in addition to
hunting, fishing, and gathering practices. To meet this goal, ODOE supports and encourages US DOE, the
Environmental Protection Agency, Washington State, and other partners to center cultural humility and
listen to the needs of the Tribal communities who are the most impacted. Building engagement and
collaboration is done by meeting with Tribal leadership, in-person whenever it is possible, to find a path


Oregon Department of Energy                                                                              10
 ANNUAL ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE COUNCIL REPORT – 2023

forward that brings the area to a level of remediation that supports the cultural practices of Tribes since
time immemorial.

The work of the Division to collaborate with Tribes in the clean-up efforts of the Hanford Nuclear Site is
a model for the team’s desire to continue this level of engagement throughout all programs with all
environmental justice communities. In support of the Division’s work on emergency fuel preparedness
and energy security planning, ODOE staff regularly meet with and engage with Tribal Government staff
to share information, understand each party's needs, and work to find solutions.

Environmental Justice Highlights

   •   ODOE released the Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion Implementation Plan and Strategic Approach
       in June 2023, which builds on ODOE’s 2021-2024 Strategic Plan.
   •   ODOE convened an environmental justice roundtable in 2022 to inform legislative concept and
       funding ideas, which led to ODOE’s bill for a Community Navigator program. The bill passed in
       2023 and the new Community Navigator Program has now launched to help support
       environment justice communities across the state in achieving their energy goals by accessing
       opportunities in state-funded and federally funded programs.
   •   ODOE requested funding, which was approved in the 2023 session, and created a new
       Community Equity and Inclusion Analyst position to conduct research, collect information, and
       provide advice to ODOE programs and teams about environmental justice, equity, and inclusion
       in the energy sector with a focus on requirements and policies in HB 4077 (2022).
   •   In August 2023, ODOE began hosting workshops for organizations that serve environmental
       justice communities to share information and provide more transparency throughout the federal
       grant funding process. The organizations that participated found the share outs helpful and
       wanted more opportunities to provide feedback. ODOE formed a closer working relationship
       with the Coalition for Communities of Color (the Coalition), who were awarded separate
       foundation funding to co-host future workshops and provide $10,000 of funding to qualifying,
       participating organizations who joined the workgroup. With this funding, ODOE and the Coalition
       formalized the approach to prioritize the voices of environmental justice communities who are
       the most impacted. The goal of this “Environmental Justice Leaders Workgroup” is to: (1) share
       information about energy-related federal funding opportunities, (2) match opportunities to
       needs, (3) ensure metrics and data are demonstrating benefits flowing to disadvantaged
       communities, and (4) create a forum to share experiences across organizations.
   •   ODOE performed a preliminary gap analysis to understand the regions that are least represented
       in the Environmental Justice Leaders Workgroup using the Climate and Economic Justice
       Screening Tool (CEJST), finding the need to reach out and build more relationships with Eastern
       Oregon and Coastal communities. Further action is being taken by ODOE to ensure there is
       representation that demonstrates a nexus to J40 requirements through the CEJST mapping tool.




Oregon Department of Energy                                                                              11
 ANNUAL ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE COUNCIL REPORT – 2023

   Solar For All
   On June 28, 2023, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) released a $7
   billion Solar for All Notice of Funding Opportunity. Through a competitive
   process, EPA will award up to 60 Solar for All grants to states, territories, Tribal
   governments, municipalities, and nonprofits to expand the number of low-income and
   disadvantaged communities primed for residential solar investment—enabling millions of low-
   income households to access affordable, resilient, and clean solar energy.

   The Oregon Solar for All Coalition (OSFAC) applied for this competitive award, with ODOE serving
   as the coalition lead and Energy Trust of Oregon and Bonneville Environmental Foundation as
   coalition members. ODOE submitted its Notice of Intent to the EPA on July 28, 2023 and received
   Oregon legislative approval to apply for the grant. The final grant application was submitted on
   October 11, 2023, and requested $138,679,606 for Oregon.

   The grant application describes how it will maximize access to the program for low-income and
   disadvantaged communities (DACs) in Oregon. The coalition-style approach allows each of the
   members to provide customized support within their regions and areas of expertise in five
   identified pathways proposed: (1) enable solar installations at single-family households with little
   to no upfront customer cost; (2) point of sale rebates for multifamily buildings that provide
   tangible benefits to low-income residents; (3) financial and technical assistance to develop
   community solar projects under the Oregon Community Solar Program (OCSP), a program
   regulated by the Oregon Public Utility Commission; (4) financial and technical assistance to
   develop Consumer-Owned Utility Territories’ Community Solar (COUTCS) projects in areas
   outside of OCSP coverage; and (5) workforce development activities.

   As part of application development, the OSFAC members had individual conversations with a
   wide range of organizations and stakeholders. The OSFAC members also held a two-hour webinar
   in August 2023, presenting information about the application concept and seeking feedback
   through an electronic portal. ODOE coordinated a meeting specifically with leaders from
   environmental justice and community-based organizations that work in Oregon to provide
   information and seek feedback on how to best structure this program.

   The OSFAC will maximize the breadth and diversity of the communities served throughout
   Oregon, while still prioritizing low-income and DACs. Members of DACs that are not low-income
   may be served in specific program components. However, some aspects of the OSFAC program
   design will provide benefits to all Oregonians seeking to benefit from solar technologies. For
   example, OSFAC efforts to provide consumer education or workforce training are done so to
   support OSFAC objectives — but benefits will accrue to a broader base of Oregonians.

   In December 2023, ODOE presented the Oregon Solar for All information to the Racial Justice
   Council Equity Committee to both share out and hear important feedback about the accessibility
   of the program and how to increase awareness amongst environmental justice communities.

   *Please find further information about ODOE’s commitment to environmental justice
   communities in the OSFAC narrative: 2023-ODOE-Solar-For-All-Narrative.pdf (oregon.gov)



Oregon Department of Energy                                                                               12
 ANNUAL ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE COUNCIL REPORT – 2023

ADDRESSING ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE ISSUES (ORS 182.550 SECTION 1)

The Oregon Department of Energy began to develop a strategic plan in 2019. Through the process,
ODOE centered diversity, equity, and inclusion (DEI) in both the research and writing of the plan as well
as the implementation occurring through the end of 2024. By ensuring that DEI is rooted throughout
each phase of the Strategic Plan, ODOE has a defined process for incorporating environmental justice
factors into agency operations and decision-making. Throughout this work, ODOE must consider the
statutory authority, legislative budgetary allocations, and available data in each program. With this
knowledge, ODOE can then begin to overlap understanding where the most affected environmental
justice communities are and find intersectionality to best deliver programs that meet the needs of
Oregonians.

To best understand ODOE’s process for incorporating environmental justice factors into agency
operations and decision-making, it is important to first recognize the concepts and commitments
outlined in the strategic plan, which are further highlighted and built upon in the Diversity, Equity, and
Inclusion Implementation Plan and Strategic Approach in June 2023:
    • Acknowledgement that our organization and processes do not yet fully represent the dimensions
        of diversity in people and viewpoints in the state.
    • Recognition that it will take more resources to ensure equity in the energy sector.
    • DEI needs to be integrated throughout our strategic plan and we want ODOE to be held
        accountable to being a better partner.
    • We need to build trust and develop relationships that will enable us to meaningfully engage with
        diverse communities.
    • ODOE will show up with a spirit of openness, learning, and humility, and will commit to following
        up, sharing our lessons learned, and offering support through partnerships and action.

In the strategic plan there are five “imperatives” or focus areas. One of the imperatives is to “Build
Practices and Processes to Achieve More Inclusive and Equitable Outcomes.” This is further outlined in
the following initiatives that are currently being implemented through 2024:
   •   Conduct assessment of current agency decision-making and advisory bodies to identify
       opportunities for more diverse representation.
   •   Develop a communication plan and engagement process collaboratively with historically and
       currently underserved populations and communities that includes actively listening, being
       responsive, and incorporating feedback in the development of programs, policies, and other
       areas of work.
   •   Build on existing Tribal engagement efforts by expanding internal responsibilities and resources,
       and reaching out to Tribes to assess and amplify shared interests and priorities.
   •   Enhance ODOE's internship program to provide benefits to interns, such as paid positions and
       greater access to educational credits, to help build a more diverse network of ODOE and energy
       industry employees.
   •   Develop a Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion Action Plan in partnership with historically and
       currently underserved populations and communities.




Oregon Department of Energy                                                                             13
 ANNUAL ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE COUNCIL REPORT – 2023

   •   Create inclusive, multi-lingual communications to increase accessibility of agency program
       information and services.
   •   Conduct agency-wide DEI assessment and training to measure and increase employee
       knowledge, awareness, and skills.
   •   Collect and analyze demographic data to better inform ODOE’s work and to identify barriers to
       achieving equitable energy outcomes.

Additionally, ODOE must incorporate environmental justice factors into agency programs as required in
Justice40 and HB 4077. HB 4077 provides a clear definition of environmental justice communities, which
is also referenced in ODOE’s programs that are state funded, as “communities of color, communities
experiencing low incomes, communities experiencing health inequities, Tribal communities, rural
communities, remote communities, coastal communities, communities with limited infrastructure,
communities traditionally underrepresented in public processes and adversely harmed by
environmental and health hazards.” Justice40 uses the terminology “disadvantaged communities” for
ODOE programs that are federally funded.

The Justice40 initiative is required by federal agencies in using grant funding from the Infrastructure
Investment and Jobs Act (IIJA) and Inflation Reduction Act (IRA). This means that ODOE must
demonstrate that at least 40 percent of the federal funding we receive for programs are benefiting
communities who have been identified as “disadvantaged communities” in the Climate and Economic
Justice Screening Tool. Through a strict grant and federal reporting process, all decision-making is rooted
in serving Oregon’s disadvantaged communities. The Climate and Economic Justice Screen Tool (CEJST)
which, “... uses datasets to identify indicators of burdens and shows these burdens in census tracts.
Census tracts are small units of geography. Census tract boundaries for statistical areas are determined
by the U.S. Census Bureau once every ten years.”

ODOE also recognizes that the CEJST tool is already outdated. Since 2010 when the census tracts were
created and census data was collected in 2020, many communities have been devastated by wildfires
and catastrophic weather events, experienced drought, suffered from economic loss, and other
substantial incidents that may change the environmental impacts to their communities. A recognized
challenge is the CEJST map does not completely align with environmental justice communities
considered by the State.

For programs and activities that are not federally funded or do not have a specific reference to the HB
4077 definition, ODOE relies on the agency’s strategic plan focus on currently and historically
underserved communities and populations, Tribal governments, and Black, Indigenous, and People of
Color, and building agency practices and processes for more inclusive and equitable outcomes. To stay
informed of community impacts, ODOE relies on other agency mapping tools such as the U.S.
Department of Agriculture’s Rural Development eligibility mapping tool and census data as a resource,
though not for decision-making.

With an evolution of guidance from the federal government and the continued efforts of the state,
ODOE recognizes that this work is adaptive and ongoing. With this knowledge, ODOE requested a
budget and position authority, and hired a new staff position – the Community Equity and Inclusion
Analyst. This position will assist strategic plan implementation efforts and provide support throughout



Oregon Department of Energy                                                                               14
 ANNUAL ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE COUNCIL REPORT – 2023

the agency to build more processes and ways to track environmental justice issues that have been
identified.

Internal to the agency, there are efforts to share information about environmental justice issues that
have been identified through funding opportunities, community need as determined by those who are
affected, and the development of new programs, reports, or other projects. This information sharing
occurs within teams as well as across the agency through processes like internal engagement
roundtables that center on learning about organizations and the communities they serve, internal
presentations at team meetings, and providing feedback on draft reports and plans.

As noted earlier, the Energy Facility Siting division provides a look at an area of ODOE’s operations
where environmental justice is not an explicit statutory consideration. The statutory considerations are
what the Council must use in making decisions about proposed energy projects. Developers may
propose projects in rural parts of the state, which are considered environmental justice communities in
HB 4077 and are also within a Justice40 disadvantaged community as determined by the CEJST map –
but are not framed this way in the siting process. The siting process and information required to
demonstrate compliance with the siting standards is informed by Tribes and environmental justice
communities that provide input through the process. This is an example of an intersection of work
rather than an intentional, legislative requirement. New energy facilities must meet standards that
protect natural resources, ensure public health and safety, and protect against adverse environmental
impacts. A full list and further links to siting standards can be found here: State of Oregon: Facilities –
Siting Standards. Throughout the siting process there are times for community input demonstrated in
this infographic: EFSC-Process-Flowchart.pdf (oregon.gov) and further described in detail in this public
guide: EFSC-Public-Guide.pdf (oregon.gov). By hosting multiple opportunities for public participation, the
Energy Siting Division incorporates environmental justice factors into its operations where possible and
in line with the siting standards.

As noted above, the Energy Facility Siting division also serves as staff to the Energy Facility Siting Council.
The council has seven members who are appointed by the Governor and confirmed by the Oregon
Senate. Members are selected to understand, evaluate, and deliberate complex issues associated with
proposed facilities and how those facilities affect people, habitat, and communities. Appointees are also
selected to ensure broad geographic representation. Council meetings are open to the public, and public
involvement is built into the council’s review. While the Council may not always expressly name
environmental justice factors, several standards of review may overlap with environmental justice and
are in place to protect communities.

An example of this intersectionality is seen in 345-022-0090, Historic, Cultural, and Archaeological
Resources. This standard often requires communication and collaboration with Tribal governments.
Tribal governments are encouraged to enter into inter-governmental agreements with ODOE so that
Tribal government staff can be compensated for their time in reviewing information about proposed
projects and potential impacts. Through government-to-government communication and culturally
specific practices, the Energy Facility Siting Division can work within the process to support
environmental justice efforts.

At times, there may be issues identified outside the scope of work that are legally oriented and rooted in
rules and statutes. At present there is no formalized tracking mechanism; however, it is a goal to provide


Oregon Department of Energy                                                                                 15
 ANNUAL ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE COUNCIL REPORT – 2023

more opportunities for information sharing with the addition of the new position, the Community Equity
and Inclusion Analyst, as well as structures like the internal engagement roundtable.

At present, ODOE is committed to building community outreach tools, methods, and practices that
create root-cause solutions that prioritize environmental justice communities. Through developing
communication plans and accessibility plans, for instance, we will be better situated to hear from
environmental justice communities who are most affected by energy policies and decisions. By
addressing barriers, ODOE will be better situated to center an inclusive and equitable engagement
approach to best identify the priorities in environmental justice communities. Examples of this work
have been highlighted in the Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion Implementation Plan and Strategic
Approach in June 2023:

   •   Develop a communication plan and engagement process collaboratively with historically and
       currently underserved populations. The agency’s 2021-2024 Strategic Plan includes a focus area
       to Expand and Improve Stakeholder Engagement. An initiative under that focus area is to develop
       a communication plan and engagement process collaboratively with historically and currently
       underserved populations and communities that includes actively listening, being responsive, and
       incorporating feedback in the development of programs, policies, and other areas of work. An
       internal action team is working on implementing this initiative and has developed a draft
       communications and engagement framework for ODOE staff to incorporate into their work
       across the agency. The action team used the Racial Equity Impact Assessment Worksheet
       (provided by the Racial Justice Council) that was used during the 2023-2025 budget development
       process to serve as a starting point for this draft communications and engagement framework.
       ODOE used the worksheet to guide engagement activities for several pilot projects, including
       federal funding activities, the Oregon Rural and Agricultural Energy Assistance Program, and the
       agency’s new heat pump programs, among others. The team identified best practices and
       approaches learned through this pilot activity to inform the draft framework and next steps
       include sharing it with organizations serving environmental justice communities to further refine
       and finalize for staff use across ODOE.
   •   Create inclusive, multi-lingual communications to increase accessibility of agency program
       information and services comes from another strategic plan focus area around building practices
       and processes to achieve more inclusive and equitable outcomes. An internal action team is
       implementing this initiative, including members of the communications team. ODOE has
       renewed efforts on multi-lingual communications, including ensuring program applications are
       translatable, translating program materials into additional languages, and translating our agency
       strategic plan into the four languages most often spoken in Oregon homes other than English.
       Our websites have built-in translation capabilities, and ODOE’s virtual meeting platforms also
       allow for live translation captioning. One challenging area is accessing live interpretation services
       for in-person meetings – available companies are limited and ODOE has not been successful in
       finding a consistent service yet. The agency is also considering other inclusive communication
       options, such as audio or video information for Oregonians with visual impairments or literacy
       considerations. ODOE has a podcast to share energy information, and has developed some video
       tutorials, including for a complex public energy facility siting process and for navigating data
       dashboards or other tools.




Oregon Department of Energy                                                                               16
 ANNUAL ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE COUNCIL REPORT – 2023

PUBLIC PARTICIPATION AND MEANINGFUL INVOLVEMENT (ORS 182.535
SECTION 2)

The Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion Implementation Plan and Strategic       We have power in our
Approach takes time to acknowledge that diverse communities have             position and so it is our
different communications and engagement needs—there is no one-size-          responsibility to provide
fits-all approach. Some communities experience specific barriers to          space, time, and reduce
receiving messages from our agency or being able to engage with us. As a     barriers to meaningful
governmental agency, we recognize that we have power in our position         engagement.
and so it is our responsibility to provide space, time, and reduce barriers
to meaningful engagement. Strategic planning has been important in creating a process for promoting
community participation in agency decision-making processes as it leads to a root-cause analysis and
lasting solutions that are embedded throughout the agency.

As described above, ODOE is in the process of creating a communication and engagement framework
that will be broadly applicable to the entire agency. It will intentionally leave space for each program to
adapt and apply the framework for the varying types of work that are tied to statutory direction and
budget. The engagement framework is currently in draft form and will be complete in 2024. The new
position at ODOE, the Community Equity and Inclusion Analyst, is tasked with prioritizing community
participation and will be working to finalize this engagement framework. This position will also
participate in related advisory groups, councils, and workgroups to center the voices of environmental
justice communities throughout all ODOE’s work. Pivotal to the Community Equity and Inclusion
Analyst’s work is consulting internally as staff build community outreach plans to help support
meaningful feedback in decision-making in ODOE’s projects and programs.

Further engagement processes are being developed through the new Community Navigator Program,
where the program’s staff is focused on building relationships and visiting areas across the state to
engage in conversations and better understand community needs with organizations serving
communities, Tribal governments, and local governments. The Community Navigator Program includes a
Resource Assistance for Rural Environments (RARE) Member located in Central Oregon. The RARE
member is helping to develop deeper relationships in the region to fill a geographic gap for ODOE’s
programs and services to equitably reach Central Oregonians with a focus on the two federally
recognized tribes in Central Oregon – The Confederated Tribes of Warm Springs and Klamath Tribes –
and Jefferson, Deschutes, Crook, Lake, and Klamath Counties.

Through the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act and the Inflation Reduction Act, ODOE will receive a
considerable amount of federal funding on behalf of the State of Oregon. ODOE recognized the potential
positive effects of these opportunities for environmental justice communities and wanted to promote
participation in developing federal grant applications. In summer of 2023, ODOE began a series of
information sharing and listening workshops for representatives of organizations that are serving
environmental justice communities to better understand the status of federal funding opportunities and
key questions and decisions for how to design programs. These workshops were well-attended and
ODOE received feedback that they were very helpful to organizations. Recently, the Coalition of
Communities of Color partnered with ODOE to build on the workshops and formally establish an
Environmental Justice Leader's Federal Funding Workgroup that will participate at multiple levels



Oregon Department of Energy                                                                              17
 ANNUAL ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE COUNCIL REPORT – 2023

throughout the federal grant process. There is a high level of quality in participation with multiple
geographic regions; racial, ethnic, and cultural demographics; income status; and other environmental
justice qualifying factors represented throughout the workgroup. This workgroup will provide
meaningful feedback in three key areas:
    • Planning and testing ODOE’s assumptions,
    • Shaping federal grant applications before they are submitted, and
    • Reviewing implementation and supporting metrics development to ensure and demonstrate that
        benefits flow to environmental justice communities.

As ODOE continues to build capacity for community outreach, we have outlined four culturally specific
strategies and needs to best engage with environmental justice communities to promote participation:
    • Consider Oregonians and families whose first language is not English when developing
        communications materials. The agency tries to provide translated or translatable materials when
        possible. While ODOE’s information is primarily available electronically, the agency does provide
        some printed brochures and flyers in our office. Our Community Navigator Program staff keeps
        printed brochures and flyers on-hand for in-person events and meetings. Incentive flyers are
        translated into Spanish regularly, as are brochures specifically about the Hanford Nuclear Site
        and emergency preparedness activities. Materials about Hanford are also provided to Oregon
        counties within the emergency planning zone for display at their on-site offices. ODOE has a
        general agency brochure available in English, Spanish, Vietnamese, Simplified Chinese, and
        Russian. Some translation barriers remain, however. As noted above, it has been challenging to
        secure live translation services at in-person public meetings.
    • Acknowledge and address, when possible, how the energy system continues to be affected by
        systemic racism. Historically, energy policy decisions and programs – such as tax credit or other
        incentive programs – were more likely to benefit white and higher-income Oregonians. Recent
        programs designed by the legislature have expanded ODOE’s reach, but barriers still remain,
        especially for Oregonians with low or moderate incomes. Trust in government also remains a
        barrier, as past government decisions negatively affected certain communities. It will take time
        and deliberate action on the part of state government to earn back trust from racial justice and
        environmental justice communities.
    • Continue to strengthen communication and engagement with Oregon’s Tribal governments.
        Systemic racism in the energy landscape particularly negatively affected Tribal communities in
        Oregon. For example, dams installed to generate electricity block the flow of rivers and harm
        salmon populations important to Tribal communities. ODOE has worked to strengthen our
        partnerships with Tribal governments in our communications and engagement work through a
        Tribal Liaison, regular communications with Tribal leadership, and participation in Legislative
        Commission on Indian Services meetings and events.
    • Target communications toward Oregon’s rural communities to ensure they know about ODOE
        activities and programs. There continue to be barriers to participation among rural communities,
        especially for certain organizations or community groups that lack the time or capacity to engage
        in complex topics. ODOE’s engagement efforts are supporting this strategy through the new
        Community Navigator and the Resource Assistance for Rural Environments (RARE) AmeriCorps
        Member in the new Community Navigator Program. ODOE’s Community Navigator program is




Oregon Department of Energy                                                                            18
 ANNUAL ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE COUNCIL REPORT – 2023

       designed to empower local communities throughout the state of Oregon in their pursuit of
       energy solutions.

ODOE has outlined four Americans with Disability Act (ADA) compliance strategies to engage and
promote participation:
   • Format materials with adequate font selection and font size, as well as contrasting colors, to help
      those with visual impairments. A good example is the agency’s Biennial Energy Report. We
      produce a printed version of the book that includes readable font sizes and strategic color
      choices when possible. Some report sections are also available as interactive webpages, and each
      section is also available as downloadable PDFs that could be used with screen readers.
   • Design ODOE’s website with ADA considerations in mind. ODOE’s website has ADA-compliant
      and ADA-friendly features but has room for improvement. The agency will be updating to the
      latest SharePoint template in 2024 and will be conducting an audit of web pages to meet ADA
      best practices for headers, font use, alt text for images, and other features.
   • Offer hybrid in-person and virtual meetings and events to expand access geographically and
      among those needing ADA accommodation. COVID-19 led to ODOE’s public meetings going
      virtual. As the state recovers from the pandemic, ODOE continues to offer hybrid in-
      person/virtual or completely virtual meetings. A benefit of this approach has been built-in closed
      captioning and live translated transcription options for online meetings. The agency also posts
      videos to YouTube for later viewing, where users with hearing impairments can use YouTube’s
      closed-captioning features.
   • Include language in public hearing or meeting notices about how Oregonians can request
      accommodations to participate.

ODOE’s Strategic Plan includes an imperative to expand and improve stakeholder engagement. When
developing the strategic plan, we heard from stakeholders that they are not always aware of ODOE’s
work and how it affects issues and topics that they care about. There was an opportunity for ODOE to
better engage a diverse range of stakeholders to create a more inclusive and coordinated discussion
about energy challenges and solutions. ODOE staff have been working on several initiatives and
objectives under this imperative. One outcome of this work is the establishment of an internal
engagement roundtable that creates an internal procedure and monthly forum across programs to share
information about community needs and how ODOE’s programs and projects are working with
organizations serving communities.


   Strategic Plan Imperative: Expand and Improve Stakeholder Engagement
      • Objective 1.2: Year-over-year increase in agency engagement with organizations
        representing historically and currently underserved populations and communities.
      • Initiative 1.2: Develop a communication plan and engagement process collaboratively with
        historically and currently underserved populations and communities that includes actively
        listening, being responsive, and incorporating feedback in the development of programs,
        policies, and other areas of work.




Oregon Department of Energy                                                                          19
 ANNUAL ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE COUNCIL REPORT – 2023

      • Initiative 1.3: Build on existing Tribal engagement efforts by expanding internal
        responsibilities and resources, and reaching out to Tribes to assess and amplify shared
        interests and priorities.
      • Initiative 1.4: Work with external entities to assess their needs and priorities to strengthen
        relationships and better inform Oregon's energy policies and programs.
      • Initiative 1.5: Strengthen staff capacity within ODOE to serve as liaisons and ambassadors
        with communities, stakeholder groups, and Tribes.


Through the Strategic Engagement Team, ODOE works to coordinate ongoing organizational analysis,
stakeholder mapping, and organizational profile databases to help provide guidance to develop a
measured and targeted approach that does not overwhelm stakeholder groups, especially those with
limited capacity.

While ODOE has been working toward formalizing community engagement and participation in multiple
ways, there is still room for improvement. As new programs and staff are hired to the ODOE team with
the specific tasks to increase stakeholder analysis, the level and quality of participation, and
programmatic reach will increase. It is likely that there will be more staff capacity to listen to people
from environmental justice communities and bring that information back to ODOE to improve program
delivery.

ODOE does not have a formal agency-wide public engagement policy, rather, teams rely on legislative or
federal direction that may specify groups, advisory committees, and/or demographics of people to reach
out to as well as internal procedures and checklists to support engagement. ODOE recognizes the
burden placed on Tribes, organizations, individuals, and other government entities when we ask them to
participate in projects and processes without cross-agency coordination and seeks to coordinate
internally to determine how to engage efficiently and effectively.

As ODOE expands the way we meaningfully engage with environmental justice communities, there are
times that required public participation occurs through the five advisory bodies and commissions
described earlier in this report: the Oregon Climate Action Commission, the Energy Facility Siting
Council, the Oregon Hanford Cleanup Board, and the Energy Advisory Work Group. Formal public
participation is also triggered in legislation, such as the overall siting process or development of specific
energy reports, as well as administrative rulemaking processes.

All federally funded, Justice40 covered programs are required to engage in stakeholder consultation and
ensure that community stakeholders are meaningfully involved in determining program benefits.
Covered programs are also required to report data on the benefits directed to disadvantaged
communities.

Beyond what is required, ODOE is working to build engagement and public participation into the fabric
of the work to better understand community needs, impact, and measurements of success to
continually build process improvement feedback loops. This effort can be seen with the development of
the new Community Navigator Program, the Community Equity and Inclusion Analyst position, the
internal engagement roundtable, and the draft engagement framework.



Oregon Department of Energy                                                                                 20
 ANNUAL ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE COUNCIL REPORT – 2023

Part of creating feedback loops is finding ways to follow-up with communities. ODOE views participation
from community groups as ongoing and long-term. As an agency, we are always working to build two-
way relationships that center listening to communities and then putting what we hear into practice
when it is possible. If it is not possible, ODOE evaluates the barriers and provides context to community
members. The goal is to constantly evolve and up-level to implement more useful and timelier
evaluations.


AGENCY ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE IMPACTS (ORS 182.550 SECTION 3)

ODOE measures the effects of agency decisions on environmental justice in Oregon communities and is
seeking to better understand them with more data. The types of agency decisions are varied and can
range from funding decisions by ODOE’s Director, to ODOE’s Siting Division recommendations, to the
Energy Facility Siting Council for their ultimate decision. ODOE’s Strategic Plan fleshed out the need to
prioritize data collection, review, analysis, and sharing that shapes the recommendations made by the
agency. There is still work to be done in this realm to better understand the intersectionality of ODOE’s
work and impact on environmental justice communities. As an agency, we are working to develop more
mechanisms to collect and analyze data with a holistic approach.

Not only is providing data analysis and information one of ODOE's key statutory responsibilities, it was
also identified by staff and stakeholders as an important ODOE service during outreach to inform
development of our strategic plan. This is why serving as a “central repository of energy data,
information, and analysis" is one of ODOE's core position statements (what we do) identified in phase
one of our plan. The agency is focused on strengthening our skills, systems, and structure for research,
working with data providers, vetting analytical assumptions, and producing unbiased data and
information that can serve as a foundation for the agency and for public use.

The strategic plan acknowledges the importance of data to the work that we do, both in terms of
collecting that data and then turning it into information that is informative and useful. It will help us
produce better reports, more quickly and accurately answer questions, and provide trusted, unbiased
information to inform conversations, solve problems, provide educational resources, and administer
programs.

A key element of this part of our strategic plan is to, where possible, collect demographic data to inform
our work. The agency does not currently have a formal written policy or practice regarding the collection
of race or ethnicity data, although where we do request this information for our programs, we include a
statement about how the information will be used. For example, in our survey of existing agency
advisory and decision-making bodies, our request for demographic data includes the statement:

    “We are collecting demographic information to help us better understand who may be missing
    from energy-related conversations and decisions. Filling out this information is optional. Under
    state and federal law, this information may not and will not be used to discriminate against you.”

The demographic data that we voluntarily request from program and advisory body participants includes
disaggregated race and ethnicity data in the following communities: Asian, Black or African American,
Hispanic/Latinx, Middle Eastern or North African, Native American or Alaska Native, Native Hawaiian or


Oregon Department of Energy                                                                                 21
 ANNUAL ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE COUNCIL REPORT – 2023

Pacific Islander, Slavic, white, or two or more races. The survey form also includes “other” category that
the respondent can fill in.

It is our goal to use the demographic and community-specific data that we gather to inform policy
development and program design. For our incentive programs, this information can also help us tailor
our engagement strategies to better reach certain targeted populations. In addition to quantitative data
about the populations we serve, ODOE seeks to use our research and analysis tools as a platform to
surface energy challenges faced by communities. For example, our Biennial Energy Report includes
information on energy burden, which can help inform advocacy and policy making on behalf of energy
burdened communities.

During outreach and engagement to inform our strategic planning process, ODOE was reminded that we
can and should use the agency’s power and position to make changes and shift narratives, even where
we may not have direct control over the outcome. We recognize that we have a responsibility to lift and
amplify the voices of underrepresented and marginalized communities. We are aware that the
information and data we share can help others make changes and shift narratives.


AGENCY ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE PROGRESS (ORS 182.550 SECTION 4)

Environmental Justice is built into ODOE’s Strategic Plan by clearly outlining objectives that are rooted in
increasing stakeholder engagement in historically and currently underserved populations and
communities year-over-year. In phase two of the strategic plan, ODOE has outlined the imperatives,
objectives, and initiatives to get focused while centering environmental justice priorities. ODOE’s
strategic plan has also committed to building practices and processes to achieve more inclusive and
equitable outcomes throughout all programs and services offered. ODOE maintains progress dashboards
to demonstrate the efforts and actions quarterly.

Through the process of creating the Strategic Plan, ODOE identified an initiative to develop a Diversity,
Equity, and Inclusion Action Plan with historically and currently underserved populations. ODOE has
been working on implementing this initiative with the resources available, and in June 2023 published a
Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion Implementation Plan and Strategic Approach, in response to a request
from Governor Kotek’s office. This DEI Implementation Plan and Strategic Approach further lays out how
to center environmental justice communities into agency planning and action. Both of these guiding
documents set a standard of culture within the agency.

ODOE deliberately considers environmental justice in policymaking, though there is not always a
requirement to do so. For rulemaking, there is a statutorily required equity analysis. Additionally, ODOE
is required by the Governor’s office to share an equity analysis for agency-led legislation. Rather than
settle for the minimum requirements, ODOE prioritizes reaching out to partners in the environmental
justice community to get input on policy and legislation. In 2022, ODOE held a roundtable with
environmental justice groups and asked what they needed from our agency to better serve their
communities. The direct feedback from environmental justice communities led to legislation establishing
a Community Navigator Program and a full-time employee to act as the Community Navigator, who
works with environmental justice communities. This roundtable conversation also provided valuable




Oregon Department of Energy                                                                              22
 ANNUAL ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE COUNCIL REPORT – 2023

information to ODOE to develop legislation establishing a "one-stop-shop" to help people better
understand their options for energy efficiency incentives.

Consistent with the strategic plan, ODOE seeks to increase fluency of ODOE employees to build cultural
humility that will lead to a greater understanding of the needs within environmental justice
communities. This may require developing more in-depth community relationships, roundtable
discussions, and further internal training. When employees have more knowledge of the diverse cultures
of Oregonians, then they are better resourced to create inclusive policies.

ODOE’s approach to program development will be better served with input from environmental justice
communities. As we have increased the amount of engagement with and requests for feedback from
currently and historically underserved communities, we have learned that these communities are often
resource- and capacity-constrained. To support their engagement, we look for ways to compensate
people for their time and involvement. Where possible, we offer stipends to participants in our
processes, such as the external evaluation committees that are established to help provide a
competitive review of Community Renewable Energy Program grant applications. To further develop
and implement environmental justice policies at ODOE, we need community participation in the process,
and the community needs to be compensated for their time, energy, expertise, and sharing their lived
experiences.

To further develop and implement this type of work that informs policy to address these systemic issues,
ODOE needs to continue to explore processes and seek funding to equitably fund participants through
the procurement or contracting as well as continued support from the Environmental Justice Council in
creating a statewide tool.


AGENCY ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE MAPPING TOOL INVOLVEMENT (ORS
182.550 SECTION 5)

ODOE has a dedicated staff person, the Community Equity and Inclusion Analyst, assigned to the
Environmental Justice Council as a representative. The Community Equity and Inclusion Analyst attends
all Environmental Justice Council sessions to understand the progress of the Council and report back to
relevant ODOE staff members and offer any useful information to Council members from the
perspective of ODOE. The Community Equity and Inclusion Analyst also attends relevant subcommittee
meetings such as the Environmental Justice Mapping Subcommittee and the Environmental Justice
Annual Report Workshop to collaborate and share information with agency partners. There are
additional staff that have expertise in data and GIS mapping that have attended mapping subcommittee
meetings and responded to requests as well. ODOE staff works with other natural resource agency
partners to provide ODOE’s data, mapping tools, and other relevant information for the Environmental
Justice Council to best develop an environmental justice mapping tool.

ODOE is excited to continue working with the Environmental Justice Council and agency partners in 2024
to share ideas. Right now, ODOE is heavily reliant on the CEJST mapping tool created under Justice40.
The CEJST mapping tool is not up-to-date and does not fully reflect the needs of Oregonians who are the
most impacted and vulnerable within environmental justice communities. ODOE would like to continue



Oregon Department of Energy                                                                          23
 ANNUAL ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE COUNCIL REPORT – 2023

to share data, analysis, and gaps so that the Environmental Justice Council is able to consider the very
tangible need for an accurate and present-day tool that will benefit Oregonians by providing funding and
programmatic opportunities that lead to a safe, equitable, clean, and sustainable future. The
Environmental Justice Council is also in a unique position to see each agency report through a de-siloed
lens that will provide an opportunity to bring agencies together in this work.

Recent legislation that includes language regarding meaningful engagement for ODOE is found in:
HB 3409 Section 2 (e): Consistent with applicable federal and state laws, consulting with the Oregon
Global Warming Commission and the Environmental Justice Council and using, when appropriate, the
environmental justice mapping tool developed under section 12, chapter 58, Oregon Laws 2022, when
considering or evaluating for development or implementation the policies and actions described in this
subsection.

HB 3409 Section 63: The Oregon [Climate Action] Commission shall establish a process for consultation
with representatives of federally recognized Indian tribes in this state to advise the commission on the
performance of its duties under sections 53 to 63 of this 2023 Act, including the identification of
opportunities to support indigenous practices and knowledge from tribal nations to sequester and store
carbon on natural and working lands. Nothing that meets the definition of “meaningful involvement” as
defined in this document.

HB 3630, Section 1: The State Department of Energy shall establish a program to provide assistance
related to energy projects and activities to environmental justice communities, as defined in ORS
469A.400. At a minimum, the program must provide environmental justice communities with
information regarding: (1) Funding resources. (2) Technical assistance. (3) Other support that may be
available.

In implementing this language from HB 36360, ODOE developed the Community Navigator program and
Community Navigator position to purposefully work to build meaningful engagement and long-term,
mutual relationships with environmental justice communities.

HB 5016, the Department of Energy agency budget bill, included funding for a relevant new position: the
Community Equity and Inclusion Analyst. This bill does not specifically outline meaningful engagement;
however, this position was designed to support HB 4077 and the Justice40 Initiative. Both HB 4077 and
the Justice40 Initiative require direct and meaningful engagement with environmental justice and
disadvantaged communities.

When multiple agencies are listed in legislation, there is usually one agency that is listed first as the lead
agency. Depending on the language in the bill, the other agencies listed can act in cooperation or
coordination, which may look like co-leadership or close collaboration. In most instances, agencies work
in consultation with a lead agency or agencies. The level of collaboration or engagement between
agencies is dependent upon each agency’s capacity to participate. When ODOE is the lead agency, we
proceed mindfully and communicate from the beginning of the process to hear what will work for other
agencies in either a coordination or consulting role.




Oregon Department of Energy                                                                                 24
 ANNUAL ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE COUNCIL REPORT – 2023

LOOKING AHEAD

ODOE has worked to develop a culture that values diversity of thought, inclusivity, and equitable
outcomes. There has been significant progress to guide these efforts by creating a Strategic Plan and
Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion Implementation Plan and Strategic Approach. By examining the mission
and values and attaching tangible outcomes, ODOE has laid the groundwork for a meaningful future.

                                   There is a lot of work to do with an influx of federal funding that must
ODOE recognizes that
there is not a one-size-fits-all   adhere to Justice40 requirements, and ODOE wants to do more than
approach, rather a need            check a box. Because time has been taken to develop an ethos of care,
for a mindful approach             empathy, reflection, inclusion, curiosity, and collaboration employees
that works to connect              are excited to fulfill the mission and build toward solutions that center
Oregonians to their specific       equity. ODOE recognizes that there is not a one-size-fits-all approach,
energy needs, addresses            rather a need for a mindful approach that works to connect
concerns, and uplifts their        Oregonians to their specific energy needs, addresses concerns, and
interests.                         uplifts their interests.

Key to this work is ODOE’s collaboration with the Coalition of Communities of Color to ensure
meaningful engagement throughout the federal grant process with environmental justice communities;
supporting the new Community Navigator Program as they provide help and remove barriers to funding
access; relying on the new Community Equity and Inclusion Analyst to offer programmatic support and
community support; and the efforts of the ODOE Internal Roundtable to remove silos and find
intersectionality.

Environmental Justice Strategic Plan

Both the 2021 – 2024 Strategic Plan and the Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion Implementation Plan and
Strategic Approach have been mentioned throughout this report as guiding documents. For a further
summation of the strategic plan with infographics, please use this link: 2021-ODOE-Strategic-Plan-
Summary.pdf (oregon.gov).

The introductory letter from the director for the Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion Implementation Plan
and Strategic Approach is below.




Oregon Department of Energy                                                                              25
 ANNUAL ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE COUNCIL REPORT – 2023



  Letter From the Director
  In the summer of 2019, ODOE began work on a new strategic plan. Strategic planning enabled our
  organization to set direction, establish goals, prioritize work, measure progress, and allocate time,
  resources, and attention – all while fostering organizational cohesion, shared purpose, and
  common values. The agency had been through considerable change and needed to provide clarity
  about our work and focus on specific areas to ensure we are meeting our mission on behalf of
  Oregonians. Developing the strategic plan involved input from the public, stakeholder groups,
  Tribal partners, peer organizations, and our own staff.

  Diversity, equity, and inclusion are central to ODOE’s strategic plan; these elements show up in the
  process we used to develop the plan as well as in the plan itself. The development of the plan
  began with gathering input through interviews and focus groups, and ODOE brought on a
  consultant specifically to help with outreach and engagement on diversity, equity, and inclusion.
  The consultant conducted one-on-one interviews with a small group of stakeholder and
  community representatives, peer organizations, and Tribes. This work informed the first phase of
  our plan, which involved developing clarity and a shared understanding of ODOE’s work. This led
  to the development of a new vision, mission, and position statement (articulation of what we do.)

  Defining these clarity elements of our strategic plan was a critical first step in setting the course
  for the future and laying the groundwork for discussions on the second phase of the plan: the
  strategic focus for the agency over the next four years. ODOE’s vision is the ideal future state we
  are working toward — the “why” behind our work. In creating the vision, our staff took our
  previous mission and added “equitable.” Our vision is for a safe, equitable, clean, and sustainable
  future. ODOE’s mission is our purpose, the “what” of ODOE’s specific work to make the future in
  our vision statement happen. Grounded in the responsibilities outlined in ODOE’s authorizing
  statutes and informed by outreach and engagement on the strategic plan, we developed a mission
  statement that highlights the need to ensure our energy system is resilient and that the clean
  energy transition is equitable: The Oregon Department of Energy helps Oregonians make informed
  decisions and maintain a resilient and affordable energy system. We advance solutions to shape
  an equitable clean energy transition, protect the environment and public health, and responsibly
  balance energy needs and impacts for current and future generations.

  In the second phase of our plan, we identified focus areas, objectives, and initiatives that form the
  basis of actions we are going to take as an agency over the plan’s four-year timeframe to improve
  and meet our mission more effectively. Based on the feedback during the first phase, ODOE
  reached out to past collaborators and partners for guidance and advice on diversity, equity, and
  inclusion. We also spoke with peer organizations who were focused on equity so we could listen
  and learn from their journeys. As part of the discussion with these diversity partners, ODOE
  provided a discussion guide with the following concepts and commitments:
       • Acknowledgement that our organization and processes do not yet fully represent the
           dimensions of diversity in people and viewpoints in the state.
       • Recognition that it will take more resources to ensure equity in the energy sector.
       • DEI needs to be integrated throughout our strategic plan and we want ODOE to be held
           accountable to being a better partner.


Oregon Department of Energy                                                                               26
 ANNUAL ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE COUNCIL REPORT – 2023

      •   We need to build trust and develop relationships that will enable us to meaningfully
          engage with diverse communities.
      •   ODOE will show up with a spirit of openness, learning, and humility, and will commit to
          following up, sharing our lessons learned, and offering support through partnerships
          and action.

  Diversity, equity, and inclusion are a major piece of the five imperatives, or focus areas, of ODOE’s
  strategic plan. These imperatives are not meant to summarize or capture the entirety of the work
  being done at ODOE, but instead represent a path toward us doing that work better. Each
  imperative includes objectives that will help us measure progress in meeting these goals.
  Initiatives are the specific actions we will take to achieve those objectives. This part of the
  strategic plan was drafted concurrently with and informed by the 2021 State of Oregon Diversity,
  Equity, and Inclusion Action Plan.

  Consistent with the 2021 Oregon DEI Action Plan, and as will be discussed throughout this
  document, ODOE’s strategic plan includes key strategies to establish and maintain relationships
  with organizations representing currently and historically underserved Oregonians; center equity
  in budgeting, planning, procurement, and policymaking; strengthen public involvement; improve
  equitable access to services, programs, and resources; and foster an inclusive workplace culture.

  Examples of where equity is highlighted in ODOE’s strategic plan include:
     • One of the five main plan imperatives is to “Build Practices and Processes to Achieve More
         Inclusive and Equitable Outcomes”
     • Initiatives related to equity and environmental justice are woven throughout all five
         imperatives:
            ▪ Conduct assessment of current agency decision-making and advisory bodies to
                identify opportunities for more diverse representation
            ▪ Develop a communication plan and engagement process collaboratively with
                historically and currently underserved populations and communities that includes
                actively listening, being responsive, and incorporating feedback in the development
                of programs, policies, and other areas of work
            ▪ Build on existing Tribal engagement efforts by expanding internal responsibilities
                and resources, and reaching out to Tribes to assess and amplify shared interests and
                priorities
            ▪ Enhance ODOE's internship program to provide benefits to interns, such as paid
                positions and greater access to educational credits, to help build a more diverse
                network of ODOE and energy industry employees
            ▪ Develop a Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion Action Plan in partnership with historically
                and currently underserved populations and communities
            ▪ Create inclusive, multi-lingual communications to increase accessibility of agency
                program information and services
            ▪ Conduct agency-wide DEI assessment and training to measure and increase
                employee knowledge, awareness, and skills
            ▪ Collect and analyze demographic data to better inform ODOE’s work and to identify
                barriers to achieving equitable energy outcomes



Oregon Department of Energy                                                                               27
 ANNUAL ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE COUNCIL REPORT – 2023

Environmental Justice Barriers

In presenting this list of barriers, ODOE hopes that the Environmental Justice Council is able to approach
this work holistically by connecting agencies and offering support in overcoming these challenges.

Consistent with The Environmental Policy Innovation Center’s and Climate XChange’s report, Delivering
on Justice40: Perspectives from State Agency Staff, there are barriers to meeting federal requirements
within the Justice40 initiative that directly affect environmental justice communities:
   •   Agencies need more and clearer federal and state-level guidance.
   •   There is not a straight-forward and easy way to pay people for their emotional labor and lived
       experience when providing feedback in this work.
   •   Some limitations and barriers to community participation exist, such as the lack of resources and
       employee time to dedicate to staffing energy specific programs. Additionally, many
       environmental justice groups have complex relationships with government entities that are
       rooted in mistrust in part, due to a lack of follow-through from agencies throughout history and
       currently. ODOE recognizes the importance of slowing down to build long-standing and ongoing
       relationships to demonstrate commitment to our environmental justice communities who have
       been and are marginalized and ignored.
   •   While ODOE has invested in a Community Navigator Program, it takes time to build meaningful
       connections with environmental justice communities. Relationship building is not always linear
       or fast moving; the process does not follow a governmental workflow. This can prove challenging
       when programs have timelines and sunset dates.
   •   Environmental justice communities may lack the capacity (time, funding, positions) to complete
       grant applications necessary to receive further funding and grants rarely provide enough
       administrative funding. Additionally, new energy technologies require workforce training that
       may not be available in environmental justice communities.
   •   There is a need to provide greater technical and contracting assistance to Tribal governments,
       environmental justice agencies, and municipal governments from the state.
   •   The Climate and Economic Justice Tool provided by the Justice40 Initiative has geographic gaps in
       that leaves out environmental justice communities. This is especially apparent in communities
       who have suffered from catastrophic wildfires and extreme weather events in recent years.
   •   Many opportunities for funding are through financial reimbursement, but it can be difficult if not
       impossible to initially finance a project for environmental justice communities.

Environmental Justice Opportunities

Each barrier has a corresponding opportunity. While this is not an exhaustive list, it is a list that ODOE
believes is a priority and can expand in the next year.
   •   In 2023, ODOE created the Community Navigator Program and hired the first Community
       Navigator to help provide grant assistance to environmental justice communities. Key to this
       position is prioritizing ODOE’s commitment to establishing trust and long-term relationships with
       communities who are the most impacted.
   •   For the fiscal year 2023-2024, ODOE has an AmeriCorps fellow from the Resource Assistance for
       Rural Environments (RARE) through an intergovernmental agreement with the University of


Oregon Department of Energy                                                                                  28
 ANNUAL ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE COUNCIL REPORT – 2023

       Oregon. This position is nested in the Community Navigator Program, is located in Bend, Oregon,
       and is providing key aid and expertise in developing resources and relationships throughout the
       Central Oregon region. Their areas of focus are: the Confederated Tribes of the Warm Springs
       and Klamath Tribes, Jefferson, Crook, Deschutes, Klamath, and Lake Counties. Additionally, ODOE
       is working to develop a stronger partnership with the RARE program to activate the other Energy
       Cohort AmeriCorps members throughout the state to learn more about the goals and visions for
       energy programs in rural areas, such as Lake County (Lake County Resource Initiatives), Wy’East
       Resource Conservation and Development, Wallowa Resources, and other organizations that are
       hosting a RARE placement.
   •   ODOE recently hired the Community Equity and Inclusion Analyst who is tasked with conducting
       research, collecting information, and providing advice to ODOE programs and teams about
       environmental justice, equity, and inclusion in the energy sector with a focus on requirements
       and policies in HB 4077 (2022), the Environmental Justice Council, Racial Justice Council, and the
       agency’s Strategic Plan.
   •   ODOE was legislatively directed to develop a “one-stop-shop model” to provide communities
       with more consistent and centralized information about energy efficiency funding and programs
       to support improvements to their homes. A goal in this process is to reduce the number of
       touches, therefore addressing capacity issues and other burdens to communities.
   •   ODOE recognizes the systemic barriers to environmental justice communities and has worked to
       develop a strategic plan and DEI initiatives to address opportunities to empower them.




Oregon Department of Energy                                                                           29
 ANNUAL ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE COUNCIL REPORT – 2023


DEFINITIONS

Environmental Justice: (ORS 182.535 Section 3)
   “Environmental justice” means the equal protection from environmental and health risks, fair
   treatment and meaningful involvement in decision making of all people regardless of race, color,
   national origin, immigration status, income or other identities with respect to the development,
   implementation and enforcement of environmental laws, regulations and policies that affect the
   environment in which people live, work, learn and practice spirituality and culture.

Environmental Justice Community: (ORS 182.535 Section 4)
   “Environmental justice community” includes communities of color, communities experiencing lower
   incomes, communities experiencing health inequities, tribal communities, rural communities,
   remote communities, coastal communities, communities with limited infrastructure and other
   communities traditionally underrepresented in public processes and adversely harmed by
   environmental and health hazards, including seniors, youth and persons with disabilities.

Meaningful Involvement: (ORS 182.535 Section 7)
  “Meaningful involvement” means:
  (a) Members of vulnerable populations have appropriate opportunities to participate in decisions
  about a proposed activity that will affect their environment or health;
  (b) Public involvement can influence a decision maker’s decision;
  (c) The concerns of all participants involved are considered in the decision-making process; and
  (d) Decision makers seek out and facilitate the involvement of members of vulnerable populations

Environmental Burdens: (ORS 182.535 Section 2)
   “Environmental burden” means the environmental and health risks to communities caused by the
   combined historic, current and projected future effects of:
   (a) Exposure to conventional pollution and toxic hazards in the air or in or on water or land;
   (b) Adverse environmental conditions caused or made worse by other contamination or pollution;
   and
   (c) Changes in the environment resulting from climate change, such as water insecurity, drought,
   flooding, wildfire, smoke and other air pollution, extreme heat, loss of traditional cultural resources
   or foods, ocean acidification, sea-level rise and increases in infectious disease.




Oregon Department of Energy                                                                              30
 ANNUAL ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE COUNCIL REPORT – 2023


APPENDIX

House Bill 4077 (2022)
Legislation establishing the Environmental Justice Council, the Council’s responsibility to develop an
environmental justice mapping tool, develop a biannual report to the Governor, and the requirement for
natural resource agencies to submit an annual report to the Environmental Justice Council.

Senate Bill 420 (2007)
Legislation establishing the Environmental Justice Task Force, the predecessor for the Environmental
Justice Council. It also includes requirements for the Task Force to submit biannual reports to the
Governor and the requirement for natural resource agencies to submit an annual report to the
Environmental Justice Task Force.

ORS 182.550 Reports by natural resource agencies
All directors of natural resource agencies, and other agency directors as the Governor may designate,
shall report annually to the Environmental Justice Task Force and to the Governor on the results of the
agencies’ efforts to:
    1. Address environmental justice issues;
    2. Increase public participation of individuals and communities affected by agencies’ decisions;
    3. Determine the effect of the agencies’ decisions on environmental justice communities;
    4. Improve plans to further the progress of environmental justice in Oregon; and
    5. Utilize the environmental justice mapping tool developed under section 12 of this 2022 Act.




Oregon Department of Energy                                                                            31
 ANNUAL ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE COUNCIL REPORT – 2023

ACCESSIBLE LINKS USED IN DOCUMENT:

   •   Energy Facility Siting Council: https://www.oregon.gov/energy/facilities-
       safety/facilities/Pages/About-the-Council.aspx
   •   Oregon Global Warming Commission: https://www.oregon.gov/energy/energy-
       oregon/Pages/Oregon-Global-Warming-Commission.aspx
   •   Hanford Clean-Up Board: https://www.oregon.gov/energy/safety-resiliency/Pages/OHCB-
       Meetings.aspx
   •   Energy Advisory Work Group: https://www.oregon.gov/energy/Get-Involved/Pages/Energy-
       Advisory-Work-Group.aspx
   •   Oregon Department of Oregon Budget: https://www.oregon.gov/energy/About-
       Us/Pages/Budget.aspx
   •   Executive Order 14008: https://www.energy.gov/justice/justice40-
       initiative#:~:text=Section%20223%20of%20EO%2014008%20established%20the%20Justice40,inf
       rastructure%20%E2%80%93%20to%20flow%20to%20disadvantaged%20communities%20
   •   Nuclear Safety & Emergency Preparedness: https://www.oregon.gov/energy/facilities-
       safety/safety/Pages/default.aspx
   •   ODOE Facility Siting Process: https://www.oregon.gov/energy/facilities-
       safety/facilities/Documents/Fact-Sheets/EFSC-Process-Flowchart.pdf
   •   ODOE Facility Siting standards: https://www.oregon.gov/energy/facilities-
       safety/facilities/Pages/Siting-Standards.aspx
   •   Energy by the Numbers: https://energyinfo.oregon.gov/energy-by-the-numbers
   •   2022 Biennial Report: https://www.oregon.gov/energy/Data-and-Reports/Documents/2022-
       Biennial-Energy-Report.pdf
   •   Oregon Solar Rebate Program: https://www.oregon.gov/energy/Incentives/Pages/Solar-
       Storage-Rebate-Program.aspx
   •   2023-OSSRP-Legislative-Report.pdf (oregon.gov): https://www.oregon.gov/energy/Data-and-
       Reports/Documents/2023-OSSRP-Legislative-Report.pdf
   •   Energy Efficient Wildfire Rebuilding Incentive:
       https://www.oregon.gov/energy/Incentives/Pages/EEWR.aspx
   •   Community Renewable Energy Grant Program:
       https://www.oregon.gov/energy/Incentives/Pages/CREP.aspx
   •   Heat Pump Incentive Programs: https://www.oregon.gov/energy/Incentives/Pages/heat-
       pumps.aspx
   •   Community Heat Pump Deployment Program:
       https://www.oregon.gov/energy/Incentives/Pages/CHPDP.aspx
   •   Oregon Rental Home Heat Pump Program:
       https://www.oregon.gov/energy/Incentives/Pages/ORHHPP.aspx
   •   Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion Implementation Plan and Strategic Approach:
       https://www.oregon.gov/energy/About-Us/Documents/2023-ODOE-DEI-Implementation-and-
       Approach.pdf
   •   Notice of Funding Opportunity Solar for All: https://www.epa.gov/newsreleases/biden-harris-
       administration-launches-7-billion-solar-all-grant-competition-fund
   •   2023 ODOE Solar For All Narrative:
       https://www.oregon.gov/energy/Incentives/Documents/2023-ODOE-Solar-For-All-Narrative.pdf


Oregon Department of Energy                                                                     32
 ANNUAL ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE COUNCIL REPORT – 2023

   •   Energy Facility Siting Council members: https://www.oregon.gov/energy/facilities-
       safety/facilities/Documents/General/EFSC-members.pdf
   •   United States Census Bureau: https://www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/geography-
       acs/geography-boundaries-by-year.html
   •   USDA Eligibility Mapping Tool:
       https://eligibility.sc.egov.usda.gov/eligibility/welcomeAction.do;jsessionid=OiNpklYb1HA2YPCbV
       HTeelhU
   •   Climate and Economic Justice Screening Tool (CEJST):
       https://screeningtool.geoplatform.gov/en/about#3/33.47/-97.5
   •   Resource Assistance for Rural Environments (RARE): https://rare.uoregon.edu/
   •   ODOE Advisory and Stakeholder Groups: https://www.oregon.gov/energy/Get-
       Involved/Pages/Advisory-Stakeholder-Groups.aspx
   •   Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy:
       https://www.energy.gov/sites/default/files/2021/01/f82/SEP-fact-
       sheet_2021.pdf#:~:text=The%20State%20Energy%20Program%20%28SEP%29%2C%20part%20of
       %20the,advance%20state-
       led%20energy%20initiatives%2C%20and%20increase%20energy%20affordability
   •   Inflation Reduction Act: https://www.whitehouse.gov/cleanenergy/inflation-reduction-act-
       guidebook/
   •   Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act: https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-
       room/statements-releases/2021/08/02/updated-fact-sheet-bipartisan-infrastructure-
       investment-and-jobs-act/
   •   Justice40 Initiative: https://www.energy.gov/justice/justice40-initiative
   •   ODOE Energy Info, By the Numbers: https://energyinfo.oregon.gov/energy-by-the-numbers
   •   2021-2024 ODOE Strategic Plan: https://www.oregon.gov/energy/About-Us/Pages/Strategic-
       Plan.aspx
   •   ODOE Strategic Plan Progress Dashboard: https://www.oregon.gov/energy/About-
       Us/Documents/2023-Q3-SP-Progress-Dashboard.pdf
   •   2021 ODOE Strategic Plan Summary: oregon.gov/energy/About-Us/Documents/2021-ODOE-
       Strategic-Plan-Summary.pdf
   •   HOMES and HEAR: https://www.oregon.gov/energy/energy-oregon/Documents/Federal-Home-
       Energy-Rebates-FAQ.pdf
   •   Community Navigator Program: https://www.oregon.gov/energy/resources/Pages/Community-
       Navigator.aspx
   •   Justice40 Initiative | Department of Energy: https://www.energy.gov/justice/justice40-
       initiative#:~:text=Section%20223%20of%20EO%2014008%20established%20the%20Justice40,inf
       rastructure%20%E2%80%93%20to%20flow%20to%20disadvantaged%20communities%20(DACs)




Oregon Department of Energy                                                                       33
 ANNUAL ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE COUNCIL REPORT – 2023

FOR MORE INFORMATION


                              The Oregon Department of Energy
                                  550 NE Capitol Street NE
                                      Salem, OR 97301
                                503-378-4040 | 800-221-8035
                                   askenergy@oregon.gov
                                  www.oregon.gov/energy




Oregon Department of Energy                                     34
