                                  CHILDREN, FAMILY      & COMMUNITY             CONNECTIONS             DIVISION
 EF& Clackamas                                 CLACKAMAS PARENTING TOGETHER SMALL GRANTS
    Laat Together
              trong   Roots
                                                            NOTICE OF FUNDING OPPORTUNITY


INTRODUCTION
Clackamas County Health, Housing & Human Services Department through its Children, Family & Community
Connections (CFCC) Division is seeking applications from multiple agencies/organizations that are capable of
delivering evidence-based and best practice parenting education class series* and activities. The funding source
for this opportunity is Oregon Parenting Education Collaborative through Oregon State University. A total of
$240,000 is currently available for programming between July 1, 2025, and June 30, 2027. More funding may
be received and disbursed during this time.
*See Exhibit A for examples of Evidenced-Based Curricula
*See Exhibit C for Definition and Terms


PROGRAM                       DESCRIPTION
    a. OVERVIEW
       By providing high quality, evidence-based or best practice parenting education series and workshops to
       parents and caregivers in our community, Clackamas Parenting Together aims to increase positive
       caregiver-child relationships, expand caregiver knowledge related to child development and effective
       parenting skills, and reduce caregiver stress resulting in enhanced health, development and school
       readiness    for    children.  To    learn    more   about    parenting    education     in   Oregon     visit:
       https://health.oregonstate.edu/opec
    b. GOAL
       Provide evidence-based and best practice parenting education class series and activities to parents and
       caregivers of children, prenatal to 18 years old living in Clackamas County. Successful applicants will
       demonstrate the ability to offer high quality, easily accessible programming to universal and/or target
       populations. Successful class series, when applicable, will meet all fidelity requirements* designated by
       the curriculum publisher and have a successful parent retention rate of at least 75% of participants
       attending at least 70% of class sessions offered. 75% of class participants will report an increase in quality
       of parent-child/youth interactions as measured by Parenting Skills Ladder (PSL) responses.
       *See exhibit B for fidelity and best practice


AWARD                 INFORMATION
The funding source for this opportunity is Oregon Parenting Education Collaborative through Oregon State
University. A total of $240,000 is currently available for the time-period of July 1, 2025, and June 30, 2027.
Of this funding, the following categories are available:
    e    $120,000 for programming for caregivers of 0-6 year-olds
    e    $120,000 for programming for caregivers of 7-18 year-olds
More funding may be received and disbursed in this time-period.
Minimum award amount is $8,000, maximum of $100,000

Note that the award period is for 24 months and two years of program planning is required to be a
successful applicant.
                                                                                                                 Page | 1
REPORTING            and REIMBURSEMENT
Awarded proposals will be required to submit reimbursement requests by the 15“ of each month or quarterly to
align with multi class series completion timelines. Program reports, including a TBD quarterly work plan of
proposed classes and services, will be due on the 8 of each month after the close of each previous quarter.
Fidelity visits and check sheets will be utilized for quality assurance.


ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA

Eligible applicants are nonprofit organizations, schools, or public entities serving residents of Clackamas County.
Proposed projects must address goals identified above and result in positive, measurable outcomes for parents
and their children.
Successful applicants will meet the following criteria:

e     Demonstrate capacity and willingness to provide evidence-based and best practice parenting education
      services to a variety of populations. This includes, but is not limited to, parents/caregivers or their children
      who are:
          ©   Black, Indigenous, and People of Color
          o   English language learners
          ©   Lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer, questioning, intersex, and/or asexual
          o   Living in rural communities
          ©   Low income as defined by Medicaid, Head Start, WIC, or other public assistance
          ©   Supporting children with special needs
          o   Otherwise historically underserved
e     Commit to conducting a minimum of two and a maximum of twenty-five separate evidence-based class
      series, either virtually or in-person over the funding period.

FUNDING CYCLE AND TIMELINE
    Last day to ask questions                                                                     April 30, 2025
    Application Due Date                                                                          May 9, 2025
    Award Decisions and Notification (estimated)                                                  June 2, 2025

    Agreement Start Date (estimated)                                                              August 1, 2025
    Agreement End Date (all proposed class series and activities must be completed by
                                                                                                  June 30, 2027
    June 30, 2027, unless an extension is granted through an amended agreement)
    Final Reporting Due Date                                                                      July 8, 2027


FUNDING CONSIDERATIONS
      e   Funding to individuals is not allowed.
      e   Applications must propose serving parents/caregivers of children who reside in Clackamas County.
      e   Operating expenses must be clearly outlined for each proposed project.
      e   Applications must propose the use of parenting curricula that is evidence-based unless the proposal is for
          specific culturally and linguistically responsive parent education, for which there is no evidence-based
          curricula.
                                                                                                                   Page | 2
   e   Virtual parenting class programs are allowed using evidence-based curriculum so long as program
       facilitators meet curriculum publisher recommendations for virtual adaptations.
   e   Applications may include funding requests for promising or best practice            approaches   in parent
       engagement to supplement or enhance evidence-based series facilitation.
   e   Funding of capital improvements is not allowed.
   e   Organization’s chosen facilitators will be engaged in Clackamas Parenting Together (CPT) approved
       professional development and regional trainings. A total of 40 hours throughout the grant cycle is expected
       with an average of 2 hours a month.
   e   Schedule of class offerings to be approved by CPT staff.
   e   If an applying organization had a previous parenting education grant through this same funding stream,
       past performance will be evaluated.




TO APPLY
Complete an application by providing the information requested in the template below, including a proposed
budget and fiscal capacity narrative.


Questions about this opportunity must be submitted electronically to Stephanie Radford:
sradford@clackamas.us Responses to application questions will be posted weekly as FAQs at
https://www.clackamas.us/grants.

Questions received after April 30, 2025, may not receive a response.

Completed applications are due Friday May 9th, 2025, by 5:00 pm, and should be submitted electronically
to Stephanie Radford: sradford @ clackamas.us

Applications received after the deadline or not submitted as directed may not be considered.

Total funding available through this small grant opportunity is subject to change.


Per the Civil Rights Act of 1964, no person shall, on the basis of race, color, or national origin, be excluded
from participation, be denied the benefits of, or be subjected to discrimination under any County program,
service or activity.




                                      Application begins on the next page




                                                                                                             Page | 3
                                                                                                               Grant Application
                                                                                                                     FY 2025-27
                                                                                            Parenting Education Small Grants
                                                           SECTION 1
                                                          COVER PAGE

     Date:



                     Legal Organization Name
                        Alternate name/acronym
                                           Address

                                           Website
                                              Phone

                      Executive Director Name

                                 Email and Phone
             Oregon Business Registry Number
                    Employer ID Number (EIN)
                        Program Contact Name
                                 Email and Phone

                           Fiscal Contact Name

                                 Email and Phone

                   Funding Amount Requested

With my signature, I certify the following:
1.   The above information is correct;
2.   lam authorized by the governing board of the applicant organization to submit this grant proposal;
3.   The organization is in good standing with the IRS, retains its 501(c)(3) tax exempt status, and is further classified as a public charity
     and not a private foundation, or is a public agency or school district;
4.   The organization does not discriminate on the basis of race, religion, sexual preference, sexual orientation, physical circumstances, or
     national origin;
5.   The organization agrees to submit quarterly progress reports and final progress reports.
6.   The organization agrees to submit proof of insurance at the levels required by the county.


I have included the following application components:
           L]Project Description Question with Exhibit D: Table of Programming Schedule
           L]Project Logistics Questions
           L]Community Collaboration Questions
             L]Project Budget table
             L]Project Budget Narrative
             L]Fiscal Capacity Questions




Signing Authority Name (printed)                                                 Title


Signature                                                                        Date




                                                                                                                                       Page | 4
                                                      SECTION 2

Project Description (20 points)
(If awarded, the information you provide here will form the basis of your work plan)
    1.   Please explain your proposed parenting education project. Include:
         a.     What evidence-based parenting education curriculum(a) you intend to facilitate
                    i. if not proposing evidence-based curricula, describe how your proposed curricula
                       meets best-practice standards and will be culturally/linguistically specific

         b.     Why you have chosen this curriculum (a) to meet the needs of your target population.

         c.     If applicable, any additional best practice programming or activities you intend to include
                and how these programs will strengthen support to parents and their children

    2.   In the work plan table (see Exhibit D), please provide an approximate schedule for parenting
         class offerings. Include for each quarter the day, time, language and service area your
         organization intends to serve.
         (Add additional columns if necessary — multiple series can take place in the same quarter.)


         Proposals of multiple curricula are allowed. Successful applicants will provide a minimum of
         two and maximum of twenty-five class series. See the list of approved curricula. (Exhibit A:
         Approved Curriculum). (max 500 words)

Project Logistics (30 points)
Directions: Answer each component of every question completely. Responses to each question will be rated on
a scale of I (does not meet requirements) to 5 (exceeds expectations) for a total score of 30 points.



    1.   Will your programming target specific parent populations? Why have you chosen to focus
         programming on this population of parents? How will your program offerings meet the needs of
         parents in that community? (max 300 words)


         Does your organization currently provide Parenting Education programming? Please describe how
         this    project   continues,   differs   from,   enhances,   or   changes   the   scope   and/or   scale   of   the
         programming your organization currently offers. (max 250 words)



         What training or experience does your organization/facilitators have in each curriculum
         proposed? If new positions are part of the project, please describe the anticipated hiring and/or
         training process here (max 300 words)




                                                                                                                      Page | 5
    4.   Describe how your organization will market your parenting program to the target population(s),
         include strategies/solutions to common challenges such as low enrollment and/or challenges with
         outreach. (max 250 words)

    5.   What are potential challenges to this project, how do you plan to mitigate these? If your proposal
         includes promising or best practice approaches to parent engagement (i.e. virtual support group,
         porch drop off of class materials, additional incentives, monthly parent café, etc.) how will these
         additional efforts help enhance positive parental experiences? (max 300 words)

    6.   Information: This funding requires that participants be given a survey following the completion
         of a class series (Parenting Skills Ladder) or a workshop (Parent Workshop Evaluation). These
         surveys may be given in person or online, but results must be turned in promptly to Clackamas
         Parenting Together staff along with attendance records and other class demographic information.

             a. Explain your familiarity with requests like this and your plan for communicating to group
             facilitators and other key staff about the importance of turning in these surveys and class
             reports as your measurable outcome of this grant. (max 300 words)


Community Collaboration (20 points)
Parenting Education in Clackamas County is a cooperative effort. Potential participants should be guided
towards best-fit programs in their area. Therefore, creating and maintaining relationships with other
organizations offering parenting education and/or family support is crucial for maximizing the participation
and community impact of programming.

    1.   How is your organization integrated within your community? Examples:
            e Are there community events you help to coordinate?
            e Are you the go-to for a specific service?
            e Are you reaching a population who would otherwise not receive services?
            e How would the community describe your organization and your contributions to the
                area?

    2.   How does your organization maintain and establish collaborative relationships with partners?
         Directions: Answer each component of this question completely. Responses to each will be rated ona
         scale of 1 (does not meet requirements) to 5 (exceeds expectations) for a total score of 15 points.

             a.   In what ways are you working to grow trust and enhance participation with partners?
                  How do you incorporate feedback and input from partners?

             b.   Please identify potential NEW PARTNERS for you as an organization.

             c.   Are there shared resources that could be leveraged with partnership?




                                                                                                          Page | 6
                                               SECTION 3
Applicants should complete the budget template provided, adding and/or deleting expense lines as needed.
Budget Narrative will be scored separately. Budget table will be scored ona scale of 1 to 15 taking into
consideration complete and accurate budget amounts as well as cost effective programming.


Project Budget (15 points)
         On the next page, please identify all expenses related to this application. Add additional lines as
         necessary.
         For every $600 of total funding received it is expected that you will serve one caregiver with a
         series of evidence-based classes or a series of workshops/cafes. 1.e., for a grant with a total
         budget of $45,000 you will be expected to serve no less than 75 families with parenting
         education opportunities over the course of the grant cycle.

         For an online version vou can copy and fill with calculations click here and attach to email
         submission if desired.




                                                                                                           Page |7
For an online version you can copy and fill with calculations click here

                                 [Insert name of organization Here] Budget

           Contractor:                                          OPEC
             Program:
             Address:


     Contact   Person:                                          Contract#:

     Phone     Number:                                          Contract Term:               7/1125--6/30/27
                   E-mail:   _


               Budget Category                       ka    0-       ae           a   T-   Total Budget


 Personnel
                                                 $                  $
 Parenting Educators                                            -
                                                 $                  $
 Program Oversite                                               -
 Childcare Staff
                                                 $                  $
 Fringe                                                         :
                                                 $                  $

 Administration
                                                 $                  $
 Admin                                                          -
                                                 $                  $

 Program costs
                                                 $                  $
 Meals & Snacks, Food                                           -
                                                 $
 Parent Incentives
 Program Supplies
                                                                    $
 Curriculum costs                                               -
 Mileage
                                                 $                  $
 Facility Rental                                                -
                                                 $                  $
 Facilitator Training & Travel                                  -
                                                 $                  $

                                                            $                         $                    $
                                  Total Budget


                                                                                                               Page | 8
Budget Narrative (10 points)
    Provide a narrative that clearly explains salary/fringe, administrative, program, and any other costs
    associated with this project as outlined in your budget template. (max 300 words)

Fiscal Capacity (5 points)

   1.   Describe your organization’s procedures to ensure that only costs deemed allowable are billed to
        the County under this agreement.



   2.   Does your organization have a financial management system that can separately track the source
        and use of funds of individual agreements?

                     Yes.
                     No. Please explain.




   3.   Does your organization have procedures that provide assurance that consistent, fair and equitable
        treatment is applied in the distribution of charges to all funding sources?

                     Yes.
                     No.




                     Applications are due Friday May 9th, 2025 by 5:00pm.
  Please submit the application electronically to Stephanie Radford at sradford @clackamas.us




                                                                                                      Page | 9
Exhibit A:
Examples of Evidence-Based Curricula                              (see also Exhibit C)
Note: if there is a culturally- or linguistically-specific curriculum that is a better fit for a particular population in
your region than those listed here, please contact Stephanie Radford sradford@clackamas.us about including it
in your proposal.



          Abriendo Puertas https://ap-od.org/

    e     Active Parenting/Paternidad Activa https://activeparenting.com/

    e     Circle of Security https://www.circleofsecurityinternational.com/

    e     Conscious Discipline https://consciousdiscipline.com/

    e     Effective Black Parenting https://www.dcctf.org/aboutebp

    e     The Incredible Years httos://www.incredibleyears.com/

    e     Make Parenting a Pleasure, Parenting: The First Three Years, Haga de la Paternidad un Placer from
    Parenting Now! https://parentingnow.org/parenting-educators/curricula-parenting- educators-new/

    e     Nurturing Parenting (information about variations for cultural populations can be found in this
    curriculum’s Multi-Cultural Parenting Guide) https://www.nurturingparenting.com/

    e     Parenting Inside Out http://www.parentinginsideout.org/

    e     Positive Indian Parenting https://www.nicwa.org/about-pip/

    e     Strengthening Families Program: For Parents and Youth 10-14 https://www.extension.iastate.edu/sfp10-
    14/

    e     Strengthening Families 7-17 https://strengtheningfamiliesprogram.org/


    e     Triple P https://www.triplep.net/glo-en/home/

    e     See a full list of OPEC approved curricula here: https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1AvBwo79-
          AKseBCiGTxY-MfiQpavaM4-x30tPGH22uzA/edit


Important: DELC funds can only be used to support programs focused on families with young children (0-6).
ODHS funds can only be used to support parenting education programs for families with older children (7-18+).
Additional evidence-based curricula can be found on the following national registries:
http://www.ojidp.gov/mpg/
http://homvee.acf.hhs.gov/




                                                                                                                     Page | 10
Exhibit B:
Fidelity Program Fidelity Tools
Implementation fidelity refers to the “extent to which delivery of an intervention adheres to the
protocols and program model originally developed” (Mowbrey et al., 2003). Maintaining fidelity and
being responsive to the communities parent educators work with is a careful balance. To help with this
aim, OPEC has developed a suite of resources that will help you make informed decisions.
    e Monitoring Fidelity in OPEC Parenting Education Series explains the basics of program fidelity
        and evaluation and provides guidance for what can and cannot be changed in an evidence-based
        parenting education curriculum.
    e Howto Rate Fidelity to Best Practices in Parenting Education: A User Guide was created in
        2014-2015 and provides easy-to-follow instructions for calculating the fidelity rating for across a
        number of indicators. It refers to the following tools:
           o   Fidelity to Best Practices in Parenting Education Tool (shortened)
           o   Fidelity Checklist for Facilitators Guide
           o   Fidelity Checklist for Facilitators Checklist




                                                                                                     Page | 11
Exhibit C:
Definitions and Terms
Culturally-Adapted Curriculum: “the examples used to teach the main lessons are transformed to respect the
target culture’s practices” (Dalla, R. L., Defrain, J., Johnson, J., & Abbott, D. A. (2009). Strengths and challenges of
new immigrant families: Implications for research, education, policy, and service. Lexington Books)
Culturally-Specific Curriculum: “the philosophy and underlying assumptions of the program integrate the target
group’s values and beliefs” (Dalla, R. L., Defrain, J., Johnson, J., & Abbott, D. A. (2009). Strengths and challenges
of new immigrant families: Implications for research, education, policy, and service. Lexington Books)
Cultural Competence: “the ability of individuals and systems to respond respectfully and effectively to people of
all cultures, classes, races, ethnic backgrounds, sexual orientations, ability statuses, and faiths or religions, in a
manner that recognizes, affirms, and values the worth of individuals, families, tribes, and communities, and
protects and preserves the dignity of each. Cultural competence is a continuous process of learning about the
differences of others and integrating their unique strengths and perspectives into our lives.” (Child Welfare
League of America)
Diversity, Equity, Inclusion, and Belonging (DEIB) Efforts: This refers to values, processes, and practices that
relate to Diversity, Equity, Inclusion, and Belonging. This can include, but is not limited to: anti-racism, cultural
humility, trauma-informed care, reflective practice, disability access, language access, and more.
Evidence-Based: A program is “judged to be evidence-based if (a) evaluation research shows that the program
produces the expected positive results; (b) the results can be attributed to the program itself, rather than to
other extraneous factors or events; (c) the evaluation is peer- reviewed by experts in the field; and (d) the
program is “endorsed” by a federal agency or respected research organization and included in their list of
effective programs.” (“Evidence- based programs: An overview” University of Wisconsin-Madison and University
of Wisconsin- Extension, October 2007)
Parenting Education: The National Parent Education Network offers the following definition of parent
education: “a process that involves the expansion of insights, understanding and attitudes and the acquisition of
knowledge and skills about the development of both parents and of their children and the relationship between
them.” (http://www.npen.org/about/background.html )
Parenting Education Programming: refers to curricula series, workshops, parent support activities, family or
community activities, etc.
Parenting Education Curriculum: Refers to a multi-class series led by trained facilitators that is designed to teach
parenting skills and concepts, which are also often linked to positive long-term outcomes for the parents and/or
children who participate. Most of the funding for the OPEC initiative requires the use of evidence-based,
culturally-responsive (adapted), and/or culturally specific parenting education programming. See OPEC’s list of
approved parenting education curricula. Additional parenting curricula may be used that are culturally-specific,
culturally-responsive, and/or emergent from communities with promising evidence.
Professional Development: Learning activities for staff, facilitators, and/or others that provide parenting
education services. Example of these activities include curriculum trainings, workshops, classes, peer-to-peer
learnings, communities of learning/practice, coaching, networking, and more.
Target Audience: who your program aims to serve; e.g., “Spanish-speaking families with children 0-6,” “LGBTQ+
families,” or “Any family with children 10-14.” This would be a description of the community your curricula or
program Is designed to support.




                                                                                                                  Page | 12
Exhibit D:
Table of programming schedule
Guidelines
Please follow these guidelines for completing the Work Plan:
   e   The Work Plan is for two years: July 1, 2025-June 30, 2027 and you will fill out each table.
           o Weunderstand that work plans are the “best outcome’ of the work. To this end, we would expect the year 1 plan to be
               more detailed than year 2. For year 2, please put your plans to the best of your knowledge now. You will have the
               opportunity to update their Year 2 Work Plan in the continuation process.
   e   The Work Plan should align with the objectives identified in your project. The Work Plan should provide more detailed
       information about the strategies you will be using to address your project’s goals and objectives. In developing the Work Plan,
       you may address as many objectives as fit your proposal, taking into account program resources and project structure. You
       have the option of adding your own components, as long as the additions fall within the Request for Proposals parameters
       and are justified in your proposal.
   e   For every $600 of total funding received, it is expected that you will serve one caregiver with one series of evidence-
       based classes or a series of workshops/cafes. Please refer to your total amount requested and divide that number by 600
       to find your personalized goal for caregivers served. Then anticipate the number of class series needed to serve your
       personal goal and list below.
   e   Rows can be added or deleted in the template. Table cells can be divided. All columns should remain intact and should line
       up visually so we can follow your intent and progress.




                                                                                                                                 Page | 13
                                  Check all that apply.                                                         e.g., In-         mecueaed     Who     will help
Include the curriculum for                                            (Who, how many,     (City, building if    Person,     TRE     eee        market? Any
      Class series.              ODHS          DELC       Other?      additional notes)       known)            Virtual,     chronological    funding or co-
                                 (7-18)          (0-6)       ers                                                riper              order.    facilitation help?
                                                                   Families and Youth
                                                                   aged 11 -16 years
                                                                   of age. Facilitated
                                                                   adult group and                                                           ODHS Self-
         SA MPLE                                                   Facilitated Youth      Estacada                                           Sufficiency,
Active Parenting of Teens with                                     group. 5—    10        Middle                                             Roseburg High
  a Teen Group Component           x                               Families total.        School               In-Person | Fall 2025         School,                 English




                                                                                                                                                                   Page | 14
    .                                                                                                                                                                     Language
Sales, porns             or      Funding Source                   Target Audience          Location           Format                When           Partners                 and/or
                                                                                                                                                                       Interpretation
                                                                                                                          -         Dates or     Who will help
Include the curriculum for        Check all that <PPY.               (Who, how many,     (City, building if    Fea            TRE     eee        market? Any
      Class series.              ODHS          DELC      Other?      additional notes)       known)            Virtual,        chronological    funding or co-
                                 (7-18)          (0-6)      ers                                                riper                 order.    facilitation help?
                                                                  Families and Youth
                                                                  aged 11 -16 years
                                                                  of age. Facilitated
                                                                  adult group and                                                              ODHS Self-
         SAMP LE                                                  Facilitated Youth      Estacada                                              Sufficiency,
Active Parenting of Teens with                                    group. 5—    10        Middle                                                Roseburg High
  a Teen Group Component           4                              Families total.        School               In-Person | Fall 2025            School,                English




                                                                                                                                                                    Page | 15
Page | 16
