                                                                                        OMB Approval No. 2577-0169
                                                                                                   (exp.(04/30/2026))




                        U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
                                 Office of Public and Indian Housing

                     SECTION 8 PROJECT-BASED VOUCHER PROGRAM

                              AGREEMENT TO ENTER INTO A
                        HOUSING ASSISTANCE PAYMENTS CONTRACT

                          NEW CONSTRUCTION OR REHABILITATION

                                                         PARTI


OMB Burden Statement. The public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 0.25 hours,
including the time for collecting, reviewing and reporting the data. The information is required to establish terms between
the PHA and the owner prior to execution of a HAP contract for PBV assistance as provided in §983.152. Assurances of
confidentiality are not provided under this collection. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any other aspect of
this collection of information, including suggestions to reduce this burden, to the Office of Public and Indian Housing, US.
Department of Housing and Urban Development, Washington, DC 20410. HUD may not conduct and sponsor, and a person
is not required to respond to, a collection of information unless the collection displays a valid control number.

Privacy Notice. The Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) is authorized to collect the information
required on this form by 24 CFR § 983.152. The information is being collected to establish the agreement between the PHA
and owner prior to execution of a HAP contract for PBV assistance as provided in §983.153. The Personally Identifiable
Information (PII) data collected on this form are not stored or retrieved within a system of record.



  1.1    Parties

            This Agreement to Enter into Housing Assistance Payments Contract
            (“Agreement”) is between:

                                                                                  (“PHA”) and
                                                                                   “owner’’).


  1.2 Purpose

            The owner agrees to develop the Housing Assistance Payments Contract (“HAP
            Contract’) units to in accordance with Exhibit B and to comply with Housing
            Quality Standards (“HQS”), and the PHA agrees that, upon timely completion of
            such development in accordance with the terms of the Agreement, the PHA will
            enter into a HAP Contract with the owner of the Contract units.




                                                                    Agreement to Enter into a PBV HAP Contract
                                                                                        HUD 52531A, Part 1 of 2
  Previous Editions are obsolete                                                                                 (04/2023)
                                                                                                              Page 1 of 18
 1.3     Contents of Agreement
         This Agreement consists of Part I, Part I, and the following Exhibits:

         EXHIBIT A: The approved owner’s PBV proposal. (Selection of proposals must
         be in accordance with 24 CFR 983.51.)

         EXHIBIT B: Description of work to be performed under this
         Agreement, including:

                  if the Agreement is for rehabilitation of units, this exhibit must include
                  the rehabilitation work write-up and, where the PHA has determined
                  necessary, specifications and plans.

                  if the Agreement is for new construction of units, the work description
                  must include the working drawings and specifications.

                  any additional requirements beyond HQS relating to quality, design and
                  architecture that the PHA requires.

                  work items resulting from compliance with the design and construction
                  requirements of the Fair Housing Act and implementing regulations at 24
                  CFR 100.205, the accessibility requirements under section 504 of the
                  Rehabilitation Act of 1973 and implementing regulations at 24 CFR 8.22
                  and 8.23, and accessibility requirements under Titles II and III of the
                  Americans with Disabilities Act at 28 CFR parts 35 and 36, as applicable.

         EXHIBIT C: Description of housing, including:

                  project site.

                  total number of units in project covered by this Agreement.

                  locations of contract units on site.

                  number of contract units by area (size) and number of bedrooms and
                  bathrooms.

                  services, maintenance, or equipment to be supplied by the owner without
                  charges in addition to the rent to owner.

                  utilities available to the contract units, including a specification of utility
                  services to be paid by the owner (without charges in addition to rent)
                  and utility services to be paid by the tenant.
                  estimated initial rent to owner for the contract units.



                                                         Agreement to Enter into a PBV HAP Contract
                                                                             HUD 52531A, Part 1 of 2
Previous Editions are obsolete                                                              (04/2023)
                                                                                         Page 2 of 18
         EXHIBIT     D: The HAP       contract.


 1.4     Significant Dates
         A.       Effective Date of the Agreement: The Agreement must be executed
                  promptly after PHA notice of proposal selection to the owner has been
                  given. The PHA may not enter this Agreement with the owner until a
                  subsidy layering review has been performed and an environmental review
                  has been satisfactorily completed in accordance with HUD requirements.

         B.       A project may either be a single-stage or multi-stage project. A single-
                  stage project will have the same Agreement effective date for all contract
                  units. A multi-stage project will separate effective dates for each stage.

                LL] Single-stage project

                          1.         Effective Date for all contract units:

                          il.        Date of Commencement       of the Work:   The date for
                                     commencement of work is not later than
                                     calendar days after the effective date of this Agreement.

                          iil.       Time for Completion of Work: The date for completion of
                                     the work is not later than                  calendar days
                                     after the effective date of this Agreement.

                |       Multi-Stage Project

                          Enter the information for each stage upon execution of
                          the Agreement for the corresponding stage.

   STAGE          NUMBER         |   EFFECTIVE            DATE OF        TIME FOR
                  OF UNITS             DATE            COMMENCEMENT |} COMPLETION
                                                          OF WORK        OF WORK




                                                         Agreement to Enter into a PBV HAP Contract
                                                                             HUD 52531A, Part 1 of 2
Previous Editions are obsolete                                                                (04/2023)
                                                                                          Page 3 of 18
 15      Nature of the Work

        [|     This Agreement is for New Construction of units to be assisted by the
                  project-based Voucher program.

        L]     This Agreement is for Rehabilitation of units to be assisted by the project-
                  based Voucher program.

 1.6     Schedule of Completion
         A.       Timely Performance of Work: The owner agrees to begin work no later
                  than the date for commencement of work as stated in Section 1.4. In the
                  event the work is not commenced, diligently continued and completed as
                  required under this Agreement, the PHA may terminate this Agreement
                  or take other appropriate action. The owner agrees to report promptly to
                  the PHA the date work is commenced and furnish the PHA with progress
                  reports as required by the PHA.

         B.       Time for Completion: All work must be completed no later than the end
                  of the period stated in Section 1.4. Where completion in stages is
                  provided for, work related to units included in each stage shall be
                  completed by the stage completion date and all work on all stages must be
                  completed no later than the end of the period stated in Section 1.4.

         C.       Delays: If there is a delay in the completion due to unforeseen factors
                  beyond the owner’s control as determined by the PHA, the PHA agrees
                  to extend the time for completion for an appropriate period as determined
                  by the PHA in accordance with HUD requirements.

 1.7.    Changes in Work

        A.        The owner must obtain prior PHA approval for any change from the
                  work specific in Exhibit B which would alter the design or quality of the
                  rehabilitation or construction. The PHA is not required to approve any
                  changes requested by the owner. PHA approval of any change may be
                  conditioned on establishment of a lower initial rent to owner at the
                  amounts determined by PHA.


                                                    Agreement to Enter into a PBV HAP Contract
                                                                        HUD 52531A, Part 1 of 2
Previous Editions are obsolete                                                        (04/2023)
                                                                                    Page 4 of 18
         B.       If the owner makes any changes in the work without prior PHA approval,
                  the PHA may establish lower initial rents to owner at the amounts
                  determined by PHA in accordance with HUD requirements.

         C.       The PHA (or HUD in the case of insured or coinsured mortgages) may
                  inspect the work during rehabilitation or construction to ensure that work
                  is proceeding on schedule, is being accomplished in accordance with the
                  terms of the Agreement, meets the level of material described in Exhibit
                  B and meets typical levels of workmanship for the area.

 1.8     Work completion
         A.       Conformance with Exhibit B: The work must be completed in accordance
                  with Exhibit B. The owner is solely responsible for completion of the
                  work.

         B.       Evidence of Completion: When the work in completed, the owner must
                  provide the PHA with the following:

                  1.      A certification by the owner that the work has been completed in
                          accordance with the HQS and all requirements of this Agreement.

                  2.      A certification by the owner that the owner has complied with
                          labor standards and equal opportunity requirements in the
                          development of the housing. (See 24 CFR 983.155(b)(1)(i1).)

                  3.      Additional Evidence of Completion: At the discretion of the PHA,
                          or as required by HUD, this Agreement may specify additional
                          documentation that must be submitted by owner as evidence of
                          completion of the housing. Check the following that apply:

                           EL]   A certificate of occupancy or other evidence that
                                 the contract units comply with local requirements.

                           cL]   An architect’s or developer’s certification that the
                                 housing complies with:

                                 L__] the nas:
                                 |      State, local, or other building codes;

                                 L]     Zoning;




                                                     Agreement to Enter into a PBV HAP Contract
                                                                         HUD 52531A, Part 1 of 2
Previous Editions are obsolete                                                            (04/2023)
                                                                                        Page 5 of 18
                                         The rehabilitation work write-up for rehabilitated
                                         housing;

                                         The work description for newly constructed
                                         housing; or

                                 [__] Any additional design or quality requirements
                                         pursuant to this Agreement.

1.9     Inspection and Acceptance by the PHA of Completed Contract
        Units

        A.        Completion of Contract Units: Upon receipt of owner notice of
                  completion of Contract units, the PHA shall take the following steps:

                  1.      Review all evidence of completion submitted by owner.

                  2.      Inspect the units to determine if the housing has been completed in
                          accordance with this Agreement, including compliance with the
                          HQS and any additional requirements imposed by the PHA under
                          this Agreement.

        B.        Non-Acceptance: If the PHA determines the work has not been completed
                  in accordance with this Agreement, including non-compliance with the
                  HQS, the PHA shall promptly notify the owner of this decision and the
                  reasons for the non-acceptance. The parties must not enter into the HAP
                  contract.

        C.        Acceptance: If the PHA determines housing has been completed in
                  accordance with this Agreement, and that the owner has submitted all
                  required evidence of completion, the PHA must submit the HAP contract
                  for execution by the owner and must then execute the HAP contract.

1.10 Acceptance where defects or deficiencies are reported:

        A.        If other defects or deficiencies exist, the PHA shall determine whether
                  and to what extent the defects or deficiencies are correctable, whether the
                  units will be accepted after correction of defects or deficiencies, and the
                  requirements and procedures for such correction and acceptance.

        B.        Completion in Stages: Where completion in stages is provided for,
                  the procedures of this paragraph shall apply to each stage.




                                                       Agreement to Enter into a PBV HAP Contract
                                                                           HUD 52531A, Part 1 of 2
Previous Editions are obsolete                                                           (04/2023)
                                                                                       Page 6 of 18
1.11. Execution of HAP           Contract

         A.       Time and Execution: Upon acceptance of the units by the PHA, the owner
                  and the PHA execute the HAP contract.

                  Completion in Stages: Where completion in stages is provided for the
                  number and types of units in each stage, and the initial rents to owner
                  for such units, shall be separately shown in Exhibit C of the contract for
                  each stage. Upon acceptance of the first stage, the owner shall execute
                  the contract and the signature block provided in the contract for that
                  stage. Upon acceptance of each subsequent stage, the owner shall
                  execute the signature block provided in the contract for such stage.

                  Form of Contract: The terms of the contract shall be provided in Exhibit
                  D of this Agreement. There shall be no change in the terms of the contract
                  unless such change is approved by HUD headquarters. Prior to execution
                  by the owner, all blank spaces in the contract shall be completed by the
                  PHA.

                  Survival of owner Obligations: Even after execution of the contract,
                  the owner shall continue to be bound by all owner obligations under
                  the Agreement.

1.12 Initial determination of rents

         A.       The estimated amount of initial rent to owner shall be established
                  in Exhibit C of this Agreement.

                  The initial amount of rent to owner is established at the beginning of
                  the HAP contract term.

                  The estimated and initial contract rent for each units may in no event
                  exceed the amount authorized in accordance with HUD regulations and
                  requirements. Where the estimated initial rent to owner exceeds the
                  amount authorized in accordance with HUD regulations, the PHA shall
                  establish a lower initial rent tow owner, in accordance with HUD
                  regulations and requirements.

1.13 Uniform        Relocation Act

        A.        A displaced person must be provided relocation assistance at the levels
                  described in and in accordance with the requirements of the Uniform
                  Relocation Assistance and Real Property Acquisition Policies Act of 1970



                                                     Agreement to Enter into a PBV HAP Contract
                                                                         HUD 52531A, Part 1 of 2
Previous Editions are obsolete                                                           (04/2023)
                                                                                       Page 7 of 18
                  (URA) (42 U.S.C. 4201-4655) and implementing regulations at 49
                  CFR part 24.

         B.       The cost of required relocation assistance may be paid with funds
                  provided by the owner, or with local public funds, or with funds
                  available from other sources. Payment of relocation assistance must be
                  paid in accordance with HUD requirements.

         C.       The acquisition of real property for a project to be assisted under the
                  program is subject to the URA and 49 CFR part 24, subpart B.

         D.       The PHA must require the owner to comply with the URA and 49 CFR
                  part 24.

         E.       In computing a replacement housing payment to a residential tenant
                  displaced as a direct result of privately undertaken rehabilitation or
                  demolition of the real property, the term “initiation of negotiations”
                  means the execution of the Agreement between the owner and the PHA.

1.14 Protection of In-Place Families

         A.       In order to minimize displacement of in-place families, if a unit to be
                  placed under Contract is occupied by an eligible family on the proposal
                  selection date, the in-place family must be placed on the PHA’s waiting
                  list Gf they are not already on the list) and, once their continued eligibility
                  is determined, given an absolute selection preference and referred to the
                  project owner for an appropriately sized unit in the project.

         B.       This protection does not apply to families that are not eligible
                  to participate in the program on the proposal selection date.

         C.       The term “in-place family” means an eligible family residing in a
                  proposed contract unit on the proposal selection date.

         D.       Assistance to in-place families may only be provided in accordance
                  with the program regulations and other HUD requirements.

1.15 Termination of Agreement and Contract

         The Agreement or HAP contract may be terminated upon at least 30 days notice to
         the owner by the PHA or HUD if the PHA or HUD determines that the contract
         units were not eligible for selection in conformity with HUD requirements.




                                                      Agreement to Enter into a PBV HAP Contract
                                                                          HUD 52531A, Part 1 of 2
Previous Editions are obsolete                                                            (04/2023)
                                                                                        Page 8 of 18
1.16 Rights of HUD if PHA Defaults Under Agreement

       If HUD determines that the PHA has failed to comply with this Agreement or has
       failed to take appropriate action to HUD’s satisfaction or as directed by HUD, for
       enforcement of the PHA’s rights under this Agreement, HUD may assume the
       PHA’s rights and obligations under the Agreement, and may perform the
       obligations and enforce the rights of the PHA under the Agreement. HUD will, if
       it determines that the owner is not in default, pay Annual Contributions for the
       purpose of providing housing assistance payments with respect to the dwelling
       unit(s) under this Agreement for the duration of the HAP contract.

1.17 Owner Default and PHA Remedies
       A.        Owner Default

                 Any of the following is a default by the owner under the Agreement:

                 1.       The owner has failed to comply with any obligation under
                          the Agreement.

                 2.       The owner has violated any obligation under any other housing
                          assistance payments contract under Section 8 of the United
                          States Housing Act of 1937 (42 U.S.C. 1437f).

                 3,       The owner has committed any fraud or made any false statement
                          to the PHA or HUD in connection with the Agreement.

                 4,       The owner has committed fraud, bribery, or any other corrupt
                          or criminal act in connection with any Federal housing
                          assistance program.

                 5.       If the property where the contract units are located is subject to a
                          lien or security interest securing a HUD loan or mortgage
                          insured by HUD and:

                          a.     The owner has failed to comply with the regulations for the
                                 applicable HUD loan or mortgage insurance program, with
                                 the mortgage or mortgage note, or with the regulatory
                                 agreement; or

                          b.     The owner has committed fraud, bribery, or any other
                                 corrupt or criminal act in connection with the HUD loan or
                                 HUD-insured mortgage.



                                                      Agreement to Enter into a PBV HAP Contract
                                                                          HUD 52531A, Part 1 of 2
Previous Editions are obsolete                                                          (04/2023)
                                                                                      Page 9 of 18
                  6.      The owner has engaged in any drug-related criminal activity or
                          any violent criminal activity.

        B.        PHA Remedies

                  1.      If the PHA determines that a breach has occurred, the PHA may
                          exercise any of its rights or remedies under the Agreement.

                  2.      The PHA must notify the owner in writing of such determination.
                          The notice by the PHA to the owner may require the owner to
                          take corrective action (as verified by the PHA) by a time
                          prescribed in the notice.

                  3.      The PHA’s rights and remedies under the Agreement include but
                          are not limited to: (1) terminating the Agreement; and (11) declining
                          to execute the HAP contract for some or all of the units.

        C.        PHA Remedy is not Waived

                  The PHA’s exercise or non-exercise of any remedy for owner breach of
                  the Agreement is not a waiver of the right to exercise that remedy or
                  any other right or remedy at any time.

 1.18 PHA      and Owner Relation to Third Parties

        A.        Selection and Performance of Contractor

                  1.      The PHA has not assumed any responsibility or liability to the
                          owner, or any other party for performance of any contractor,
                          subcontractor or supplier, whether or not listed by the PHA as a
                          qualified contractor or supplier under the program. The selection of
                          a contractor, subcontractor or supplier is the sole responsibility of
                          the owner and the PHA is not involved in any relationship between
                          the owner and any contractor, subcontractor or supplier.

                  2.      The owner must select a competent contractor to undertake
                          rehabilitation or construction. The owner agrees to require from
                          each prospective contractor a certification that neither the
                          contractor nor its principals is presently debarred, suspended,
                          proposed for debarment, declared ineligible, or voluntarily
                          excluded from participation in contract by the Comptroller
                          General or any federal Department or agency. The owner agrees
                          not to award contracts to, otherwise engage in the service of, or
                          fund any contractor that does not provide this certification.

                                                     Agreement to Enter into a PBV HAP Contract
                                                                         HUD 52531A, Part 1 of 2
Previous Editions are obsolete                                                          (04/2023)
                                                                                    Page 10 of 18
         B.       Injury Resulting from Work under the Agreement: The PHA has not
                  assumed any responsibility for or liability to any person, including a worker
                  or a resident of the unit undergoing work pursuant to this Agreement,
                  injured as a result of the work or as a result of any other action or failure to
                  act by the owner, or any contractor, subcontractor or supplier.

         C.       Legal Relationship: The owner is not the agent of the PHA and this
                  Agreement does not create or affect any relationship between the PHA and
                  any lender to the owner or any suppliers, employees, contractor or
                  subcontractors used by the owner in the implementation of the Agreement.

         D.       Exclusion of Third Party Claims: Nothing in this Agreement shall be
                  construed as creating any right of any third party (other than HUD) to
                  enforce any provision of this Agreement or the Contract, or to assert any
                  claim against HUD, the PHA or the owner under the Agreement or the
                  Contract.

         E.       Exclusion of owner Claims against HUD: Nothing in this Agreement shall
                  be construed as creating any right of the owner to assert any claim against
                  HUD.

1.19 PHA-Owned             Units

         Notwithstanding Section 1.18 of this Agreement, a PHA may own units assisted
         under the project-based voucher program, subject to the special requirements in
         24 CFR 983.59 regarding PHA-owned units.

1.20 Conflict of Interest

         A.       Interest of Members, Officers, or Employees of PHA, Members of Local
                  Governing Body, or Other Public Officials

                  1.      No present or former member or officer of the PHA (except
                          tenant-commissioners), no employee of the PHA who formulates
                          policy or influences decisions with respect to the housing choice
                          voucher program or project-based voucher program, and no public
                          official or member of a governing body or State or local legislator
                          who exercises functions or responsibilities with respect to these
                          programs, shall have any direct or indirect interest, during his or
                          her tenure or for one year thereafter, in the Agreement or HAP
                          contract.

                  2.      HUD may waive this provision for good cause.



                                                       Agreement to Enter into a PBV HAP Contract
                                                                           HUD 52531A, Part 1 of 2
Previous Editions are obsolete                                                            (04/2023)
                                                                                       Page 11 of 18
         B.       Disclosure

                 The owner has disclosed to the PHA any interest that would be a violation
                 of the Agreement or HAP contract. The owner must fully and promptly
                 update such disclosures.

1.21 Interest of Member or Delegate to Congress

         No member of or delegate to the Congress of the United States of America or
         resident-commissioner shall be admitted to any share or part of the Agreement
         or HAP contract or to any benefits arising from the Agreement of HAP contract.



1.22 Transfer of the Agreement, HAP Contract, or Property

         A.      PHA Consent to Transfer

                 The owner agrees that the owner has not made and will not make any
                 transfer in any form, including any sale or assignment, of the Agreement,
                 HAP contract, or the property without the prior written consent of the
                 PHA. A change in ownership in the owner, such as a stock transfer or
                 transfer of the interest of a limited partner, is not subject to the provisions
                 of this section. Transfer of the interest of a general partner is subject to the
                 provisions of this section.

         B.      Procedure for PHA Acceptance of Transferee

                 Where the owner requests the consent of the PHA for a transfer in any
                 form, including any sale or assignment, of the Agreement, the HAP
                 contract, or the property, the PHA must consent to a transfer of the
                 Agreement or HAP contract if the transferee agrees in writing (in a form
                 acceptable to the PHA) to comply with all the terms of the Agreement and
                 HAP contract, if the transferee is acceptable to the PHA. The PHA’s
                 criteria for acceptance of the transferee must be in accordance with HUD
                 requirements.

         C.      When Transfer is Prohibited

                 The PHA will not consent to the transfer if any transferee, or any principal
                 or interested party, is debarred, suspended, subject to a limited denial of
                 participation, or otherwise excluded under 2 CFR part 2424, or is listed on
                 the U.S. General Services Administration list of parties excluded from
                 Federal procurement or nonprocurement programs.


                                                      Agreement to Enter into a PBV HAP Contract
                                                                          HUD 52531A, Part 1 of 2
Previous Editions are obsolete                                                            (04/2023)
                                                                                       Page 12 of 18
1.23 Exclusion from Federal Programs

         A.       Federal Requirements

                  The owner must comply with and is subject to requirements of 2 CFR part
                  2424.

         B.       Disclosure

                  The owner certifies that:

                  1.      The owner has disclosed to the PHA the identity of the owner and
                          any principal or interested party.

                  2.      Neither the owner nor any principal or interested party is listed on
                          the U.S. General Services Administration list of parties excluded
                          from Federal procurement and nonprocurement programs; and
                          none of such parties are debarred, suspended, subject to a limited
                          denial of participation, or otherwise excluded under 2 CFR part
                          2424,

1.24 Lobbying Certifications

         A.       The owner certifies, to the best of the owner’s knowledge and belief, that:

                  1.      No Federally appropriated funds have been paid or will be paid,
                          by or on behalf of the owner, to any person for influencing or
                          attempting to influence an officer or employee of any agency, a
                          Member of Congress, an officer or employee of Congress, or an
                          employee of a Member of Congress in connection with the
                          awarding of the Agreement or HAP contract, or the extension,
                          continuation, renewal, amendment, or modification of the HAP
                          contract.

                  2.      If any funds other than Federally appropriated funds have been
                          paid or will be paid to any person for influencing or attempting to
                          influence an officer or employee of any agency, a Member of
                          Congress, an officer or employee of Congress, or an employee of
                          a Member of Congress in connection with the Agreement or HAP
                          contract, the owner must complete and submit Standard Form-
                          LLL, “Disclosure Form to Report Lobbying,” in accordance with
                          its instructions.




                                                     Agreement to Enter into a PBV HAP Contract
                                                                         HUD 52531A, Part 1 of 2
Previous Editions are obsolete                                                         (04/2023)
                                                                                    Page 13 of 18
         B.       This certification by the owner is a prerequisite for making or entering into
                  this transaction imposed by 31 U.S.C. 1352.

1.25 Subsidy Layering

         A.       Owner Disclosure

                  The owner must disclose to the PHA, in accordance with HUD
                  requirements, information regarding any related assistance from the
                  Federal government, a State, or a unit of general local government, or
                  any agency or instrumentality thereof, that is made available or is
                  expected to be made available with respect to the contract units. Such
                  related assistance includes, but is not limited to, any loan, grant,
                  guarantee, insurance, payment, rebate, subsidy, credit, tax benefit, or any
                  other form of direct or indirect assistance.

         B.       Limit of Payments

                  Housing assistance payments under the HAP contract must not be more
                  than is necessary, as determined in accordance with HUD requirements,
                  to provide affordable housing after taking account of such related
                  assistance. The PHA will adjust in accordance with HUD requirements
                  the amount of the housing assistance payments to the owner to
                  compensate in whole or in part for such related assistance.

1.26 Prohibition of Discrimination

         A.       The owner may not refuse to lease contract units to, or otherwise
                  discriminate against, any person or family in leasing of a contract
                  unit, because of race, color, religion, sex (including sexual orientation
                  and gender identity), national origin, disability, age, or familial
                  status.

         B.       The owner must comply with the following requirements:

                  1.      The Fair Housing Act (42 U.S.C. 3601-19) and implementing
                          regulations at 24 CFR part 100 et seq.;

                  2.      Executive Order 11063, as amended by Executive Order 12259 (3
                          CFR 1959-1963 Comp., p. 652, and 3 CFR, 1980 Comp., p. 307)
                          (Equal Opportunity in Housing Programs) and implementing
                          regulations at 24 CFR part 107;




                                                      Agreement to Enter into a PBV HAP Contract
                                                                          HUD 52531A, Part 1 of 2
Previous Editions are obsolete                                                             (04/2023)
                                                                                        Page 14 of 18
                  3.       Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000d—2000d-
                           4) (Nondiscrimination in Federally Assisted Programs) and
                           implementing regulations at 24 CFR part 1;

                  4.       The Age Discrimination Act of 1975 (42 U.S.C. 6101-6107)
                           and implementing regulations at 24 CFR part 146;

                  5.       Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 U.S.C. 794) and
                           implementing regulations at 24 CFR part 8;

                  6.       Title II of the Americans with Disabilities Act, 42 U.S.C. 12101 et
                           seq.; 28 CFR part 35

                  7.       Executive Order 11246, as amended by Executive Orders 11375,
                           11478, 12086, and 12107 (3 CFR, 1964-1965 Comp., p. 339; 3
                           CFR, 1966-1970 Comp., p. 684; 3 CFR, 1966-1970 Comp., p.
                           803; 3 CFR, 1978 Comp., p. 230; and 3 CFR, 1978 Comp., p. 264,
                           respectively) (Equal Employment Opportunity Programs) and
                           implementing regulations at 41 CFR chapter 60;

                   8.     Executive Order 11625, as amended by Executive Order 12007 (3 C
                              FR, 1971-1975 Comp.., p. 616 and 3 CFR, 1977 Comp., p. 139)
                           (Minority Business Enterprise Development); and

                   9,     Executive Order 12138, as amended by Executive Order 12608 (3
                           CFR, 1977 Comp., p. 393, and 3 CFR, 1987 Comp., p. 245)
                           (Women’s Business Enterprise).

                  10.      HUD’s Equal Access Rule at 24 CFR 5.105.

             The PHA and the owner must cooperate with HUD in the conducting of
             compliance reviews and complaint investigations pursuant to all applicable
             civil rights statutes, Executive Orders, and all related rules and regulations.




                                                     Agreement to Enter into a PBV HAP Contract
                                                                         HUD 52531A, Part 1 of 2
Previous Editions are obsolete                                                          (04/2023)
                                                                                     Page 15 of 18
 1.27 Owner Duty to Provide Information and Access to HUD and PHA
         A.       The owner must furnish any information pertinent to this Agreement as
                  may be reasonably required from time to time by the PHA or HUD. The
                  owner shall furnish such information in the form and manner required
                  by the PHA or HUD.

                  The owner must permit the PHA or HUD or any of their authorized
                  representatives to have access to the premises during normal business
                  hours and, for the purpose of audit and examination, to have access to
                  any books, documents, papers, and records of the owner to the extent
                  necessary to determine compliance with this Agreement.

1.28 Notices and Owner            Certifications

         A.       Where the owner is required to give any notice to the PHA pursuant to
                  this Agreement, such notice shall be in writing and shall be given in the
                  manner designated by the PHA.

                  Any certification or warranty by the owner pursuant to the Agreement
                  shall be deemed a material representation of fact upon which reliance
                  was placed when this transaction was entered into.

1.29 HUD Requirements

         A.       The Agreement and the HAP contract shall be interpreted and
                  implemented in accordance with all statutory requirements, and will all
                  HUD requirements, including amendments or changes in HUD
                  requirements. The owner agrees to comply with all such laws and
                  HUD requirements.

                  HUD requirements are requirements that apply to the project-based
                  voucher program. HUD requirements are issued by HUD Headquarters as
                  regulations, Federal Register notices, or other binding program directives.

1.30 Applicability of Part II Provisions — Check All that Apply

              | Equal   Employment   Opportunity
                  Section 2.1 applies only to construction contracts of more than $10,000.

                                                     Agreement to Enter into a PBV HAP Contract
                                                                         HUD 52531A, Part 1 of 2
Previous Editions are obsolete                                                         (04/2023)
                                                                                    Page 16 of 18
             | Labor Standards Requirements
                 Sections 2.3, 2,7, and 2.9 apply only when this Agreement covers nine or
                 more units.

       []      Flood Insurance
                 Section 2.10 applies if units are located in areas having special flood
                 hazards and in which flood insurance is available under the National Flood
                 Insurance Program.




                                                   Agreement to Enter into a PBV HAP Contract
                                                                       HUD 52531A, Part 1 of 2
Previous Editions are obsolete                                                       (04/2023)
                                                                                  Page 17 of 18
 EXECUTION OF THE AGREEMENT

 I/We, the undersigned, certify under penalty of perjury that the information provided above
 is true and correct. WARNING: Anyone who knowingly submits a false claim or makes a
 false statement is subject to criminal and/or civil penalties, including confinement for up to
 5 years, fines, and civil and administrative penalties. (18 U.S.C. $§ 287, 1001, 1010, 1012;
 31 U.S.C. §3729, 3802).

PUBLIC HOUSING AGENCY              (PHA)
Name of PHA (Print)




By:

Signature of authorized representative



Name and official title (Print)




Date


OWNER
Name of Owner (Print)




By:

Signature of authorized representative



Name and official title (Print)




Date




                                                    Agreement to Enter into a PBV HAP Contract
                                                                        HUD 52531A, Part 1 of 2
Previous Editions are obsolete                                                        (04/2023)
                                                                                   Page 18 of 18
