Monitoring
HOME


              U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
              Office of Community Planning and Development




Prepared by




                                                                 September 2010
Introduction


Purpose of this Guidebook
When HUD provides a HOME participating jurisdiction (PJ) with HOME funds, it holds the PJ accountable for compli-
ance with all the HOME Program regulations. This is true even if the PJ provides some of its HOME allocation to other
entities to help it carry out its HOME-funded activities. So, if the PJ disburses HOME funds to another entity to undertake
any HOME activity, HUD requires the PJ to monitor that entity to verify that its use of funds also complies with HOME
requirements.
This guidebook, Monitoring HOME, is a tool for staff of HOME PJs to assist them in monitoring their own operations and
the other entities they fund to ensure that they comply with HOME requirements. The PJ’s monitoring staff (also called “PJ
monitors”) can use this guidebook to:
    • Understand the purpose and process of monitoring
    • Determine their program partners’ compliance with HOME’s specific program, project, administrative, and long-term
      requirements.
The main emphasis of this guide is on onsite monitoring.

Background
Monitoring HOME replaces two key sources of monitoring guidance that HUD has issued previously:
    • The HOME model program guide, HOME Monitoring Model Guide (CPD-2030, October 2008)
    • The HOME monitoring training manual, Monitoring HOME: Ensuring Program Compliance. (This manual has been
      distributed at training sessions that have been convened throughout the country since 2002.)
Monitoring HOME updates recent changes to the HOME Program regulations and other policy guidance, and incorporates
guidance from HUD’s CPD Grantee Monitoring Handbook, which was developed and issued after HUD’s monitoring pro-
gram guide and training manual. HUD Field Office staff uses the CPD Grantee Monitoring Handbook to monitor the com-
pliance and performance of HOME PJs.
The Handbook includes monitoring checklists (referred to as “HUD checklists”) that provide HUD staff a wealth of detailed
monitoring information and a consistent set of questions by which it can monitor a PJ’s HOME performance and compli-
ance. This guidebook, Monitoring HOME, draws on these HUD checklists and adapts them as needed for use by HOME PJs
to monitor their own program partners. HOME PJs are not required to use the HUD checklists, but most PJs will find that
the checklists can facilitate the monitoring process. These checklists are the most comprehensive HOME monitoring tool
available to date, and they follow a simple and standardized format so that the PJ can ensure all HOME requirements are
being adhered to. This guidebook is based on the CPD Grantee Monitoring Handbook 6509.2, REV-6.
A copy of the most recent version of the CPD Grantee Monitoring Handbook can be found at http://www.hud.gov/offices/
cpd/library/monitoring/handbook.cfm. Chapter 7 of the Handbook discusses monitoring the HOME Program require-
ments. Other chapters of the Handbook are not HOME-specific, but relate to other Federal requirements that apply to the
HOME Program.




Introduction                                                                                                              1
Organization of the Guidebook
Monitoring HOME is organized into seven chapters that cover the following topics:
     • Overview to monitoring (Chapter 1)
     • Monitoring program partners (Chapter 2)
     • Monitoring administrative and management requirements (Chapter 3)
     • Monitoring specific HOME activities (Chapters 4-7)
       — Homeowner rehabilitation programs (Chapter 4)
       — Homebuyer programs, including programs that provide direct assistance to homebuyers and programs that pro-
         vide subsidies for the development of housing for homeownership (Chapter 5)
       — Rental programs (Chapter 6)
       — Tenant-based rental assistance programs (Chapter 7).

How to Use this Guidebook
Chapter 1 of this guidebook provides necessary background information about monitoring and the monitoring process,
and provides specific guidance on how to conduct a risk assessment and how to develop an annual monitoring plan. Chap-
ter 1 also provides guidance on the PJ’s obligations to follow up on any corrective actions that may be needed as a result of
monitoring.
Chapters 2-7 are designed as monitoring tools for each area of HOME compliance that the PJ monitors. The PJ monitor can
simply copy and use the checklists found in these chapters for use during onsite monitoring visits. The checklists relate to the
core HOME program activities and general administrative and financial management.
Chapters 4 through 7 provide guidance on monitoring each of the eligible HOME activity areas (homeowner rehabilitation,
rental, homebuyer housing, and tenant-based rental assistance). Each of these chapters is further divided into three sections,
for each stage of monitoring that the PJ might conduct:
     • Section 1 provides checklists to facilitate pre-monitoring
     • Section 2 provides checklists to facilitate project monitoring
     • Section 3 provides checklists on program monitoring.
This guidebook adapts the HUD checklists for the core HOME Program monitoring areas, but it is not exhaustive. For some
areas of review, PJs may need to use some of the original HUD checklists that were not adapted in this guidebook, in order to
more thoroughly monitor compliance. The introduction of each chapter identifies the additional HUD checklists that may
be needed for that area of review.
This guidebook is intended to assist the PJ monitor in evaluation of the HOME Program. Its contents do not supersede any
information found in the HOME Program statute, HOME Program regulations, HUD notices, and relevant cross-cutting
Federal laws, regulations, notices, and circulars.

About the HOME Model Series
Monitoring HOME is one of a number of model program guides that has been issued by HUD to provide technical assistance
to PJs implementing the HOME Program. These model program guides cover a range of topics related to HOME Program
administration and activities, and are available at no cost through Community Connections at 1-800-998-9999. For a com-
plete list of all the model program guides, see the HOME Program’s website, Model Program Guides, at http://www.hud.gov/
offices/cpd/affordablehousing/library/modelguides/index.cfm.




2                                                                                                             Monitoring HOME
Chapter 1: HOME Monitoring Basics


This chapter provides an overview on monitoring that explains who the PJ must monitor, why monitoring is important, and
how monitoring can be conducted. The chapter provides detailed guidance on how to conduct a risk analysis to target limited
monitoring resources to the highest risk activities or funded entities in the PJ’s portfolio, and how to develop an annual moni-
toring plan. The chapter concludes with a description of the monitoring process.

A. What Is Monitoring?
HOME Investment Partnerships (HOME) Program funds must be used in accordance with all applicable requirements speci-
fied at 24 CFR Part 92. Monitoring is a systematic review of programs and fund administration that helps HUD and the
HOME Participating Jurisdiction (PJ) evaluate whether compliance with these requirements is achieved. Monitoring can also
be used to evaluate program management, performance, and program outcomes.

B. Who Does the PJ Monitor?
It is the PJ’s responsibility to monitor all the entities that expend HOME funds to carry out HOME activities. These entities
may include one or more of the following:
     • PJ (itself ). Although HUD is responsible for monitoring the PJ, in order to ensure program compliance, effective
       management, and performance achievement, the PJ should monitor itself. This involves assessing the PJ’s own compli-
       ance with any of the program activities it administers, as well as its own management, administrative, and financial
       systems.
     • Subrecipient. A subrecipient is a public agency (such as a public housing authority) or nonprofit organization that is
       selected by the PJ to administer all or a portion of its HOME program activities. The PJ is responsible for monitoring
       its subrecipients on an annual basis. Note, a PJ may fund a separate department or agency within its own governmen-
       tal structure. While these entities are not typically considered subrecipients, the PJs should monitor them in a similar
       way.
     • State Recipient. A State recipient is a unit of local government that receives HOME funds from a State PJ. In general,
       the State recipient administers a program activity in its jurisdiction and has responsibilities that are similar to a subre-
       cipient. The State PJ is responsible for monitoring its State recipients on an annual basis.
     • Consortium Members. A consortium is a number of geographically contiguous units of general local government that
       join together for the purpose of receiving HOME funds. A consortium is considered a single entity for the purposes
       of the HOME Program. One member of the consortium must be designated as the “lead entity,” and that entity is the
       PJ. The remaining member jurisdictions, if funded, are subrecipients of the lead entity. The lead entity is responsible
       to monitor the consortium’s funded activities, and for ensuring that all member jurisdictions comply with the HOME
       requirements.
     • Community Housing Development Organization (CHDO). A CHDO is a special nonprofit that meets certain
       qualifying criteria that are outlined in the HOME regulations at 24 CFR 92.2 (definition of "CHDO"). Each PJ must
       spend no less than 15 percent of each annual HOME allocation on housing that is owned, developed, or sponsored
       by CHDOs. PJs are required to determine the eligibility of nonprofit organizations to qualify as CHDOs and must
       monitor CHDOs for compliance with all applicable requirements.
     • Housing Owners, Developers, and Sponsors. An owner, developer, or sponsor of affordable housing is a for-profit
       or nonprofit organization that receives funds to undertake specific affordable housing projects. Unlike subrecipients,


Chapter 1: HOME Monitoring Basics                                                                                                 3
       owners, developers, and sponsors do not administer HOME program activities. Also, nonprofit organizations func-
       tioning as owners, developers, or sponsors do not need to meet the HOME CHDO qualifying criteria unless they
       receive HOME CHDO set-aside funds.
     • Contractor. A contractor is an entity that is competitively procured to carry out a specified scope of work for a
       specified price. It can administer a program and/or provide necessary goods and services to a PJ, State recipient,
       or subrecipient. PJs monitor contractors for performance under agreements as well as compliance with applicable
       requirements.
                                    Figure 1-1: Entities that the PJ Must Monitor

                                                            PJ




                                                                                         Nonprofit Owner,
                      Contractor
                                                                                        Developer, Sponsor

                                                                                  For-profit Owner,
                             Subrecipient
                                                                                 Developer, Sponsor

                                                                       State
                                             CHDO
                                                                     Recipient



C. Why Must the PJ Monitor Its Activities and Partners?
There are three key reasons why the PJ monitors its funded activities and the entities it funds:
     • It is legally required to do so, to ensure compliance with HOME Program requirements.
     • It can use information uncovered in monitoring to improve program design and management.
     • It can evaluate how well its funded programs are achieving the desired outcomes (i.e., performance).

1. Comply with Legal Requirements
    When a PJ accepts HOME funds from HUD, it agrees to comply with all HOME regulations. HUD is required to mon-
    itor HOME PJs and to hold them accountable to comply with the HOME requirements. When the PJ provides HOME
    funds to other entities to carry out HOME activities on its behalf, the PJ is likewise required to monitor its funded
    entities on at least an annual basis from project selection through to project completion, and periodically throughout the
    affordability period, in accordance with 24 CFR 92.504. Noncompliance with HOME requirements on the part of the
    PJ or one of its funded entities can result in the repayment of HOME funds to HUD.
    Legal accountability is necessary to ensure that PJs comply with the HOME requirements and to protect against fraud
    and misuse of public funds. The most significant of the HOME rules require that:
     • Funds are used to provide housing opportunities for low- and very low-income families
     • Any housing that is assisted with HOME funds must meet certain standards to ensure that it is decent, safe,
       and sanitary
     • A portion of funds be invested in housing that is owned, developed, or sponsored by community housing development
       organizations (CHDOs), to ensure that PJs cultivate the capacity of nonprofit housing developers in their jurisdictions.


4                                                                                                              Monitoring HOME
    • Housing opportunities that are created with HOME funds must be available and affordable for some period of time
      (the affordability period).
2. Improve Program Design and Management
    As part of the monitoring process, the PJ reviews program procedures and program design, related to all aspects of
    program delivery-- from how projects and programs are selected for funding, to how the beneficiary’s income-eligibility
    is determined, to whether assisted units comply with applicable property standards and affordability requirements over
    time.
    The information the PJ uncovers during the monitoring process can help it examine whether it is using its resources effi-
    ciently and effectively. Prudent PJs use this information to adjust program design, and policies and procedures in order to
    improve operations. In addition, PJs can use information gathered in the monitoring process to evaluate the effectiveness
    and performance of the PJ’s funded entities. This information should be shared with the PJ staff that makes project selec-
    tion decisions, so that funding decisions are informed with current information on performance and compliance.
3. Evaluate Performance
    The HOME Program gives State and local PJs considerable flexibility to implement affordable housing programs that
    meet local housing priorities, conditions, and needs. Monitoring can help the PJ determine whether or not HOME funds
    are being used to address the highest affordable housing priorities, conditions and needs of the jurisdiction. Monitoring
    allows PJs to ensure that HOME-funded programs and projects:
    • Align with the Consolidated Plan
    • Comply with the CPD Outcome Performance Measurement system or other performance measurement systems
      implemented by the HUD or the PJ
    • Are successful in achieving key objectives and outcomes.

D. What Types of Monitoring Can the PJ Undertake?
The PJ must monitor all aspects of its funded programs and projects that impact compliance. Monitoring for HOME compli-
ance falls into four general areas:
    • Program monitoring assesses the overall performance and operation of the program and helps the PJ assess if its pro-
      grams and activities are carried out effectively and in compliance with HOME rules.
    • Administrative and financial monitoring assesses the fiscal and administrative management of the HOME funds.
    • Project monitoring assesses compliance with requirements related to specific HOME activities and projects (such as
      specific homebuyer or rental development projects).
    • Long-term monitoring assesses compliance with long-term HOME requirements that apply to HOME-assisted
      rental and homeownership housing after project completion.
Figure 1-2, Types of HOME Monitoring, describes and compares each type of monitoring and identifies what types of entities
must be monitored for each type.




Chapter 1: HOME Monitoring Basics                                                                                             5
                                          Figure 1-2: Types of HOME Monitoring
                                                         Administrative and
                            Program Monitoring                                      Project Monitoring         Long-Term Monitoring
                                                        Financial Monitoring
 What it is               Evaluates:                  Evaluates:                 Evaluates specific           Evaluates compliance
                          • Overall performance       • Administrative           funded projects for          with applicable long-
                            and operation               systems for carrying     compliance with:             term affordability
                                                        out HOME activities      • All HOME project           requirements upon
                          • Program                                                                           project completion
                            administration            • Financial management       requirements (such as
                                                      of HOME funds                property standards,        Applies to rental and
                          • Project and beneficiary                                per unit subsidy           homeownership projects
                            selection               • Recordkeeping,               limits, beneficiary        only
                          • Adequacy of policies,     reporting, and               income-eligibility,
                                                      oversight of funded                                     Evaluates compliance
                            procedures, and                                        and affordability          with:
                            practices to ensure       activities                   restrictions)
                            HOME compliance           • Effective and                                         • Rent and income
                                                                                 • Cross-cutting Federal        restrictions (rental)
                          • Staff capacity and          compliant written          regulations (such as
                            implementation              agreements that            environmental review,      • Affirmative marketing
                                                        protect the HOME           Uniform Relocation           and fair housing
                          Identifies systemic           investment                 Act, Lead Safe             • Property condition
                          problems, rather than
                                                                                   Housing Rule, and
                          single instances of                                                                 • Principal residence
                                                                                   others).
                          noncompliance that                                                                    and resale/
                          are limited to specific                                Typically involves a           recapture provisions
                          projects.                                              review of specific project     (homebuyer)
                                                                                 files and inspection of
                                                                                 units.
 Who is monitored         All entities that receive   All funded entities that   All program                  Owners of HOME-
                          funding from the PJ to      are not competitively      administrators that          assisted rental property
                          administer all or part      procured. This might       carry out HOME-funded        and homebuyer housing
                          of its HOME Program         include:                   activities
                          activities. This might      • PJ                       • PJs
                          include:
                                                      • Subrecipients            • Subrecipients
                          • PJ                          (including consortia       (including consortia
                          • Subrecipients               members)                   members)
                            (including consortia      • State recipients         • State recipients
                            members)
                                                      • Community housing        • Contractors
                          • State recipients            development              and the entities that
                          • Contractors                 organizations (limited   carry out specific
                                                        review)                  projects (including
                                                                                 CHDOs)
                                                                                 • Owners
                                                                                 • Developers
                                                                                 • Sponsors
 Applicable chapters in   Section 3 of Chapters       Chapter 3                  Section 2 of Chapters        Chapters 5 (homebuyer)
 this guidebook           4-7 provides detailed                                  4-7 provides detailed        and 6 (rental)
                          guidance for each HOME                                 guidance for each HOME
                          activity                                               activity



E. How Often Should the PJ Monitor Its Funded Entities?
The frequency that a PJ is required to monitor a funded entity depends on the activity type and whether the project is in the
development stage or it has been completed. Figure 1-3 summarizes the minimum frequency of required onsite monitoring
visits.
1. Required Monitoring


6                                                                                                                    Monitoring HOME
   PJs are required to monitor their State recipients, subrecipients, and contractors at least once a year, during all phases of
   the project or program administration—typically from when that funded entity starts drawing HOME funds, up until
   the project or program administration is complete. See 24 CFR 92.504.
   When the PJ has evidence that a subrecipient, State recipient, or contractor may be at risk of noncompliance or nonper-
   formance, it may need to monitor that funded entity more frequently than annually in order to minimize the risk that
   the funded entity will not carry out the activity in compliance with HOME rules or the terms of the written agreement.
   Alternatively for other funded entities where annual monitoring is not required (e.g., CHDOs), the PJ should conduct
   a risk analysis to determine appropriate monitoring efforts. If the PJ conducts a risk analysis of all of its funded entities,
   it will be able to identify these at-risk entities that it may want to monitor more frequently throughout the year. The risk
   analysis provides a framework to help the PJ assess its risks. It is discussed in more detail in Section F, How Can the PJ
   Assess Its Risk?
   Figure 1-3 provides the required frequency for onsite monitoring visits. These monitoring visits involve both physical
   inspections as well as program/project file reviews.


                               Figure 1-3: Frequency of Required Onsite Monitoring Visits
                                 Activity                                        Required Frequency of Onsite Monitoring Visits
For any activity administered by a subrecipient, State recipient, or        Annually
contractor, while contract is in effect
Tenant-based rental activity                                                Annually (unit inspection and income verification only)
Project development activities during all phases of the project through     At least annually, but recommended at periodic timeframes
to occupancy and project completion                                         throughout the development process (such as upon
                                                                            submission of payment voucher)
Post completion, for rental projects with 1-4 total units in the project    Every 3 years
Post completion, for rental projects with 5-25 total units in the project   Every 2 years
Post- completion, for rental projects with 26 or more total units in the    Annually
project



2. Long-term Monitoring of Rental Housing
   a. HOME-Assisted Rental Housing
        Upon project completion, the PJ must also conduct long-term monitoring of HOME-assisted rental housing projects
        for compliance with HOME requirements that apply during the affordability period. Rental property owners must
        submit an annual Rental Compliance Report that the PJ reviews to monitor compliance with the ongoing income
        targeting and affordability requirements [24 CFR 92.252(f )(2)]. Attachment 6-E is a sample of this form, found at
        the end of Chapter 6. The PJ must also conduct onsite monitoring on a periodic basis to: (1) Verify accuracy of rent
        and occupancy reports and review onsite records, and (2) inspect units to ensure continued compliance with appli-
        cable housing standards. See 24 CFR 92.504(d).
   b. Tenant-based Rental Assistance
        PJs must perform annual inspections of rental housing that is occupied by tenants that receive HOME tenant-based
        rental assistance. The purpose of these inspections is to ensure that the property continues to meet the HOME prop-
        erty standards. See 24 CFR 92.504(d)(2).
        In addition, on an annual basis, the PJ must re-verify that each tenant receiving tenant-based rental assistance contin-
        ues to be income-eligible. This income re-verification must be based on source documentation. See 24 CFR 92.216.




Chapter 1: HOME Monitoring Basics                                                                                                       7
F. How Can the PJ Assess Its Risk?                                                                      Most PJs cannot always
                                                                                                        perform comprehensive
A risk analysis helps program and monitoring staff evaluate the likelihood that a project,              onsite reviews of all
program, or organization will fail to comply with program requirements, or is vulnerable                funded entities, given
to fraud and abuse. This evaluation may also focus on activities that carry performance risk            their limited resources.
(such as poor housing unit production, a low number of residents assisted, or slow expenditures).       With a risk analysis, PJs
The level of structure and formality to a risk analysis should reflect the size and scope of            assess their relative risks
activities the PJ undertakes. The important purpose of the analysis is that it provides a stan-         of noncompliance or poor
dard framework for comparing relative risk across a variety of activities.                              performance and make
                                                                                                        strategic choices about
In conducting a formal risk analysis, the PJ:                                                           how and where to invest
1. Establishes a protocol that documents the standard methodology with which all funded                 monitoring resources.
   entities will be evaluated. This protocol identifies the risk factors and subfactors that
   affect program performance. For instance, risk factors may include type of HOME activity and subfactors may include
   funded entity staff capacity/experience to undertake a HOME activity.
2. Assigns a relative weight to each factor and subfactor that helps to evaluate overall risk of the organization and program/
   project performance.
Once the PJ has developed the risk analysis protocol, it uses it to quantify the level of risk that each of its funded entities
poses. This way, the PJ can compare the relative risk of a newly funded nonprofit that is carrying out a small homeowner
rehabilitation program with an experienced for-profit developer that is constructing a new rental development.
Figure 1-4 provides a simplified example of how a risk analysis tool is used. Attachment 1-A provides a well-developed risk
analysis protocol, and provides guidance on how to use it. This might be used by larger PJs or those with a large number of
funded entities or variety of funded programs.
                                        Figure 1-4: Illustration of the Risk Analysis
 A PJ rates two of its CHDOs to decide which one should be monitored more intensively this year. For simplicity, this example uses
 only three risk factors: type of program, amount of HOME funds, and staff turnover. It uses the weights and points found in the risk
 analysis protocol in Attachment 1-A.
 Step 1: Identify weights for each factor                                   CHDO 2
        • Type of program (10)                                              • Rental rehabilitation program (4 points)
        • Amount of HOME funds (20)                                         • $250,000 in HOME funds (3 points)
        • Staff turnover (15)                                               • No staff turnover in the past year (0 points)
 Step 2: Identify the points for each criteria                       Step 3: Calculate the CHDOs’ scores
        CHDO 1                                                              • Multiply the weights by the points for each factor, and
        • New construction homebuyer program (5 points)                       then add all the weighted points.
        • $60,000 in HOME funds (2 points)                                  • See the calculations below.
        • Staff turnover in the last year (5 points)

                              CHDO 1 Risk Factors                                   Weights            Points            Weighted Points
 Type of program: Homebuyer New Construction                                           10          x            5         =          50
 Amount of HOME funds: $60,000                                                         20          x            2         =          40
 Staff Turnover: Yes                                                                   15          x            5         =          75
                                                                                                                              Total: 165
                              CHDO 2 Risk Factors                                   Weights            Points            Weighted Points
 Type of program: Rental Rehab                                                         10          x            4         =          40
 Amount of HOME funds: $250,000                                                        20          x            3         =          60
 Staff Turnover: No                                                                    15          x            0         =           0
                                                                                                                              Total: 100
 Based on these totals, CHDO 1 has a higher risk score (165 total points) than CHDO 2 (100 total points) because of its staff
 turnover. The PJ should allocate more monitoring resources towards CHDO 1 than CHDO 2.



8                                                                                                                    Monitoring HOME
G. What Is an Annual Monitoring Plan?
Once the PJ has conducted its risk analysis and has made decisions about how to use its monitoring resources to minimize
its risks, it can develop a monitoring plan. The monitoring plan documents the PJ’s monitoring priorities and outlines how it
will carry out its monitoring activities for the year. In its annual action plan, the PJ is required to describe how it will moni-
tor its activities; however, HUD does not prescribe how the PJ prepares a monitoring plan. A comprehensive monitoring plan
helps the PJ use its scarce monitoring resources more effectively and efficiently.
A monitoring plan typically addresses of the following areas:
     • Monitoring priorities
     • Type of monitoring planned
     • Form of monitoring (desk reviews and onsite visits)
     • Internal and external communication
     • Schedule
     • Staffing
     • Technical assistance needs
     • Follow-up activities
1. Monitoring Priorities
    The monitoring priorities are the areas that the PJ is most interested in monitoring across-the-board. While the PJ may
    wish to tailor some of its monitoring to address areas of concern that are organization-specific, the priorities typically are
    the monitoring areas that the PJ wishes to addresses for all, or most, of the organizations it monitors. The PJ’s priorities
    may, in fact, shift from year to year.
    Figure 1-5 provides examples of areas that might be monitoring priorities for a PJ.
    When establishing the monitoring priorities for the year, the PJ should consider:
     • Areas of common concern that are identified in the risk analysis. For instance, the risk analysis might reveal that
       many of the PJ’s subrecipients are behind in their reporting. The PJ may decide that it will focus its monitoring on
       reporting and documentation in order to address this common problem.
     • Results of and follow-up needed from, prior years’ monitoring results. For instance, in the prior year, the PJ may
       have a number of funded entities whose housing units had a number of deficiencies when inspected for housing qual-
       ity. The PJ may decide to monitor the construction process of those entities the following year.
     • Analysis of progress reports and HOME and IDIS reports on program/project status. For instance, the HOME
       Expiring Funds Report might identify projects where the PJ is at-risk of losing considerable HOME funds due to the
       eight year deadline for expiration of funds. The PJ might
       want to monitor the projects associated with these expiring
                                                                           Figure 1-5: Sample Monitoring Priorities
       funds to ensure they are moving forward so funds will not be
       lost.                                                              • Identifying and tracking program and project
                                                                                results
2. Type of Monitoring
                                                                           •    Identifying technical assistance needs of PJ,
    For many of its funded entities, the PJ will conduct the required           CHDO, and subrecipient staff
    annual review (for current projects or programs) or the required
                                                                           •    Ensuring timely expenditure of HOME funds
    long-term monitoring for rental and homebuyer projects. For
    these and any additional monitoring the PJ chooses to carry            •    Documenting compliance with program rules
    out, the plan should specify what type of monitoring (program,         •    Preventing fraud and abuse
    administrative and financial, project, or long-term) is required       •    Identifying innovative tools and techniques
    and/or appropriate.                                                         that support affordable housing goals



Chapter 1: HOME Monitoring Basics                                                                                                    9
3. Form of Monitoring: Desk Reviews and Onsite Monitoring
     The annual monitoring plan identifies which funded entities will be subject to desk reviews and which will be given
     onsite reviews in the coming monitoring year. These decisions should be based primarily on the results of the required
     onsite monitoring visits and the risk analysis. Generally, the PJ should conduct onsite reviews for those that have greater
     risk, and desk reviews for those with lower risk.
     Desk Reviews. Desk reviews, as the name implies, are done at the PJ office. The desk review involves reviewing reports
     and other documentation that are submitted to the PJ from a variety of sources.
     There are a variety of reports and other documentation that can help the PJ understand how well a program or project is
     managed, and whether it is achieving its goals and compliance obligations. The annual monitoring plan should specify
     the reports (and the format) that the PJ will want to review for each program and project, and the frequency with which
     those reports must be prepared and submitted.
     Typically, the PJ should conduct at least a minimum level of desk review for every project or program that receives fund-
     ing, and for all rental projects that are in their affordability period.
     Onsite Monitoring. Onsite monitoring enables the PJ to conduct a more in-depth level of review than the desk review.
     Onsite monitoring involves a visit to the funded entity’s office to review documents and source information, observe
     actual program operations, and discuss programs and projects with the staff carrying them out. Onsite monitoring is
     recommended when the risk analysis or desk review suggests that there may be problems, or if a long period of time has
     elapsed since the last visit.
     During an onsite review, monitors evaluate overall performance and determine if compliance problems exist. Site visits
     often enable the monitor to identify aspects of the program or project that are contributing to a problem. Monitoring
     staff must prepare and distribute a report summarizing the results of the review and describing any required follow-up
     activity. An onsite visit is required annually until project completion or contract close-out. Onsite visits are also required
     during the affordability period for rental and homebuyer development projects, on a periodic basis.
4. Internal and External Coordination
     To the extent that the PJ is aware of others, either internal or external to the PJ, that might have knowledge about, or
     interest in, a funded entity, the monitoring plan should identify the other parties and specify when and how monitor-
     ing staff should coordinate with those other parties. For instance, when HOME
     funds are invested in projects that are also funded with Low-Income Housing Tax
     Credits, the PJ knows that the State housing credit allocating agency will also be         An annual monitoring plan is
     monitoring the project. The monitoring plan might specify that the PJ monitor              often a work in progress. In
                                                                                                the course of conducting desk
     contact the State allocating agency to inquire about the State’s monitoring results
                                                                                                reviews, the PJ may identify
     and to share the local PJ’s results, or it might specify that the PJ should conduct
     onsite inspections and monitoring at the same time as the State agency in order to issues of concern. It can (and
                                                                                                should!) change its plan and
     minimize redundancy in monitoring efforts.
                                                                                              conduct additional monitoring
5. Schedule                                                                                   as new information of potential
     The annual monitoring plan identifies the scope, frequency, and timing of moni-          problems is uncovered.
     toring reviews for the year. Different kinds of projects have different monitoring
     schedules. Creating a monitoring calendar during the earliest stages of project implementation allows the PJ to schedule
     staff members effectively, ensuring that tasks are completed in an orderly and organized fashion.
6. Staffing
     The monitoring plan identifies specific staff who will perform key monitoring functions. To the extent staff other than the
     monitoring staff is responsible for any particular reviews, the plan should so state.
     When determining the staff monitoring assignments, the PJ’s manager should consider:
     • Staff technical expertise in the area under review. For instance:
        — Staff conducting project and program monitoring must understand the HOME Program regulations and the


10                                                                                                               Monitoring HOME
          development or program assistance process. Depending on the area under review, the project or program monitor
          may need to work with a housing inspector, a financial analyst, or an expert in the Federal cross-cutting require-
          ments (environmental review, labor, etc).
      — Staff conducting financial and administrative monitoring must understand the HOME Program regulations, the
        uniform administrative requirements, and the applicable Office of Management and Budget (OMB) circulars.
      — Staff conducting long-term monitoring must understand the HOME Program regulations and the property man-
        agement process.
    • Objectivity of the monitor. Two suggestions to promote objectivity:
      — Separate the funding (project selection and underwriting) and monitoring functions in order to ensure that the
        monitor has no previous relationship to the funded entity under review.
      — Rotate monitoring assignments on a regular basis.
    • Opportunities for collaboration with other stakeholder agencies. When two or more public agencies fund the same
      project, there may be multiple parties monitoring its activities, such as with Low-Income Housing Tax Credit projects.
      Collaboration is an attractive way to use resources efficiently. Collaboration can work when:
      — The PJ clearly understands the monitoring needs, concerns, and motivations of the other agency, and these are
        common to the PJ’s own needs.
      — There is an agreement with the two agencies about the scope of responsibilities.
      — The monitoring staff has expertise in the HOME Program regulations.
      — The PJ understands that it remains accountable to HUD for the compliance and performance of its projects and
        programs, and monitors the collaborative process to ensure that the PJ’s monitoring needs are met.
    • Contracting out. Using an outside entity to conduct monitoring activities can prove helpful when existing staff do
      not have sufficient time or technical expertise, and for maintaining an unbiased perspective. When contracting out, it
      is important to:
      — Identify a contractor that has strong expertise in the HOME Program regulations.
      — Develop a clear scope of work that includes specific guidelines and performance standards and milestones for the
        contractor.
      — Ensure ongoing oversight by the PJ, since monitoring is an ongoing obligation of the PJ.
      — Require the contractor to provide technical assistance and training to the PJ staff so that it can take over the moni-
        toring functions in the future, when the contractor is engaged because the staff has insufficient technical expertise.
7. Technical Assistance
   Given the complexities of managing a Federal affordable housing program like HOME, technical assistance is an impor-
   tant tool to enhance program performance and compliance. Ideally, the annual monitoring plan identifies where and how
   the PJ will conduct technical assistance in the monitoring year. Technical assistance is particularly useful when working
   with other entities that have limited staff experience, past performance issues, and project specific risk factors such as a
   project involving lead hazard control, relocation, or other project specific technical issues. Technical assistance in the form
   of workshops, meetings, or group training is effective to address problems that are of common concern to more than one
   funded entity.
8. Follow-up Activities
   Each year, the PJ should ensure that any outstanding findings or concerns that were addressed the previous year have
   been resolved to the PJ’s satisfaction. The annual monitoring plan should provide a summary of the prior year’s activi-
   ties, and identify any follow-up activities that are still required. As either part of the monitoring plan, or elsewhere, the
   PJ should also have written detailed procedures for communicating the results of monitoring reviews with internal and
   external staff, and for obtaining and incorporating feedback. The plan may include a system of disciplinary actions for
   funded entities who fail to respond.


Chapter 1: HOME Monitoring Basics                                                                                                  11
     Section J, Following Up the Initial Monitoring Report, provides a detailed discussion of a common approach for monitor-
     ing follow-up.

H. Conducting Onsite Monitoring
As either a part of its monitoring plan or as a stand-alone document, it is helpful for the PJ to adopt written procedures about
how to conduct an onsite visit, to ensure consistency among monitoring staff. This section describes one effective process for
conducting onsite visits. PJs can adopt or amend this process in order to meet its own needs.
1. Prepare for the Site Visit
     Preparation before a site visit can save the PJ and its funded entity(ies) time. Prior to any site visit, the PJ monitor should
     become familiar with the HOME Program requirements under review and learn about the specific project or program
     that will be monitored.
     a. Background on the HOME Program
         Staff involved in monitoring should be familiar with the HOME resources available and reference them as needed:
         • For HOME rent, income limits, regulations, policy guidance, and model guidebooks and links to key infor-
           mation and resources for the administration of HOME activities, see http://www.hud.gov/offices/cpd/
           affordablehousing/library/
         • For HUD CPD Grantee Monitoring Handbook and Exhibits, see Chapter 7
           for HOME http://www.hud.gov/offices/cpd/library/monitoring/hand- The term “PJ monitor” is used
           book.cfm                                                            throughout this section and the
         • For other HUD policy notices, regulations, and handbooks (particularly           remainder of this guidebook. The
           those that cut across HUD programs), see http://www.hud.gov/offices/             PJ monitor refers to the PJ’s staff
           adm/hudclips/index.cfm                                                           that is responsible for monitoring
                                                                                            and that carries out the onsite
         Many publications listed in the HOME Program library are also available            monitoring review. The PJ monitor
         through HUD’s information center, Community Connections, phone (800)               may be one person or a team of
         998-9999, TDD 1-800-483-2209.                                                      people.
     b. Background on the Project/Program
         Prior to the site visit, the PJ monitor should be thoroughly familiar with the entity it is monitoring, what its contrac-
         tual obligations to the PJ are, what HOME activity it is undertaking and how, and its past performance. Specifically,
         the PJ monitor should review:
         • HOME Written Agreement. This is the contract between a PJ and a funded entity. It awards the HOME funds
           and documents the funded entity’s responsibility to comply with HOME Program requirements in administering
           these funds. HOME agreements are specific to the type of activity supported with HOME funds (e.g., homeowner
           rehabilitation or rental rehabilitation). For rental housing activities, it is useful to also review the accompanying
           deed restriction/covenant prior to monitoring. A deed restriction/covenant is the document that is recorded on the
           property that may specify long-term requirements that are not included in the HOME agreement.
         • PJ Policies and Procedures. The PJ adopts policies that describe how its programs must be implemented and how
           HOME requirements are met.
         • Funded Entity Procedures. The funded entity also adopts certain procedures for administering the program.
           Often these procedures are a part of the application to the PJ and/or referenced in the HOME agreement.
         • HOME-Related Reports and Correspondence. A number of HOME reports are available to help the PJ track
           and assess the progress of HOME projects. Some are available through the Integrated Disbursement Information
           System (IDIS) (such as the PR27, Status of HOME Grants Reports), and others are available online, such as the
           HOME SNAPSHOT report. The PJ monitor should also review letters discussing previous monitoring findings
           and/or corrective actions, electronic mail messages between the PJ and the funded entity, and reports that have


12                                                                                                                Monitoring HOME
         been submitted by the funded entity. The PJ monitor should identify any questions or concerns that are raised by
         those reports prior to the site visit.
       • Results of Desk Reviews. Depending on the project or program, the content of the desk review will vary (e.g., it
         might include the review of the Integrated Disbursement and Information System (IDIS) HOME reports to set up
         projects and activities, draw down funds, and close out projects; or rental management plans for long-term compli-
         ance monitoring; or financial reports for financial and administrative monitoring).
       • Staff Experience with the Funded Entity. Other PJ staff members who are working on, or have worked on, the
         project/program under review can generally provide a concise overview of the background on the project, identify
         issues that have arisen, and suggest the strengths and weaknesses in the project and/or funding entity staff or proce-
         dures, so that the monitor can target its monitoring efforts accordingly.
2. Schedule the Onsite Visit
   The PJ should call the funded entity to explain the purpose of the visit and to schedule the visit. Once scheduled, a for-
   mal notification letter should follow several weeks before the planned visit. This letter should include:
    • Confirmation of the date and time for the review
    • Name of the PJ staff performing the review
    • Elements of the program to be monitored
    • Information needed for review during the visit (files and records)
    • Staff needed for interviews or other assistance during the review
   For rental housing site visits, if the monitoring visit will involve unit inspections, be sure to notify the staff of the funded
   entity which units will be inspected, and ask that it notifies and makes arrangements with the affected tenants. (The PJ
   monitor may not want to notify the owner of specific units that the will be inspected too far in advance. It can follow up
   with a letter with these specifics about a week in advance.)
3. Convene an Entrance Conference
   At the inception of the onsite visit, the PJ monitor should meet with the executive director (or another top official) of the
   organization and any additional staff he/she includes. The purpose of this meeting is to explain the purpose, scope, and
   schedule for the monitoring; describe the monitoring process and follow-up procedures; and emphasize the responsibili-
   ties of the funded entity to respond to any required corrective actions upon conclusion of the monitoring process.
4. Conduct Staff Interviews
   The PJ monitor should conduct staff interviews with the funded entity’s executive director and HOME program/project
   management staff. At these interviews, the PJ monitor should explain the purpose of the monitoring visit and what will
   be reviewed, and answer any questions. The PJ monitor should conduct staff interviews on the project or program, to
   determine how the project/program is being administered, confirm that there have been no significant changes since the
   last report or site visit, and identify any areas of concern that staff may want to draw attention to. The PJ monitor should
   continue to discuss the project/program with staff throughout the monitoring visit, and should discuss preliminary obser-
   vations, solicit assistance in locating documents, and engage the staff to ensure that the monitoring is complete.
5. Select Files for Review
   The PJ monitor can select files for monitoring visit prior to the site visit, or onsite. In selecting files for review, the PJ
   monitor should consider:
    • Sample size. Many PJ monitors use a general rule:
      — For rental projects of up to 5 units, review all tenant files
      — For rental projects with more than 5 units, review 15 to 20 percent and at least one unit in every building if there
        is more than one building in the project
      — For homebuyer and tenant-based rental assistance projects, review 15 to 20 percent of the beneficiary files.


Chapter 1: HOME Monitoring Basics                                                                                                   13
     • Risk factors. In addition to the randomly selected units, it is prudent to review files for any unit/project/beneficiary
       that has been:
        — Identified as out-of-compliance during the desk review
        — The object of a complaint made with the HOME PJ.
6. Review Files
     Using the checklists provided in the subsequent chapters of this handbook, the PJ monitor should review the files to
     ensure that the program/project complies with HOME requirements, and the funded entity’s documentation of compli-
     ance is sufficient. While conducting the review, the PJ monitor should take good notes, and begin to form a preliminary
     assessment of findings.
     If the initial sampling of files identifies potential compliance or performance     Take good notes! The notes
     issues, the PJ monitor may decide to follow up in a number of ways:                 taken by the PJ monitor during
                                                                                         the monitoring visit will form the
     • Review a larger sample of files, to determine if the problem may be
                                                                                         basis of the monitoring letter and
       widespread                                                                        reports. Notes give a clear record
     • Interview program/project staff about the specific issue(s) uncovered, to         of what information was reviewed
       determine if the monitor is missing information                                   and what conversations were held.
                                                                                         Good notes are important when
     • Conduct onsite inspections of units                                               funded entities dispute the PJ’s
     • Interview residents.                                                              conclusions.

7. Hold Exit Conference
     An exit conference is a meeting held at the end of the onsite review process to present preliminary findings and recom-
     mendations with the executive director and/or HOME program management staff. The PJ monitor should provide an
     adequate overview of the issues identified in the review to ensure that the funded entity is not surprised by any issues
     identified when the report is issued. The PJ monitor should also give the funded entity an opportunity to correct any
     misconceptions or misunderstandings, and to provide additional information, as needed.
     The PJ monitor should be sure to include positive as well as negative feedback during the exit conference. Often, funded
     entities are mission-driven organizations that do important work. Positive feedback is important to communicate those
     things the funded entity is doing well, and to help build an effective long-term relationship. The PJ monitor should
     also describe the PJ’s next steps. If findings and responses require management staff to provide further direction before
     a report can be finalized, the PJ monitor should explain that. The PJ monitor should tell the funded entity when it can
     expect to receive a final report.

I. Following Up on the Onsite Visit
1. Analyze Results of Review
     Upon return to the office, the PJ monitor should conduct a thorough analysis in order to draw conclusions about the
     monitoring visit. As part of this analysis, the PJ monitor may want to:
     • Hold a staff meeting to review identified issues and concerns
     • Research any regulatory requirements where there might be a concern about compliance
     • Identify what corrective actions were used if other organizations had similar problems or concerns, in order to ensure
       consistency among all funded agencies.
     HUD’s framework for analyzing monitoring results can be helpful to the PJ as well. HUD uses three categories to analyze
     the results of its monitoring reviews:
     • Findings are areas of statutory or regulatory noncompliance that must be addressed immediately. For example, it is a
       finding if a PJ invests more HOME funds than the maximum per unit subsidy limit allows, or if a tenant is charged a
       rent that is greater than the permitted HOME rent. Findings always require corrective actions.


14                                                                                                             Monitoring HOME
    • Concerns are issues that are not instances of statutory or regulatory noncompliance but may result in noncompliance
      if they are not addressed. For example:
      — Procedures to operate its HOME program are not in place
      — Staff are unsure of the steps involved in selecting and approving applicants
      — The program’s files are in disarray.
      Even if the PJ monitor does not find any instances of noncompliance, if these conditions continue, it is unlikely that
      the funded entity will be able to continue to operate the program in compliance of HOME requirements. The PJ has
      the option to require concerns to be to be addressed, and it should so indicate in the monitoring report/letter.
    • Observations are comments about areas where the funded entity can improve program performance. For example, the
      PJ monitor might observe high staff turnover, which is not a violation in terms of compliance, but it has the potential
      to affect program performance.
2. Determine Appropriate Corrective Actions
   Corrective actions are the steps that must be taken to correct instances of noncompliance,               The range of corrective
   poor management, or poor performance that are identified by the PJ monitor. The PJ must                  actions that a PJ might
   specify corrective actions to correct findings that are violations of the HOME statute or regu-          take should be clearly
   lations. The PJ may also direct the funded entity to take corrective actions for other deficien-         identified in its written
   cies (concerns and observations) as necessary. Figure 1-6 identifies some common problems                agreement with the
   and appropriate corrective actions. Appendix I provides a list of serious findings that would            funded entity.
   typically result in a repayment of HOME funds.
                        Figure 1-6: Common Problems and Possible Corrective Actions
                       Finding or Concern                                             Possible Corrective Action(s)

Policies, procedures, or forms used in program operations do not Require the adoption or revision of policies, procedures, or forms.
accurately state HOME requirements, or do not sufficiently ensure • Provide specific guidance on issue to be improved
compliance.
                                                                  • Provide sample language or offer to review
                                                                   • Mandate use of PJ-developed material(s)

Written agreement does not clearly state HOME requirement(s).      Explain the deficiency(ies) and amend the written agreement

Staff are unfamiliar with HOME requirements in general; or, one    Require staff to attend training and/or participate in technical
or two specific areas of compliance are not in compliance, but     assistance (recommended when staff is new or inexperienced)
overall program is well-administered.                              • Large PJs should conduct training and technical assistance
                                                                   • Tap HUD Field Office resources for technical assistance, where
                                                                     possible
                                                                   Recommend or require change in staff (recommended when staff
                                                                   person has been in place and has been trained, but continues to
                                                                   have difficulty understanding or implementing the requirements)

HOME funds spent on ineligible costs                               Repay/return HOME funds

Costs are unsubstantiated                                          Withhold payments until there is evidence that costs are justified
                                                                   and reasonable
HOME-assisted unit occupied by an over-income household            For homebuyer housing, repay HOME funds
                                                                   For rental housing, adjust over-income household’s rent and
                                                                   designate another unit as HOME-assisted (in accordance with
                                                                   procedures for fixed or floating units)
Tenant pays too much for rent (in HOME-assisted rental unit)       Calculate tenant’s overpayment and make tenant whole
                                                                   In rental projects with significant rent issues, restart affordability
                                                                   period with HUD’s approval
HOME-assisted unit does not meet applicable property codes and Unit must be brought up to applicable codes and standard
standard



Chapter 1: HOME Monitoring Basics                                                                                                       15
 Funded entity fails to take corrective actions, as directed        Temporary suspension of the funding recipient
 Repeated compliance problems and limited effort to improve         Do not renew the funding recipient for the next program year
                                                                    Terminate the funding recipient’s activity for the current program
                                                                    year
                                                                    Initiate legal action


     At the conclusion of the analysis, the PJ monitor will need to:
     • Identify the areas where the funded entity demonstrates strong performance and good management and compliance
     • Identify any findings, concerns, or observations that might impact the funded entity’s compliance and performance
     • Specify the most appropriate corrective actions for the instances of noncompliance, poor management, or poor perfor-
       mance that are identified, and set a realistic timeframe to correct each situation.
3. Issue Initial Monitoring Report/Letter
     Following an in-depth analysis of the site visit, the PJ monitor sends a monitoring letter or report to the funded entity’s
     executive director. Effective monitoring reports/letters are written in a certain manner and contain certain common ele-
     ments. This letter should be issued within 30 days of the onsite visit.
     The monitoring report/letter:
     • Provides program or project name and address (include contract number if appropriate).
     • Includes names of the PJ staff and funded entity staff who participated in the monitoring, and provides a short
       description of the monitoring process.
     • Explains what program or project elements the monitor examined (e.g., by address, by HOME activity, by HOME
       program year). The letter/report should be explicit about whether the monitoring covered just the HOME regulations,
       or if other Federal requirements were covered (such as lead-based paint or labor).
     • Describes all conclusions about areas of good performance, noncompliance, or poor performance.
     • Where there is poor performance and/or noncompliance, uses a constructive tone and format to identify any specific
       instances of findings (noncompliance), areas of concern (if left unaddressed, may lead to findings), and observations.
       For each instance:
                                                                            By taking the time to recognize good performance,
        — Specify what corrective action the funded entity must
                                                                            PJ monitors can encourage good performance to
          take (if any), by when, and what documentation is
                                                                            continue. Give specific feedback to the leadership
          needed to demonstrate that the corrective action has
                                                                            of the funded entity about staff that are doing
          been taken (such as photos of completed work)
                                                                            an exceptional job, and about programs or
        — Cite the regulatory or statutory basis for all findings           projects that are well-managed, conceived, and/
        — Describe the consequences if corrective actions are not           or implemented. Many PJs use past performance,
          corrected.                                                        timeliness, and/or compliance issues as criteria for
                                                                            awarding additional HOME funds. Those with good
     • Identifies opportunities and resources for technical assistance,     performance should be so recognized at project
       if appropriate.                                                      selection time.

J. Following Up the Initial Monitoring Report
When the PJ monitor has issued a monitoring report with findings and required corrective actions, it must follow up in order
to ensure that the instance(s) of noncompliance has been corrected. The PJ monitor may need to make follow-up telephone
calls, send additional correspondence, and/or convene follow up meetings in order to clear corrective actions.




16                                                                                                                  Monitoring HOME
Once a funded entity's response to the monitoring report has been received, the
                                                                                        Using Phone and Email
PJ monitor reviews the response and determines if the funded entity has success-
fully completed the required corrective actions. Generally, the PJ monitor should       The monitoring process is a
conduct this review within 15 days of the response.                                     review of compliance with Federal
                                                                                        regulations and by definition, this
    • If monitoring staff determines that the funded entity's response is not satis-    process is a formal one. The use of
      factory, a follow-up letter should be sent to the funded entity which specifies   email enables staff to be responsive
      the additional actions that are required and the date for completing these        quickly and easily. If the PJ has
      actions.                                                                          a system to retain email for legal
    • If the funded entity does not meet the due date for corrective action, the        purposes and considers email to be
      PJ monitor should contact the entity (and document its phone or email             formal records of the agency, then
      contact). In this follow-up, the PJ monitor should try and identify the cause     email may be an adequate means
      of the delay in responding, provide any assistance that might be needed to        for transmitting monitoring reports
      correct the finding(s), identify a new due date if appropriate, and express       and follow-up information. However,
      concern about the funded entity’s failure to respond. Likewise, the PJ may        if that is not the case, it is advisable
      choose to send a follow-up letter documenting what was agreed to by phone         that correspondence related to
                                                                                        monitoring be transmitted by regular
      (if applicable), restating the actions that are required, the date for complet-
                                                                                        mail. Likewise, PJ monitors should
      ing these actions, and the consequences of continued unsatisfactory efforts
                                                                                        keep notes about the dates and
      to correct the problems.
                                                                                        content of telephone calls during the
       — Based on the number of issues identified during the initial visit, the PJ      monitoring process.
         may wish to conduct an additional onsite visit to verify the completion
         of corrective actions or the implementation of new procedures. The PJ
         might apply additional conditions to require the funded entity to notify PJ staff at a particular milestone during
         its next project to allow the PJ to return to provide technical assistance.
       — For example, a PJ documented significant findings in a subrecipient’s administration of a homeowner rehabilita-
         tion program. The subrecipient was not conducting initial inspections and was not developing a scope of work
         that brought the unit up to its written property standards. In its monitoring report, the PJ required the subre-
         cipient to notify the PJ when it had completed its first inspections and bid specifications for several homes. PJ
         staff conducted an onsite visit and inspection to review the subrecipient’s work on these homes to ensure that the
         subrecipient had implemented adequate procedures and oversight to ensure compliance with the HOME property
         standards requirement.
    • Once monitoring staff determines that an organization has successfully completed all required corrective actions, a
      close out letter should be issued to the funded entity that documents the monitoring findings have been corrected. A
      copy of the close out letter must be placed in the HOME monitoring file for that entity.




Chapter 1: HOME Monitoring Basics                                                                                             17
Monitoring Findings Database
A PJ with a number of funded entities might want to establish a tracking system or database to collect information
concerning the PJ’s monitoring efforts. Tracking of monitoring results may be helpful to:
Target the focus of future compliance monitoring
Prioritize the training needs for staff and funding recipients
Evaluate the success of current procedures and policy guidanceEstablish a record of past performance to be utilized
during funding decisions.
The database might include:
Data on all monitoring conducted, including funded entities, dates of reviews, and responsible staff
Findings and concerns to establish a record of past performance. This data can be used in risk analyses and to target
training and technical assistance
Language used for findings, concerns, and corrective actions. Sample language helps staff to draft consistent
monitoring letters/reports
Tracking of monitoring actions. The database can track the issuance of monitoring reports, receipt of responses to
funded entities, and the current status of all findings. This assists the manager to monitor staff’s completion of work
assignments and will guide the PJ in taking additional steps for funded entities that fail to respond within prescribed
timelines.




18                                                                                                       Monitoring HOME
                                                      Attachment 1-A
                                              Sample Risk Analysis Protocol
The risk analysis protocol is a tool that facilitates the PJ’s review of risk related to its funded programs, projects, and funded
entitites. This sample tool has identified the factors and subfactors that affect program performance and assigned a relative
importance to them.
Elements of the Risk Analysis Protocol
This protocol has several important components:
     • List of factors and subfactors that impact program performance (columns 1 and 2)
     • The criteria that are used to measure the possible outcomes for each factor and subfactor and an assignment of points
       for their relative importance (columns 3 and 4)
     • Assignment of weights to assess the relative importance of each risk factor and subfactor, (column 5).
When assigning weights and points to each factor, subfactor, and criterion, the PJ makes judgments about how much that
variable impacts program compliance and performance.
Using the Risk Analysis Protocol to Assess Risk
The PJ reviews each funded entity’s program using the risk analysis protocol by taking the following steps:
1. Rate the program on each of the risk factors and subfactors, and assign them points based on the criteria.
2. Multiply the number of points by the assigned weights for each factor to calculate the weighted points for each factor.
3. Add all the weighted points for each funded entity to calculate the total risk.
4. Calculate total for each entity (column 6).
The higher the resulting number, the higher the risk the entity faces. Based on these results, the PJ can make strategic deci-
sions about:
     • Which organizations present the greatest performance risk to the PJ?
     • What types of issues are causes for concern?
     • How can the PJ best focus its monitoring resources?




Chapter 1: HOME Monitoring Basics                                                                                                    19
                                                                                                              TOTAL FOR
     FACTOR           SUBFACTOR                                 CRITERIA                  POINTS   WEIGHTS     FUNDED
                                                                                                                ENTITy
Program                                        Homebuyer new construction                   5
Complexity
                                               Rental new construction                      5
                                               Homebuyer acquisition and rehabilitation     4
              Type of program                  Rental rehabilitation                        4        10
                                               Homebuyer financial assistance               3
                                               Homeowner rehabilitation                     2
                                               TBRA                                         2
                                               Other                                        2
                                               4 or more                                    5
              Number of projects               2–4                                          4         5
                                               1                                            2
                                               Yes                                          5
              Use of several contractors                                                              5
                                               No                                           0
              Multiple transactions and        Yes                                          5
                                                                                                      5
              parties                          No                                           0
              Multiple lenders and             Yes                                          5
                                                                                                      5
              funding sources                  No                                           0
Project                                        100+                                         5
Complexity                                     26–99                                        4
              Number of units                  5–25                                         3        10
                                               2–4                                          2
                                               1                                            1
                                               Yes                                          5
              Inexperienced developer                                                                10
                                               No                                           0
              Inexperienced general            Yes                                          5
                                                                                                     10
              contractor                       No                                           0
              Project during initial rent-up   Yes                                          5
                                                                                                     10
              phase                            No                                           0
Level of                                       $1 million+                                  5
Funding                                        $500,000-$999,999                            4
              Amount of HOME funds             $100,000-$499,999                            3        20
                                               $30,000-$99,999                              2
                                               Under $30,000                                1
                                               Tax Credits with HOME                        5
              Multiple funding sources         Other HUD funding with HOME                  3        10
                                               HOME only                                    0




20                                                                                                        Monitoring HOME
                                                                                                                         TOTAL FOR
    FACTOR              SUBFACTOR                             CRITERIA                        POINTS       WEIGHTS        FUNDED
                                                                                                                           ENTITy
Recipient                                     Never undertaken project before                    5
Capacity                                      Never undertaken project before but have
                                                                                                 4
                                              capacity
                 Experience of staff                                                                          20
                                              Undertaken project before, but need TA or
                                                                                                 3
                                              consultant help
                                              Undertaken project and have capacity               0
                 Low productivity or          Yes                                                5
                                                                                                              10
                 unusually high activity      No                                                 0
                 Lack of progress spending    Yes                                                5
                                                                                                              10
                 HOME funds                   No                                                 0
                 Significant change           Yes                                                5
                 in goals/direction of                                                                         5
                 organization                 No                                                 0
Staff Capacity                                Yes                                                5
                 Staff turnover                                                                               15
                                              No                                                 0
                                              Yes                                                5
                 Inexperienced staff                                                                          15
                                              No                                                 0
                 Change in funded entity’s    Yes                                                5
                                                                                                              10
                 or program’s leadership      No                                                 0
Quality of
Reporting and                                 Never submits reports                              5            10
Documentation
                 Status of project
                 submissions or progress      Submits infrequently with errors                   4
                 reports                      Submits infrequently without errors                3
                                              Submits frequently with errors                     2
                                              Submits frequently without errors                  1
                 Audit findings or no audit   Yes                                                5
                                                                                                              10
                 done                         No                                                 0
                                              Yes                                                5
                 Low quality documentation                                                                    15
                                              No                                                 0
                                              Yes                                                5
                 Failure to meet schedules                                                                    15
                                              No                                                 0
                 Failure to comply with       Yes                                                5
                                                                                                              20
                 HOME agreement               No                                                 0
Past                                          Yes                                                5
Compliance       Not monitored last year                                                                      10
                                              No                                                 0
Problems
                                              Yes                                                5
                 Recurring monitor findings                                                                   10
                                              No                                                 0
                 Inability to clear up        Yes                                                5
                 outstanding issues/                                                                          20
                 compliance violations        No                                                 0
                 Letters of complaint         Yes                                                5
                 from beneficiaries or                                                                         5
                 investigations               No                                                 0
                 Poor performance/
                                              Yes                                                5
                 compliance in other
                                                                                                               5
                 programs administered by
                 the funded entity            No                                                 0

                                                                                    Total Score for this Funded entity


Chapter 1: HOME Monitoring Basics                                                                                                21
						




22       Monitoring HOME
Chapter 2: Monitoring Program Partners


HUD permits PJs to select subrecipients, State recipients, and community housing development organizations (CHDOs)
to administer and/or carry out HOME-funded activities. The PJ is not required to use a competitive procurement process
to make this selection. It must, however, ensure that these funded entities meet other requirements imposed by HUD. This
chapter helps the PJ monitor conduct a self-assessment to review whether these additional requirements are met for each type
of funded entity the PJ works with, as follows:
    • Section 1 reviews requirements related to CHDOs.
    • Section 2 reviews requirements related to State recipients and subrecipients. Note, this section includes a discussion
      of the lead entity of a consortium and the consortium members. Lead entities are PJs and consortium members are
      subrecipients under the HOME Program.

Section 1. Community Housing Development Organizations (CHDOs)
 Overview of the CHDO Requirements and Review
A CHDO is a private, nonprofit, community-based service organization that has obtained or intends to obtain staff with the
capacity to develop affordable housing for the community it serves. The PJ should monitor its CHDO operations to ensure
that:
    • Only nonprofit organizations that meet the definition of a CHDO are funded
    • A minimum of 15 percent of each annual allocation is invested in projects where a CHDO is owner, developer, or
      sponsor
    • CHDO set-aside funds are reserved within 24 months of the PJ signing the HOME Investment Partnerships
      Agreement
    • CHDO set-aside funds are invested in eligible activities:
       — Rental: acquisition, rehabilitation, new construction
       — Homebuyer: acquisition, rehabilitation, new construction
       — Direct financial assistance to homebuyers for CHDO-developed units
    • Special financial assistance (predevelopment loans, operating funds, capacity-building, and project proceeds) meets
      applicable HOME requirements.
Basis of this Section
The checklists in this chapter assist the PJ monitor in evaluating compliance with the key HOME Program CHDO require-
ments. The checklists in this chapter are based on the following HUD checklists:
    • Exhibit 7-11, Guide for Review of Community Housing Development Organization (CHDO) Qualifications and Activities
    • Exhibit 7-12, Guide for Review of Community Housing and Development Organization (CHDO) Procedures.
The HUD checklist questions cited in this chapter have been revised slightly for use by the PJ, rather than HUD. Changes to
the HUD checklist questions are denoted with [brackets]. Questions that are denoted with the icon  are not on the HUD
checklists; these questions have been added to facilitate a PJ’s review.




Chapter 2: Monitoring Program Partners                                                                                         23
Complete copies of the HUD checklists are found in the CPD Grantee Monitoring Handbook, available online at http://www.
hud.gov/offices/cpd/library/monitoring/handbook.cfm#7. Chapter 7 of this handbook covers the HOME Program.
Framework for the Monitoring Review
This section helps the PJ monitor assess the key HOME Program requirements related          The HUD checklist exhibits
to CHDO eligibility and PJ management of CHDOs. In addition to the requirements             referenced in this section
covered in this chapter, the PJ monitor should also review the CHDO’s compliance with       have not been especially
the HOME Program requirements related to the activity(ies) the CHDO carries out.            adapted for use by the PJ in
The PJ monitor can refer to the following chapters to assist in this effort:                this guidebook. However, the
                                                                                            PJ monitor should generally
     • Use Chapter 5, Section 2 of this guidebook to monitor CHDO homebuyer
                                                                                            be able to use them in their
       projects.
                                                                                            existing form.
     • Use Chapter 6, Section 2 of this guidebook to monitor CHDO rental projects.
     • Use HUD Checklist Exhibit 7-16, Guide for Review of Owner, Developer, Sponsor Written Agreements, to monitor
       whether the HOME written agreement between the PJ and the CHDO adequately conveys all applicable HOME
       requirements and whether it is enforceable.
 Organization of this Section
This section reviews HOME’s requirements related only to CHDOs, including:
     A. CHDO qualifications and activities
     B. CHDO eligibility and performance
     C. PJ administration of CHDO requirements and performance.
 Instructions
Subsections A and B of this section are designed to help the PJ review the compliance of individual CHDOs and CHDO
projects. For these sections, the PJ monitor copies and uses one checklist for each CHDO under review.
Subsection C is used after the PJ monitor has completed the individual project file reviews. The Subsection C checklist helps
the PJ monitor assess the overall management of the CHDO requirements, and to summarize the results of the CHDO proj-
ect monitoring done in Subsections A and B. The PJ monitor copies and uses only one checklist for this review.
 Documentation to Bring
     • HOME regulations at 24 CFR Part 92
     • CPD Notice 97-11, Guidance on Community Housing Development Organizations (CHDOs) Under the HOME Program
       (issued October 8, 1997)
     • IDIS reports PR22 and PR25
     • HOME Open Activities Report (found at http://www.hud.gov/offices/cpd/affordablehousing/reports/)
     • Prior monitoring correspondence or performance-related correspondence with the funded entity

A. CHDO Qualifications and Activities
Before committing any HOME set-aside, operating, or predevelopment funding to a CHDO, the PJ must be sure that the
organization meets the qualifying criteria outlined in the HOME Rule at 24 CFR 92.2. These criteria are summarized in
Figure 2-1 and relate to the organizations’:
     1. Legal structure
     2. Capacity and experience
     3. Organizational structure


24                                                                                                         Monitoring HOME
     4. Relationship to for-profit entities
The PJ must recertify that an organization continues to qualify as a CHDO each time it provides additional CHDO set-aside,
predevelopment, or operating funds. HUD strongly recommends that the PJ recertify its CHDOs annually.
The PJ monitor should encourage PJ staff to use CPD Notice 97-11, Guidance on Community Housing Development Organi-
zations (CHDOs) Under the HOME Program (issued October 8, 1997) to determine CHDO eligibility.
                             Figure 2-1. Summary of CHDO Certification Requirements
     CHDO Category of                                                                         Documentation to Review—
                                               Requirements
       Compliance                                                                                 Items for the File
 Legal Status                • Organized under State or local law                  • Articles of incorporation or charter (organized,
                             • Purpose of organization to provide affordable         geographic area)
                               housing                                             • Mission or bylaws (purpose)
                             • No individual may benefit from the organization’s   • Map (geographic area)
                               efforts (financial or other)                        • IRS letter designation (if conditional, be sure the
                             • Clearly defined geographic area                       final designation letter is secured)
                             • Nonprofit status (IRS designation) —conditional
                               okay, not pending
 Organizational Board        • 1/3 low-income (low-income, live in a low-income • Board names, addresses, employers, category
 Structure                     area, or elected representative of a low-income    (low-income or public sector)
                               organization)                                    • Low-income self certification (if low-income)
                             • No more than 1/3 PJ employees                    • Census tract info (if low-income area)
                             • Formal process established for low-income input     • Minutes from meeting (if elected to be on board
                               (not community input)                                 as low-income organization representative)
                                                                                   • Bylaws or board resolution—in writing (low-
                                                                                     income input)
                                                                                   • Agendas/minutes (low-income input)
 Capacity and                • 1+ years experience in serving the community        • Annual report
 Experience                  • Staff capacity to undertake development             • Resumes of staff showing development
                             • Financial management standards that meet              experience
                               requirements of 24 CFR 84.21                        • Contract with consultant—including staff training
                                                                                     component
                                                                                   • Letter from financial person (CFO)


1. Legal Structure
Background: The CHDO must be a charitable organization, organized under State or local law, and one of its purposes must
be to provide affordable housing.

         HUD Checklist Exhibit 7-11 Selected Excerpts                                              Notes

 1. The nonprofit organization is organized under State or local
    laws, as evidenced by (check appropriate category) [24 CFR
    92.2]:
      Charter; or
      Articles of Incorporation.
      Yes       No




Chapter 2: Monitoring Program Partners                                                                                                  25
 2. No part of its net earnings inure to the benefit of any
    member, founder, contributor, or individual, as evidenced by
    (check appropriate category) [24 CFR 92.2]:
      Charter; or
      Articles of Incorporation.
      Yes     No

 3. The nonprofit organization has a tax exemption ruling from
    the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) under Section 501(c)(3)
    or (4) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as evidenced
    by (check appropriate category) [24 CFR 92.2]:
      A 501(c)(3) [charitable nonprofit corporation] certificate
        from the IRS; or
      A 501(c)(4) [community or civic organization] certificate
       from the IRS; or
      A group exemption letter from the IRS that includes the
       CHDO as a subordinate of a central organization non-
       profit under section 905 of the Internal Revenue Code.
      Yes     No

 4. The nonprofit organization has, among its purposes, the
    provision of decent housing that is affordable to low- and
    moderate-income people, as evidenced by a statement in the
    organization's (check appropriate category) [24 CFR 92.2]:
      Charter;
      Articles of Incorporation;
      By-laws; or
      Resolutions.
      Yes     No




2. Capacity and Experience
Background: The organization must have the capacity to administer a Federal grant, and must have demonstrated capacity
and experience in carrying out affordable housing activities and serving the community.

         HUD Checklist Exhibit 7-11 Selected Excerpts                                   Notes

 5. The nonprofit organization conforms to the financial
    accountability standards of 24 CFR 84.21, "Standards for
    Financial Management Systems," as evidenced by (check
    appropriate category) [24 CFR 92.2]:
      A notarized statement by the president or chief financial
        officer of the organization; or
      A certification from a Certified Public Accountant.
      Yes     No




26                                                                                                     Monitoring HOME
 6. The nonprofit organization has a demonstrated capacity
    for carrying out activities assisted with HOME funds, as
    evidenced by (check appropriate category) [24 CFR 92.2]:
      Résumés and/or statements that describe the
        experience of key staff members who have successfully
        completed projects similar to those to be assisted with
        HOME funds; or
      Contract(s) with consultant firms or individuals that have
        housing experience similar to projects to be assisted
        with HOME funds; and
      A plan is in place for the consultant to train appropriate
        key staff of the organization.
     Yes      No


 7. The nonprofit organization has a history of serving the
    community within which housing to be assisted with HOME
    funds is to be located, as evidenced by one of the following
    (check appropriate category) [24 CFR 92.2]:
      A statement that documents at least one year of
       experience in serving the community; or
     For newly created organizations formed by local
        churches, service, or community organizations, a
        statement that documents that its parent organization
        has at least one year of experience in serving the
        community.
                                   Assessing Community
     Yes     No
                           TIP




                                    Service Experience
                                   The organization’s
                                   community service
                                   experience does not
                                   need to be in the
                                   housing field.

 8. Was at least one full year of service completed prior to
    receipt of HOME funds [24 CFR 92.2]? 
     Yes      No



 9. Does the organization’s statement of service describe
    with specificity the activities that the organization (or
    parent) provided? (For example, it should specify that the
    organization develops new housing, rehabilitates existing
    housing stock, manages a day care, or provides food delivery
    services.) 
     Yes      No

 10. Is the statement signed by the chief executive of the
     organization? 
     Yes      No




Chapter 2: Monitoring Program Partners                              27
3. Organizational Structure
Background: The organization’s organizational structure must ensure that it is able to represent the interests of low-income
residents. Public sector representation is limited.

           HUD Checklist Exhibit 7-11 Selected Excerpts                                     Notes

 11. The nonprofit organization maintains at least one-third of its
     governing board's membership for residents of low-income
     neighborhoods, other low-income community residents,
     or elected representatives of low-income neighborhood
     organizations as evidenced by the organization's (check
     appropriate category): [24 CFR 92.2]
       By-laws;                                Definition of “Community”
                            TIP

       Charter; or                • In urban areas: One or more neighborhoods, a
       Articles of                  city, county, or metropolitan area
         Incorporation.            • In rural areas: One or more neighborhoods, a
       Yes      No                 town, village, county, or multi-county area, but not
                                     the entire State

 12. Does current Board membership meet the low-income
     representation requirement? 
       List of current Board representation and evidence of
         their representative status (employment, income, etc.)
       Yes      No

                          Documentation Needed on Board Members
           If a Board member represents a low-income neighborhood, the file should
     TIP




           include documentation of that member’s home address and census
           tract, and a map that verifies that the neighborhood is low-income.
           If the Board member is low-income, the file should include a signed
           certification from the Board member that either: (1) States his/her
           annual income (and the monitor can compare it to the current HUD
           income guidelines), or (2) Certifies that his/her income is below the
           amount that is the current low-income limit by household size.


 13. The nonprofit organization provides a formal process
     for low-income, program beneficiaries to advise the
     organization in all of its decisions regarding the design,
     siting, development, and management of affordable
     housing projects, as evidenced by (check appropriate
     category) [24 CFR 92.2]:
                                              Acceptable Ways to Secure
      By-laws;                                    Beneficiary Input
                                    TIP




      Resolutions; or
                                             • Special committees of
      A written statement of                   neighbors of a proposed
          operating procedures                  development site
          approved by the
          governing body.                    • Neighborhood advisory
     Yes       No                             councils
                                             • Open town meetings




28                                                                                                           Monitoring HOME
 14. The CHDO, which may be chartered by a State or local
     government, complies with the following restrictions:
     (1) The State or local government may not appoint more
         than one-third of the membership of the organization's
         governing body;
     (2) The board members appointed by the State or local
         government may not, in turn, appoint the remaining two-
         thirds of the board members; and
     (3) No more than one-third of the governing board members
         are public officials (including any employees of the PJ
         [or State recipient] as evidenced by the organization's
         (check appropriate category) [24 CFR 92.2]:
          By-laws;                                       Public Entities Can Not Be CHDOs
          Charter; or
                                        TIP    Public entities include:
          Articles of Incorporation.            • PJs
     Yes      No                               • Public bodies
                                                 • Instrumentalities of government (public housing
                                                   authorities, urban renewal agencies, redevelopment
                                                   authorities, and downtown development authorities).

 15. Does current Board membership meet HOME’s restrictions
     on public sector representation? 
      List of current Board membership and evidence of their
       employment status
     Yes      No



 16. If the CHDO is sponsored or created by a for-profit entity,
     the for-profit entity may not appoint more than one-third
     of the membership of the CHDO's governing body, and
     the board members appointed by the for-profit entity may
     not, in turn, appoint the remaining two-thirds of the board
     members, as evidenced by the CHDO's (check appropriate
     category): [24 CFR 92.2]
      By-laws;
      Charter; or
      Articles of Incorporation.
     Yes      No       N/A




4. Relationship with For-profit Entities
Background: A CHDO must be able to make decisions and policies (including free choice regarding use of vendors) inde-
pendent of any for-profit entity, regardless of whether the for-profit entity created the CHDO.




Chapter 2: Monitoring Program Partners                                                                                  29
           HUD Checklist Exhibit 7-11 Selected Excerpts                                         Notes

 17. The CHDO is not controlled, nor receives directions from
     individuals, or entities seeking profit from the organization,
     as evidenced by (check appropriate category) [24 CFR
     92.2]:
      By-laws;
      Memorandum of Understanding (MOU); or
      Other binding agreement between the CHDO and for-
        profit organization.
      Yes      No


 18. If this CHDO has been sponsored or created by a for-profit
     entity:
     (1) The for-profit entity's primary purpose does not include
         the development or management of housing, as
         evidenced:
            The for-profit organization's by-laws;
     and
     (2) The CHDO is free to contract for goods and services
         from vendor(s) of its own choosing, as evidenced in the
         CHDO's (check appropriate category) [24 CFR 92.2]:
            By-laws;
            Charter; or
            Articles of Incorporation.
      Yes      No       N/A




B. CHDO Eligibility/Performance
A minimum of 15 percent of each annual HOME allocation                Figure 2-2: Eligible and Ineligible CHDO Set-aside
(the “CHDO set-aside”) must be invested in housing that is            Activities
owned, developed, or sponsored by CHDOs. Figure 2-2 sum-              Eligible Set-aside Activities
marizes the eligible and ineligible CHDO set-aside activities.
                                                                      • Acquisition and/or rehabilitation of rental housing
Note, CHDOs can undertake activities that are not eligible
CHDO set-aside activities; however, these funds cannot be             • New construction of rental housing
counted toward the minimum 15 percent set-aside and the               • Acquisition and/or rehabilitation of homebuyer
CHDO serves in the capacity of a subrecipient or a non-                 properties
CHDO owner or developer.
                                                                      • New construction of homebuyer properties
For a detailed explanation of housing that is “owned, devel-
                                                             • Direct financial assistance to purchasers of HOME-
oped, or sponsored” by CHDOs, see HUD CPD Notice 97-11,        assisted housing (such as downpayment assistance)
Guidance on Community Housing Development Organizations        developed by a CHDO with HOME set-aside funds.
(CHDOs) Under the HOME Program, issued October 8, 1997.
                                                                      Ineligible Set-aside Activities
This section includes a review of:
                                                                      • Tenant-based rental assistance (TBRA)
     1. Overall CHDO eligibility
                                                                      • Homeowner rehabilitation
     2. Special assistance to CHDOs                                   • Downpayment assistance program for housing that
     3. HOME CHDO project proceeds                                      is not developed by the CHDO.




30                                                                                                            Monitoring HOME
1. Overall CHDO Eligibility
Background: The CHDO must meet all the qualifying criteria described at 24 CFR 92.2 (and represented by Subsection A
above), to be eligible to use CHDO set-aside funds.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.2 and 92.300(a)(1)
 Documentation:
    • Evidence of ownership (e.g., property title or 99-year lease), if applicable
    • Evidence of developer role (e.g., development agreement with the property owner that specifies that the CHDO is the
      developer), if applicable
    • Evidence of sponsorship (e.g., agreement with another sponsored entity and/or ownership transfer documents that
      show that the CHDO serves as sponsor), if applicable

         HUD Checklist Exhibit 7-11 Selected Excerpts                                    Notes

 19. Based upon the responses to [Subsections A1 through A4
     of this chapter], does the CHDO meet the requirements of
     24 CFR 92.2? (See [Subsections A1 – A4 of this chapter
     for a list of the requirements.) [24 CFR 92.2]
     Yes      No



 20. Is compliance with 24 CFR 92.2 documented in the file
     (e.g., CHDO checklist and supporting documentation)? [24
     CFR 92.508(a)(4)]
     Yes      No


 21. Has the PJ reexamined the CHDO’s designation each time
     HOME funds were provided? [24 CFR 92.300(a)(1)]
     Yes      No      N/A



 22. Were all CHDO set-aside funds [to this CHDO] used for
     housing projects owned, developed, or sponsored by
     CHDOs? [24 CFR 92.300(a)(1)]
     Yes      No




2. CHDO Special Financial Assistance
Background: PJs can provide several types of special financial assistance to CHDOs:
    • Capacity-building funds. New PJs that cannot identify a sufficient number of capable CHDOs to meet the CHDO
      set-aside requirement can provide a limited amount of HOME funds to build CHDO and nonprofit capacity.
    • Operating assistance. Up to five percent of a PJ's annual HOME allocation can be used to pay general operating
      assistance for CHDOs that receive, or are expected to receive, HOME set-aside funds.
    • Project predevelopment loans. Up to 10 percent of the amount the PJ sets aside for CHDOs can be used for project-
      specific predevelopment assistance. Predevelopment funds can be provided as either technical assistance and site con-
      trol loans, or seed money loans. These funds must be loaned, and may be provided as a line of credit.




Chapter 2: Monitoring Program Partners                                                                                  31
HOME imposes certain limitations on the amount of special assistance funds (in combination) that each CHDO can receive.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.300, 92.301, and 92.208

 If the PJ provided any HOME funds in the form of special assistance to the CHDO, complete the applicable section(s)
 below. If not, proceed to Subsection C, A Review of PJ’s Administration of CHDO Requirements and Performance.

 Documentation:
     • Written agreement between the PJ and the CHDO related to the use of HOME special assistance funds
     • Financial documents (contracts, cancelled checks, invoices, etc.)
     • CHDO operating budget for year of funding
     • CHDO annual financial statement (prior year)
     • IDIS reports PR22 and PR25
     • Documentation of PJ underwriting review and project feasibility analysis for any project(s) that received predevelop-
       ment loans, if applicable
     • Project loan documents for projects that received predevelopment loans, if applicable
     • Documentation related to how predevelopment loan was satisfied, if applicable
     • Documentation that identifies impediments that prevent a CHDO project from moving forward, if applicable
     • PJ approval to waive a repayment of a CHDO loan for a project that did not move forward, if applicable

         HUD Checklist Exhibit 7-11 Selected Excerpts                                       Notes

 Capacity-building Funds

 23. Did the PJ provide capacity-building assistance to this
     CHDO? If no, proceed to CHDO Operating Assistance in the
     following subsection of this checklist. 
       Yes     No


 24. If capacity-building funds were provided, were the funds
     provided when the PJ was in the first 24 months of its
     participation in the HOME Program? [24 CFR 92.300(b)] 
       Yes     No


 25. Did the amount of capacity-building funds provided to the
     CHDO exceed either (1) 20 % of the PJ’s minimum 15 %
     CHDO set-aside in a given year, or (2) $150,000 during the
     first 24 months of the PJ’s participation in HOME ? [24 CFR
     92.300(b)] 
      Yes     No




32                                                                                                          Monitoring HOME
 26. Did the files contain appropriate documentation for the type
     of capacity-building that was funded? [24 CFR 92.300Ib)
     and 92.508(a)(4)(v) 
     Yes       No
                                  Eligible Capacity-building Activities
  TIP


         Capacity-building includes any training or technical assistance to the CHDO. It can be
         provided through a third party, such as an intermediary organization or to the CHDO
         directly. Operating funds are not an eligible use of CHDO capacity-building funds.
         For more information, see HUD Notice CPD-97-11, Guidance on Community Housing
         Development Organizations (CHDOs) Under the HOME Program, issued October 8,
         1997.

 CHDO Operating Assistance

 27. Did the PJ provide CHDO operating assistance to this
     CHDO? If no, proceed to Predevelopment Loans in the
     following section of this checklist. 
      Yes       No      N/A
                   Eligible CHDO Operating Expenses
     TIP




               • Salaries, wages, benefits, and other
                 employee compensation
               • Employee education, training, and travel
               • Rent and utilities
               • Communication costs
               • Taxes and insurance
               • Equipment, materials, and supplies

 28. Did the amount of operating assistance provided to the
     CHDO exceed 5% of the CHDO’s annual HOME allocation?
     [24 CFR 92.208] 
      Yes       No


 29. Did the CHDO receive, or is it expected to receive, CHDO
     set-aside funds to undertake a project within 24 months of
     the date that the operating funds were provided? [24 CFR
     92.300(e)]
       Yes       No
          Agreement When CHDO Is Not Yet Receiving Set-aside Funds
          For CHDOs that receive operating assistance but have not
   TIP




          yet received set-aside funds, there must be an executed
          agreement between the PJ and CHDO that states:
             • The CHDO is expected to receive funds within 24 months
               for a HOME project that the CHDO owns, develops, or
               sponsors; and
             • The expected project outcome (i.e., number of expected
               units to be developed, etc.).

 30. Did the PJ execute a written agreement for the CHDO
     operating funds? [24 CFR 92.300(e) and 24 CFR
     92.504(b)] 
      Yes       No




Chapter 2: Monitoring Program Partners                                                            33
 31. Does the written agreement for CHDO operating funds
     specify the expected uses for the funds? [24 CFR
     92.300(e) and 92.208] 
      Yes       No


 32. If the CHDO is not also receiving CHDO set-aside funds,
     does the written agreement for CHDO operating funds
     specify the expectation that the CHDO will receive CHDO
     set-aside funds for development within 24 months of the
     date of the agreement? [24 CFR 92.300(e)] 
      Yes       No       N/A


 Predevelopment Assistance

 33. Did the PJ provide predevelopment assistance to this
     CHDO? If no, proceed to the next subsection, HOME Project
     Proceeds Retained by the CHDO. 
      Yes       No       N/A


 34. Did the amount of predevelopment assistance provided
     to the CHDO exceed 10% of the total amount that the PJ
     set aside for housing owned, developed, and sponsored by
     CHDOs? [24 CFR 92.300(c)] 
      Yes       No

 35. Was the predevelopment assistance provided as either: (1)
     Project-specific technical assistance or site control loan; or
     (2) Project-specific seed money loan? [24 CFR 92.301] 
      Yes       No
                           Eligible Predevelopment Assistance
        Project-specific technical assistance and site control loans can pay for
 TIP




        those costs necessary to determine if a project is feasible, such as
        application fees, professional services (architectural, engineering, legal,
        environmental), or costs related to securing site control.
        Project-specific seed money loans can pay for preconstruction costs
        when the CHDO has site control, a preliminary financial commitment,
        and a capable development team.

 36. Did the PJ determine that the predevelopment costs were
     customary and reasonable? [24 CFR 92.301(a)(2) and
     92.301(b)(1)] 
      Yes       No


 37. If the project moved forward, did the CHDO repay the loan
     with construction loan proceeds or other project income?
     [24 CFR 92.301(a)(3) and 92.301(b)(3)] 
      Yes       No       N/A
                   Predevelopment Loan Repayment
 TIP




        If the project moves forward, the CHDO must repay the
        loan or roll it into a new HOME loan for development. If
        the project does not move forward, the PJ can choose
        to either (1) Require repayment, or (2) Waive repayment
        if it determines that there were impediments to the
        project that were beyond the control of the CHDO.



34                                                                                    Monitoring HOME
 38. If the project did not move forward and the PJ waived
     repayment, did the PJ determine that the project was
     infeasible and the impediments were beyond the control of
     the CHDO? [24 CFR 92.301(a)(3) and 92.301(b)(3)] 
      Yes       No      N/A

 CHDO Special Financial Assistance (funds in combination)

 39. If the CHDO receives capacity-building funds, operating
     funds, or technical assistance pass-through funds:
     Is the total received in each fiscal year less than the
     greater of $50,000 or 50% of [the CHDO’s] annual budget?
     [24 CFR 92.300(f)]
      Yes       No      N/A




3. HOME Project Proceeds Retained by the CHDO
Background: When HOME funds are invested in a CHDO set-aside project that generates income (such as interest on
HOME loans or proceeds from permanent financing), the PJ can authorize the CHDO to retain some or all of the project
proceeds. The PJ’s authorization and the terms of use of these funds must be stated in the written agreement between the PJ
and the CHDO. If the CHDO retains the funds, they are not program income. If the CHDO returns the proceeds to the PJ,
they are program income. (Refer to Chapter 3 for guidance on program income.)
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.300(a)(2)
 Documentation:
    • Written agreement between the PJ and the CHDO
    • Financial documents (contracts, cancelled checks, invoices, etc.) to show that funds were used for eligible activities

         HUD Checklist Exhibit 7-11 Selected Excerpts                                        Notes

 40. Did the PJ allow HOME project proceeds to be retained
     by the CHDO? [24 CFR 92.300(a)(2)] If the project did
     not result in any project proceeds, skip this section and
     go to Section 3, Review of PJ's Administration of CHDO
     Requirements and Performance. 
      Yes       No      N/A


 41. Did the PJ allow HOME project proceeds to be retained by
     the CHDO? [24 CFR 92.300(a)(2)] 
      Yes       No      N/A

 42. If the PJ permits the CHDO to retain the project proceeds,
     did it execute a separate CHDO proceeds agreement
     with the CHDO and specify how the CHDO can use the
     proceeds? [24 CFR 92.300(a)(2)] 
      Yes       No      N/A

 43. If the PJ requires the CHDO to return the proceeds as
     program income, do the CHDO’s and PJ’s financial records
     show that the funds were returned? [24 CFR 92.300(a)(2)]
     
      Yes       No      N/A




Chapter 2: Monitoring Program Partners                                                                                         35
 44. If proceeds are retained by the CHDO, were the funds used
     for eligible activities, as outlined in the PJ/CHDO written
     agreement? [24 CFR 92.300(a)(2)] 
       Yes     No       N/A



C. Review of PJ’s Administration of CHDO Requirements and Performance
Background: The PJ is responsible for managing its CHDO relationships and activities in a way that ensures its CHDOs
comply with HOME requirements and perform according to the terms of their agreements. Specifically, it needs to be sure
that CHDOs comply with the following HOME requirements:
     • CHDO eligibility. The PJ must determine that the organization meets the CHDO criteria prior to committing
       HOME funds.
     • CHDO reservation deadlines. CHDO set-aside funds must be reserved within 24 months of signing the HOME
       Investment Partnerships Agreement with HUD. For additional guidance see the PJ’s IDIS report PR27 and HUD
       CPD Notice 07-06, Commitment, CHDO Reservation, and Expenditure Deadline Requirements for the HOME Program,
       issued June 1, 2007.
     • CHDO performance. The PJ must ensure that CHDO reservations result in commitments to specific projects within
       a reasonable timeframe, and that projects progress to completion timely.
     • Levels of assistance. HOME imposes a limit on how much special assistance, including operating funds, a CHDO
       can receive.
     • CHDO vs. subrecipient roles. Certain HOME rules differ for CHDOs when they are using CHDO set-aside funds
       and when they are carrying out HOME activities as subrecipients. The PJ needs to be able to distinguish the appli-
       cable requirements through written agreements and other management reporting tools whenever a CHDO serves in
       both capacities.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.2 (definition of CHDO), 92.300, and 92.301
 Documentation:
     • CHDO Checklists in Sections 1A and 1B of this chapter
     • Management interviews, if applicable
     • Procedures for CHDO designation and recertification
     • CHDO qualification checklists or similar documents
     • All written agreements with CHDOs for varied assistance (such as operating funds or project funds) and for different
       roles (CHDO vs. subrecipient)
     • Financial records (such as accounting journals and ledgers, bank statements, financial statements, or audits)
     • IDIS report PR25, Status of CHDO Funds
     • HOME Open Activities Report (found at http://www.hud.gov/offices/cpd/affordablehousing/reports/)
     • PJ’s CHDO monitoring procedures
     • Results of PJ’s CHDO monitoring reviews (reports, checklists, notes)
     • Correspondence with CHDOs to address performance issues
     • CHDO funding procedures

 This checklist is completed one time to review the PJ’s overall administration of its CHDOs and compliance with CHDO
 requirements. It is helpful to complete this section after completing Sections 1A and 1B of this chapter.



36                                                                                                           Monitoring HOME
         HUD Checklist Exhibit 7-11 Selected Excerpts               Notes

 45. If CHDO[s] also acts as subrecipient[s] for the PJ’s HOME
     program, are financial records maintained for subrecipient
     and CHDO activities that identify the source and application
     of funds? [24 CFR 92.505(b) and 24 CFR 84.21(b)(2)]
      Yes       No       N/A

            CHDO Downpayment Assistance Exception
 TIP




        If the CHDO administers downpayment
        assistance as part of an eligible CHDO set-
        aside project, the funds for the downpayment
        assistance program are eligible set-aside funds
        and do not need to be administered separately.
 46. Have CHDO reservations resulted in project commitments
     within a reasonable timeframe based upon review of the
     IDIS PR25 Status of CHDO Funds Report or PJ documents?
      Yes       No


 47. Have CHDO projects been completed in a reasonable
     timeframe based upon review of the IDIS PR25 Status of
     CHDO Funds Report, HOME Open Activities Report, or PJ
     documents?
      Yes       No

 48. Does the PJ use a checklist or similar document to
     determine the eligibility of nonprofit organizations for
     designation as CHDOs, e.g., [Section 1 of this chapter]?
      Yes       No


 49. Based on the CHDOs reviewed, do they meet the
     qualifications for CHDO designation? [24 CFR 92.2]
      Yes       No

 50. Does the PJ have a procedure for reexamining CHDO
     eligibility annually, or at least at the time of subsequent
     application by the CHDO for additional funds?
      Yes       No


 51. Does the PJ have a procedure for monitoring CHDO
     performance?
      Yes       No
     If the answer above is "yes," describe the procedure.
 _______________________________________________________
 _______________________________________________________
 _______________________________________________________

 52. Does the PJ review the performance of each CHDO
     annually? [24 CFR 92.504(a)]
      Yes       No




Chapter 2: Monitoring Program Partners                                      37
 53. Does the PJ take actions to address CHDO performance
     issues (e.g., technical assistance, training, reprogramming
     of funds)?
      Yes      No


 54. Does the PJ have adequate procedures in place to ensure
     that all projects funded with CHDO set-aside funds are
     owned, developed, or sponsored by CHDOs pursuant to 24
     CFR 92.300(a)?
      Yes      No

 55. If the PJ provides operating funds, capacity-building or
     technical assistance pass-through funds, does the PJ have
     written procedures that it has implemented to ensure that
     no CHDO receives more than $50,000 or 50% of its annual
     budget pursuant to 24 CFR 92.300(f)?
      Yes      No       N/A




38                                                                 Monitoring HOME
Section 2. Subrecipients, State Recipients, and Consortia
 Overview to the Subrecipient, State Recipient, and Consortia Requirements
The following entities might be selected by the PJ to administer all or a portion of its HOME program on its behalf:
     • Subrecipients. Subrecipients are public agencies or nonprofit organizations that are selected by the PJ to administer all
       or a portion of the PJ’s HOME Program. Unlike CHDOs, subrecipients are not subject to initial qualifying criteria.
       [24 CFR 92.2]
     • State Recipients. State PJs can select units of local government to receive HOME funds to carry out activities. These
       local governments are State recipients. [24 CFR 92.201(b)(2)].
     • Consortia Members. Geographically contiguous units of general local government can join together as a consortium
       for the purpose of receiving HOME funds. A consortium is considered a single entity for purposes of the HOME Pro-
       gram. It designates a lead entity that serves as the PJ; other member jurisdictions that undertake activities on behalf of
       the consortium are subrecipients to the lead entity. [24 CFR 92.2
       and 92.101].                                                            Though a PJ may delegate aspects of its
                                                                               HOME Program administration to a State
The PJ is held accountable for the performance of its subrecipients, State
                                                                               recipient or subrecipient, this does not
recipients, and subrecipient consortia members. The PJ must conduct an
                                                                               relieve the PJ of the responsibility for proper
annual onsite monitoring visit to each funded entity.
                                                                               and timely use of funds and full regulatory
Basis of this Section                                                          compliance. PJs must closely monitor these
                                                                               funded entities to ensure compliance.
The checklists in this chapter are based on HUD Checklist Exhibit 7-19,
Guide for Review of Subrecipient Management. The HUD checklist ques-
tions excerpted in this chapter have been revised slightly for use by the PJ, rather than HUD. The numbering is sequential for
all questions; the original HUD checklist numbering has not been retained. Questions that are denoted with the icon have
been added to facilitate a PJ’s review; these questions are not on the HUD checklists.
Complete copies of the HUD checklists are found in the CPD Grantee Monitoring Handbook, available online at http://www.
hud.gov/offices/cpd/library/monitoring/handbook.cfm#7. Chapter 7 of this handbook covers the HOME Program.
Framework for the Monitoring Review
This section helps the PJ monitor assess State recipients and subrecipients to ensure that they have adequate financial and
management systems for effective project and program administration and oversight, and for compliance with the uniform
administrative requirements. In addition to these areas of review, the PJ monitor should review the funded entity’s compli-
ance with HOME’s program administration and project-specific requirements. To assist in this effort, the PJ monitor should
use:
     • Chapter 4 to monitor homeowner rehabilitation programs
     • Chapter 5 to monitor homebuyer programs
     • Chapter 6 to monitor rental programs
     • Chapter 7 to monitor tenant-based rental assistance programs.
In addition, the PJ monitor should ensure that all HOME requirements are included in the PJ’s written agreements with its
State recipients and subrecipients, and that the agreements are enforceable. To assist in this effort, the PJ monitor can use:
     • HUD Checklist Exhibit 7-18, Guide for Review of Subrecipient Written Agreements
     • HUD Checklist Exhibit 7-17, Guide for Review of State Recipient Written Agreements.
 Organization of this Section
This checklist is organized into the following sections:
     A. Subrecipient management and training systems



Chapter 2: Monitoring Program Partners                                                                                           39
     B. Internal controls
     C. Subrecipient agreements
     D. Reporting
     E. Onsite monitoring by the PJ
     F. Program income monitoring
     G. Assessment of programs and projects
 Instructions
Subsections A through G of this section are designed to help the PJ monitor assess whether the PJ has sufficient policies,
procedures, and systems in place to provide adequate oversight to its State recipients and subrecipients, in order to ensure
compliance with HOME requirements. These checklists can be completed based on staff interviews, a review of the PJ’s poli-
cies and procedures, IDIS and PJ-generated progress reports, and upon completion of specific projects and activities carried
out by State recipients and subrecipients.
 Documentation to Bring
     • HOME Program regulations at 24 CFR Part 92
     • PJ’s policies and procedures for monitoring subrecipients
     • IDIS PR22 Report, Status of HOME Activities
     • IDIS PR27 Report, Status of HOME Grants
     • Sample written agreements between the PJ and subrecipients and/or State recipients, as applicable
     • IDIS report PR05, Drawdown Voucher Summary Report
     • IDIS report PR09, Program Income Audit Trail
     • PJ’s monitoring plan and procedures
     • Results of prior monitoring visit(s) (checklists, notes, reports, or correspondence)

A. Subrecipient Management and Training Systems
Background: The PJ monitor needs to gather background on all its funded subrecipients and then must assess whether the PJ
has appropriate policies and procedures in place to monitor its subrecipients. The PJ should be able to:
     • Identify its subrecipients, HOME funding levels, and assigned tasks/projects, and know the status of those tasks/proj-
       ects at any given point in time
     • Communicate HOME requirements and changes in requirements and policy to its subrecipients
     • Identify subrecipients most at-risk of performance or compliance problems
     • Conduct annual monitoring visits to every funded subrecipient.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.504(a)
 Documentation:
     • IDIS PR22 Report, Status of HOME Activities
     • IDIS PR27 Report, Status of HOME Grants
     • Interviews with management staff
     • Documentation of resources distributed (such as attachments to written agreements, procedures manuals, and/or


40                                                                                                          Monitoring HOME
      training classes held)
    • Policies and procedures regarding recordkeeping and records retention for State recipients and subrecipients to docu-
      ment HOME compliance
    • Written agreements containing recordkeeping requirements
    • Policies and procedures for monitoring subrecipients
    • Monitoring plan and procedures
    • Results of monitoring reviews (such as checklists, reports, or correspondence)

         HUD Checklist Exhibit 7-19 Selected Excerpts                                     Notes

 1. Does the PJ have a management system for the oversight of
    its subrecipients?
      Yes       No

    If “yes,” briefly describe below and, if the PJ has a written
    description of its subrecipient management policies or
    systems, attach a copy. [24 CFR 92.505 and 24 CFR
    85.20(b)]

    ___________________________________________________

    ___________________________________________________

    ___________________________________________________


 2. How many subrecipients did the PJ commit to provide HOME
    funds to during the program year or years being examined?

    Program Year ________________

    Number of Subrecipients ________________


 3. What is the total amount of HOME funds the PJ committed
    to all of its subrecipients during the most recent program
    year?

   __________________

 4. Of the amounts committed in [3] above, what amounts
    remain unexpended?

   __________________




Chapter 2: Monitoring Program Partners                                                                                    41
 5. For program years being reviewed, what amount of HOME
    funds committed to subrecipients remains unexpended?
    (List by program year below and then tally.). [IDIS Report
    PR22]

     Program Year/Amount                   /

     Program Year/Amount                   /

     Program Year/Amount                   /

     Total __________________



 6. Compare the PJ’s subrecipient records with information the
    PJ entered in IDIS for the years being reviewed. Are there any
    discrepancies? [24 CFR 92.502 and 92.504 (c)(2)(viii)]
       Yes      No


 7. Does the PJ have a method to ensure that subrecipients
    comply with the HOME Program requirements applicable
    to them and to the projects they are carrying out? [24 CFR
    92.504(a)]
       Yes      No
     If the answer to the above is “yes,” describe the steps
     taken by the PJ to inform subrecipients regarding applicable
     HOME Program requirements?

     ___________________________________________________

     ___________________________________________________

     ___________________________________________________


 8. Describe the technical assistance/training the PJ has provided during the program years being reviewed:

         Subrecipient Name                 Person(s) Trained                   Topics                         Date(s)




 9. Has the PJ provided appropriate resource materials to its
    subrecipients (e.g., regulations, OMB Circulars, CPD Notices,
    Building HOME manual, Technical Guide for Determining
    Income and Allowance for the HOME Program)?
       Yes      No




42                                                                                                              Monitoring HOME
 10. How does the PJ ensure that subrecipients maintain
     adequate records to comply with program requirements,
     including record retention? [24 CFR 92.504(a) and 24 CFR
     92.508]
      Yes      No



 11. Does the PJ assess the performance of 100% of its
     subrecipients annually? [24 CFR 92.504(a)]
      Yes      No

 12. Does the PJ have written procedures that it has
     implemented to identify “high risk” subrecipients?
      Yes      No

 13. Does the PJ have written procedures that it has
     implemented to ensure that “high risk” subrecipients
     receive proper oversight and monitoring?
      Yes      No



B. Internal Controls
Subrecipients are subject to applicable uniform administrative requirements as described in 24 CFR 92.505:
    • Recipients and subrecipients that are governmental entities (including public agencies) are required to comply with
      the following uniform administrative requirements:
       — Certain provisions of 24 CFR Part 85, Uniform Administrative Requirements for Grants and Cooperative Agreements
         with State and Local Governments
       — OMB Circular A-87, Cost Principles for State, Local and Indian Tribal Governments
       — OMB Circular A-133, Audits of States, Local Governments and Nonprofit Organizations.
    • Recipients and subrecipients that are nonprofit organizations are required to comply with the following uniform
      administrative requirements:
       — Specific provisions of OMB Circular A-110, as implemented at 24 CFR Part 84, Uniform Administrative Require-
         ments for Grants and Agreements with Institutions of Higher Education, Hospitals and Other Nonprofit Organizations
         (Refer to Chapter 3 for a list of applicable provisions.)
       — OMB Circular A-122, Cost Principles for Nonprofit Organizations
       — OMB Circular A-133, Audits of States, Local Governments and Nonprofit Organizations.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.504(a)
 Documentation:
    • Procedures for reviewing subrecipients’ financial systems
    • Procedures for monitoring subrecipients
    • Procedures for reviewing procurement and subcontracting requirements of the subrecipient
    • Procedures for reviewing audits
    • Results of monitoring visit(s) (checklists, notes, reports, or correspondence)




Chapter 2: Monitoring Program Partners                                                                                      43
           HUD Checklist Exhibit 7-19 Selected Excerpts                              Notes

 14. Does the PJ have a system or some other method to
     ensure that subrecipients’ financial management systems
     are kept in accordance with 24 CFR 85.20(b) or 24 CFR
     84.21(b)(3), as applicable?
       Yes        No



 15. Has the PJ established qualifications for the persons who
     conduct financial reviews of subrecipients?
       Yes        No
      If the answer to the above is “yes,” describe
      the qualifications.
     TIP




                   Qualifications of Financial Monitors
           Qualified staff (or a contractor) should have an
           accounting or finance background, specifically in the
           applicable HUD and OMB requirements listed above.



 16. If any subrecipient employees work on both HOME and
     non-HOME projects, does the PJ have a system to ensure
     that the subrecipient keeps appropriate time distribution
     records and makes appropriate charges to the HOME
     Program?
       Yes        No       N/A


 17. Does the PJ have a system or other method to ensure
     compliance by subrecipients with the procurement and/
     or subcontracting requirements of 24 CFR 85.36 [Federal
     competitive procurement] or 24 CFR 84.40 – 48, as
     applicable? (If yes, describe the system or method.)
       Yes        No
                               Specialized Financial Reviews
 TIP




           When the financial expert conducts specialized areas of review (such
           as audits or procurement systems), he/she should provide a memo
           or report to the file that states whether the requirements under
           review were satisfied, and noting any specific deficiencies or areas of
           concern.

 18. Is OMB Circular A-133 Single Audits required for any of the
     PJ’s subrecipients? [24 CFR 92.505]
       Yes        No
      If the answer to the above is “yes,” does the PJ have a
      system or methodology to ensure that such audits are
      conducted?

      ____________________________________________________

      ____________________________________________________

      ____________________________________________________




44                                                                                           Monitoring HOME
 19. If A-133 audits are required for any of the PJ’s
     subrecipients, does the PJ review the audits for compliance
     with the requirements of OMB Circular A-133? (If “yes,”
     describe process.) [24 CFR 85.26(b)(1)]
      Yes       No      N/A



 20. Does the PJ review subrecipients for evidence of conflicts
     of interest, either between the PJ and the subrecipient, or
     between the subrecipient and its contractors (e.g., seek
     information on the background of staff or the Board of
     Directors, seek specific assurances from subrecipients)?
     [24 CFR 85.36(b), and 24 CFR 92.505(a), 92.356]
      Yes       No
                                                      Resources for Calculating Income
         The HOME regulations state that no person covered who exercises or has exercised any functions or responsibilities with
  TIP




         respect to HOME activities or who is in a position to participate in decisions or gain inside information may:
         • Obtain a financial interest or benefit from a HOME activity; or
         • Have an interest in any contract, subcontract, or agreement for themselves or for persons with business or family ties.
         If the PJ monitor notes that staff, contractors, and/or beneficiaries have the same last names, he/she should ask
         questions, and look for a disclosure memo or note to the file.


 21. Does the PJ ensure that subrecipients have procedures to:
     identify HOME property and assets? [For example, does
     it ensure that subrecipients have the property records
     required by 24 CFR 85.32(d)(1) or 24 CFR 84.34(f)?] [24
     CFR 92.505(b)]
      Yes       No


 22. Does the PJ ensure that subrecipients have procedures to:
     ensure adequate safeguards for preventing loss, damage
     or theft of subrecipient-held property? [24 CFR 85.32(d)(3)
     or 24 CFR 84.34(f)(4); and 24 CFR 92.505(a) and (b)]
      Yes       No




C. Subrecipient Agreements
Background: The monitor must ensure that all funded subrecipients have a binding written agreement that details the scope
of work, use of funds, and all other required provisions and applicable requirements.
Written agreements must include terms that reflect the HOME Program rules specific to the activity being carried out. The
monitor should use HUD’s Exhibit 7-18, Guide for Review of Subrecipient Written Agreements, or Exhibit 7-17, Guide for
Review of State Recipient Written Agreements, to ensure all requirements are included in the written agreement.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.504(b)
 Documentation:
    • Written agreements between the PJ and the subrecipient(s) or State recipients, as applicable
    • Documentation of review of agreements for compliance
    • Results of monitoring visit(s) (checklists, notes, reports, or correspondence)


Chapter 2: Monitoring Program Partners                                                                                               45
         HUD Checklist Exhibit 7-19 Selected Excerpts                                        Notes

 23. Based upon the results of the subrecipients reviewed in
     [HUD Checklist] Exhibit 7-18, has the PJ executed written
     agreements with all subrecipients to whom it has allocated
     HOME funds [or Exhibit 7-14 for State recipients]? [24 CFR
     92.504(b)]
       Yes      No


 24. Did the PJ execute its written agreements with
     subrecipients prior to disbursing funds to them? [24 CFR
     92.504(b), and 92.504(a)(1) for State recipients and
     92.504(c)(2) for subrecipients] 
       Yes      No



 25. Did the PJ’s subrecipient agreements meet the
     requirements outlined in [HUD Checklist] Exhibit 7-18,
     Guide for Review of Subrecipient Written Agreements [or
     Exhibit 7-14, Guide for Review of State Recipient Written
     Agreements]? [24 CFR 92.504(c)(2)]
       Yes      No


 26. Were the PJ’s written agreements with its subrecipients
     effective for the entire period for which a subrecipient
     administers HOME funds? [24 CFR 92.504(b), and
     92.504(c)(1)(xii) for State recipients] 
       Yes      No



 27. When monitoring its subrecipients, does the PJ verify that
     they execute written agreements with other entities prior to
     disbursing funds (i.e., compare date of signature with date
     of initial IDIS draw)? [24 CFR 92.504(b)] 
       Yes      No




D. Reporting
Background: The PJ must ascertain that the project data that is entered and reported into the IDIS system is accurate and
timely, regardless of whether data entry is conducted by the PJ or the State recipient/subrecipient.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.502(b) and (d)
 Documentation:
     • Data collection procedures/guidance for project set-up and progress reporting for subrecipient(s) or State recipient(s)
     • Project data and reports submitted by subrecipient(s) or State recipient(s)
     • IDIS reports PR27 and PR22
     • Results of monitoring visit(s) (checklists, notes, reports, or correspondence)




46                                                                                                            Monitoring HOME
         HUD Checklist Exhibit 7-19 Selected Excerpts                                             Notes

 28. If subrecipients [or State recipients] enter data for IDIS
     project set-up and completion, does the PJ review data to
     ensure that the data are complete, accurate, timely and
     consistent with subrecipient [or State recipient] records?
     [24 CFR 92.502(b) and (d)]
       Yes      No


 29. When monitoring subrecipients [or State recipients] onsite,
     does the PJ verify the accuracy of data reported in IDIS and
     in reports that may be required? [24 CFR 92.504(a)]
       Yes      No




E. Onsite Monitoring by the PJ
Background: Monitors must monitor subrecipients or State recipients onsite at least once a year. If the subrecipient or State
recipient has been identified as “high risk,” then the monitor should go onsite more often as appropriate.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.504(a)                                                           Chapter 1, HOME Monitoring Basics,
                                                                                             discusses the steps involved and
 Documentation:                                                                             protocol for conducting a risk
     • Monitoring plan or schedule                                                           analysis and an onsite monitoring
                                                                                             visit, and for following up to ensure
     • Monitoring policies and procedures
                                                                                             that any problems are addressed in
     • Results of monitoring visit(s) (checklists, notes, reports, or correspondence)        a timely manner.

         HUD Checklist Exhibit 7-19 Selected Excerpts                                             Notes

 30. Provide the following information regarding the onsite monitoring efforts that have been conducted by the PJ during the year(s)
     being reviewed.

     Subrecipient/State                                  Number and Types of                                    Date(s) Findings
     Recipient Monitored
                                      Dates                                           Date of Letter
                                                              Finding                                              Resolved




      Of the subrecipients [or State recipients] monitored during the time frame stated above, what percentage does this represent
      of the total number of subrecipients funded by the PJ during this same time period?

      _________________________

 31. Do the PJ’s written monitoring reports clearly document the
     areas monitored and the conclusions reached? [24 CFR
     92.504(a) and 24 CFR 92.508(a)(6)(iii)]
       Yes      No


 32. Are subrecipients [or State recipients] given an opportunity
     to respond and/or clarify?
       Yes      No




Chapter 2: Monitoring Program Partners                                                                                                 47
 33. Are monitoring results communicated timely to
     subrecipients [or State recipients]?
       Yes      No

 34. Do such results include any expected corrective actions
     and dates for resolution? [24 CFR 92.504(a) and 24 CFR
     92.508(a)(6)(iii)]
       Yes      No


 35. What is the PJ’s internal procedure for ensuring the quality
     of monitoring efforts, including documentation and intended
     actions, and follow through on promised actions?
       Yes      No




F. Program Income
Background: Gross income that is directly generated from the use of HOME funds or matching contributions and is received
by a PJ, State recipient, or subrecipient is program income. Program income that is generated by a subrecipient or State
recipient can either be returned to the PJ or retained by the subrecipient/State recipient for investment in HOME-eligible
activities.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.2 (definition of program income) and 92.504(c)(1)(iii) for State recipients; or 92.504(c)(2)(ii)
for subrecipients
 Documentation:
     • IDIS report PR05, Drawdown Voucher Summary Report
     • IDIS report PR09, Program Income Audit Trail
     • Subrecipient financial records and reports to the PJ
     • PJ’s internal financial records
     • Monitoring plan and procedures
     • Results of monitoring visit(s) (checklists, notes, reports, or correspondence)
     • Consolidated Plan or annual action plan
     • Local budget documents.




48                                                                                                         Monitoring HOME
         HUD Checklist Exhibit 7-19 Selected Excerpts                           Notes

 36. Are subrecipients [and State recipients] accurately
     reporting program income received to the PJ? [24 CFR
     92.504(c)(2)]
      Yes       No
                            Monitoring Program Income
        The PJ monitor must verify consistency in the amount of program
        income that is reflected in:
        • The subrecipient’s internal financial records
 TIP




        • Subrecipient reports to the PJ
        • PJ IDIS program income entries.
        Use IDIS report PR05, Drawdown Voucher Summary Report, to
        identify the date, amount, type of funds, and other information about
        all of the PJ’s vouchers. Use IDIS report PR09, Program Income Audit
        Trail, to review the audit trail of program income receipts.
        Identify when program income became available and whether it was
        expended before additional HOME funds were drawn down from the
        U.S. Treasury by comparing the two reports.

 37. In comparing the PJ’s internal financial records with its
     Integrated Disbursement and Information System (IDIS)
     entries, is the PJ accurately receipting program income
     received by subrecipients in IDIS? [24 CFR 92.503(a)]
      Yes       No



 38. Does the written agreement between the PJ and the
     subrecipient [or State recipient] specify whether the
     subrecipient can retain program income or if it must return
     program income to the PJ? [24 CFR 92.504(c)(1)(iii) for
     State recipients and 92.504(c)(2)(ii) for subrecipients] 
      Yes       No


 39. If program income is retained by the subrecipient [or State
     recipient], does the PJ check to determine that program
     income is being used before grant funds are requested?
     [24 CFR 92.504(c)(2)(vi) for subrecipients; or 92.504(c)(i)
     (iii) for State recipients]
      Yes       No      N/A


 40. If program income is retained by the subrecipient [or State
     recipient], does the PJ check to determine that program
     income is being used in accordance with HOME rules? [24
     CFR 92.504(c)(2) for subrecipients; or 92.504(c)(1) for
     State recipients]
      Yes       No      N/A




Chapter 2: Monitoring Program Partners                                                  49
 41. Has the PJ included program income expected to be
     received by all of its subrecipients or State recipients in
     preparing its most recent Consolidated Plan? [24 CFR
     91.220(b)(1), 24 CFR 91.320(b)(1) and 24 CFR 91.420(b)
     (1)]
        Yes      No       N/A



G. Assessment of Programs and Projects
Background: In addition to assessing the subrecipient’s or State recipient's overall management capacity and program compli-
ance (as reflected in Section 2 of this chapter), the PJ staff should also assess subrecipient or State recipient performance when
monitoring.
Regulatory Basis: Recommended
 Documentation:
      • Written agreement between PJ and subrecipient or State recipient
      • Project timetables for subrecipient or State recipient projects
      • Subrecipient or State recipient progress reports
      • Results of subrecipient or State recipient monitoring

           HUD Checklist Exhibit 7-19 Selected Excerpts                                       Notes

 42. Does the subrecipient or State recipient adhere to
     production/program administration timetables for each
     phase of production/program administration? 
        Yes      No       N/A

                               Meeting the Schedule
           The PJ monitor should use a standard set of project milestones
           for measuring subrecipient or State recipient progress. For
     TIP




           instance, for subrecipients or State recipients carrying out
           development activities, the PJ’s timetable might include:
           • Marketing and outreach
           • Application processing
           • Rehabilitation and construction starts
           • Loan/grant approvals
           • Project completions.


 43. Does the subrecipient submit reports that are thorough and
     complete in a timely manner? 
        Yes      No



 44. Does the subrecipient submit vouchers that are accurate
     and include proper documentation and justification of
     costs? 
        Yes      No




50                                                                                                             Monitoring HOME
Chapter 3: Monitoring Management and
Administrative Requirements

This chapter describes how to monitor the overall management and administrative requirements of the HOME Program.
These requirements generally apply to PJs and their State recipients and subrecipients, regardless of the HOME activity [hom-
eowner rehabilitation, homebuyer, rental, and tenant-based rental assistance (TBRA) they undertake].


Basis of this Chapter
The checklists provided in this chapter are based primarily on the following HUD Checklists:
       • Exhibit 7-2, Guide for Review of Overall Management Systems
       • Exhibit 7-13, Guide for Review of Match Requirements.
In addition, the chapter uses a limited number of selections from a number of other HUD Checklists.1
The HUD checklist questions cited in this chapter have been revised slightly for use by the PJ, rather than HUD. The
numbering is sequential for all questions; the original HUD checklist numbering has not been retained. Questions that are
denoted with the icon  have been added to facilitate a PJ’s review; these questions are not on the HUD checklists.
Complete copies of the HUD checklists are found in the CPD Grantee Monitoring Handbook, available online at http://www.
hud.gov/offices/cpd/library/monitoring/handbook.cfm#7. Chapter 7 of this handbook covers the HOME Program.

Framework for the Monitoring Review
In addition to reviewing the overall management and administrative requirements that are presented in this chapter, there are
a number of additional requirements that the PJ monitor needs to review to conduct a comprehensive monitoring review of
its programs. The PJ monitor should:
       • Use Chapter 2, Section 1 of this guidebook when the PJ funds CHDOs to undertake activities with CHDO set-aside
         funds. This chapter helps the PJ assess whether the CHDO meets HOME eligibility criteria, and how well the PJ is
         managing its CHDOs.
       • Use Chapter 2, Section 2 of this guidebook when the PJ uses a State recipient or subrecipient to administer any
         HOME program. This chapter helps the PJ monitor assess the funded entity’s compliance with applicable uniform
         administrative requirements, and the PJ’s management and oversight of these funded entities.
       • Use Chapters 4 through 7 of this guidebook to monitor compliance with the HOME activity-based requirements:
         homeowner rehabilitation, homebuyer, rental, and tenant-based rental assistance, respectively.




1
    Including: Exhibit 7-14, Guide for Review of Beneficiary Written Agreements; Exhibit 7-15, Guide for Review of Contractor Written Agreements; Exhibit
    7-16, Guide for Review of Owner, Developer, Sponsor Written Agreements; Exhibit 7-17, Guide for Review of State Recipient Written Agreements; Exhibit
    7-18, Guide for Review of Subrecipient Written Agreements; Chapter 21, Environmental Monitoring; Chapter 22, Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity;
    Chapter 23, Labor Standards Administration; Chapter 24, Lead-based Paint Compliance; Chapter 25, Relocation and Real Property Acquisition; and
    Exhibit 27-1, Guide for Review of Flood Insurance Protection.



Chapter 3: Monitoring Management and Administrative Requirements                                                                                        51
     • Use exhibits and guidance in the CPD Grantee Monitoring Handbook to review the PJ’s own compliance with Federal
       financial, procurement, and cost allowability requirements, including:
       — Exhibit 7-20, Guide for Review of Financial Management, with Attachment to Exhibit 7-20, Reviewer’s Guide for
         Financial Management Review of HOME Participating Jurisdictions (PJs)
       — Exhibit 7-21, Guide for Review of Cost Allowability
       — Exhibit 7-22, Guide for Review of Procurement
       — Exhibit 7-23, Guide for Review of Equipment and Equipment Disposition.

Resources
The following attachments are provided at the end of this chapter, to facilitate the PJ review:
     • Attachment 3-A: Using HUD Reports to Manage HOME Funds and Track Progress
     • Attachment 3-B: Provisions in Written Agreements
     • Attachment 3-C: HOME Eligible Costs
     • Attachment 3-D: Eligible Forms of Assistance
     • Attachment 3-E: Summary of Applicable Property Standards by Activity

Section 1. Monitoring Overall Management Systems
The PJ can use this section to conduct a self-assessment of how well it is administering its HOME Program overall. It is orga-
nized into the following areas:
     A. Overall management
     B. Program progress, reporting, and oversight
     C. Written agreements
     D. HOME subsidy
     E. HOME affordability requirements
     F. Housing quality standards
     G. Administrative costs
     H. Match
     I. Program income, repayments, and recaptured funds
     J. Other cross-cutting requirements
     K. Recordkeeping

A. Overall Management
Background: In order to administer its HOME program activities effectively, the PJ, State recipient, or subrecipient needs
systems and procedures in place for overall program administration, for the administration of each HOME activity it under-
takes, and for financial management.
Effective administrative procedures include the following elements, either as stand-alone documents or as part of an adminis-
trative procedure manual.
     • Roles and responsibilities, including organizational chart(s) that clarify lines of authority and job descriptions that
       describe roles and responsibilities of each staff person.


52                                                                                                             Monitoring HOME
    • Program administration procedures that describe overall administration, financial procedures, and procurement
      requirements.
    • Activity administration procedures that describe how each of the PJ’s funded HOME activities (such as its rental
      development or homeowner rehabilitation program) is administered. These procedures should include step-by-step
      instructions on how to determine HOME compliance for the funded activity, such as how to determine community
      housing development organization (CHDO) eligibility, income-eligibility, and amount of HOME subsidy in a project.
      It should also specify how applicable cross-cutting Federal requirements (such as lead-based paint, or prevailing wage
      requirements) are implemented for the activity.
    • Integrated Disbursement and Information System (IDIS) procedures that describe staff responsibilities to ensure
      accurate, complete, and timely IDIS data entry and reporting.
    • Monitoring procedures that explain what monitoring is conducted by the PJ: activities covered, staffing, plan and/or
      timeline, and typical forms used. This is a Consolidated Plan requirement and is typically included in the PJ’s annual
      action plan. (Monitoring plans are discussed in detail in Chapter 1.)
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.504(a)
 Documentation:                                                                 Using Staff Interviews to Review
    • Program policies and procedures                                            Management Systems
    • Organizational chart(s) and job descriptions                               When monitoring a program’s overall
                                                                                 management, it is very important to
    • Program schedules and timelines                                            interview key staff about their jobs and
    • Library or electronic repository of HOME written guidance                  how they carry them out. Regardless
                                                                                 of how well a PJ might document its
    • Monitoring plan and procedures, including risk assessment and schedule     policies and procedures, if staff do not
    • Monitoring correspondence and reports                                      understand them or do not follow them,
                                                                                 the procedures have little meaning.
    • Consolidated Plan or annual action plan

          HUD Checklist Exhibit 7-2 Selected Excerpts                                     Notes

 1. Are the duties and responsibilities of PJ staff clearly defined
    and understood by both management and staff?
     Yes       No

 2. Are lines of authority clearly outlined and understood by both
    management and staff?
     Yes       No

 3. Are there systems in place that establish deadlines and
    track employee performance of specific tasks?
     Yes       No



 4. Are there systems to ensure that staff receives the
    appropriate information to enable them to complete tasks
    timely?
     Yes       No




Chapter 3: Monitoring Management and Administrative Requirements                                                          53
 5. Does the program staff maintain a library of HOME written
    guidance (final rule and policy notices) or access to those
    documents online as needed?
      Yes      No


 6. Does the PJ review the performance of program participants
    (i.e., subrecipients, State recipients, and contractors) at
    least annually? [24 CFR 92.504(a)]
      Yes      No


 7. Does the PJ select program participants for onsite
    monitoring at regular intervals or on the basis of risk
    assessment results?
      Yes      No



         HUD Checklist Exhibit 20-1 Selected Excerpts                                         Notes

 8. Is the jurisdiction: Using the standards and procedures it
    described in its Consolidated Plan for monitoring activities
    carried out in furtherance of the Plan and complying with
    long-term compliance requirements? [24 CFR 92.525(a)]
      Yes      No



B. Program Progress, Reporting, and Oversight
Background: The PJ is subject to several deadlines that ensure that HOME funds are spent in a reasonable amount of time:
     • Commitment. The PJ must commit the full amount of its HOME annual allocation within 24 months of receipt of
       funds. If this deadline is not met, HUD will deobligate HOME funds from the PJ.
     • CHDO reservation. The PJ must reserve funds for housing that is owned, developed, or sponsored by CHDOs (a
       minimum of 15 percent of its HOME allocation) within 24 months of receipt of funds. If this deadline is not met,
       HUD will deobligate HOME funds from the PJ.
     • Expenditure. The PJ must spend its HOME annual allocation (including CHDO funds) within five years of receipt
       of funds. The date of receipt of funds is the last day of the month in which HUD notifies the PJ of HUD’s execu-
       tion of the HOME Investment Partnership Agreement with the PJ. Note, in addition to this HOME requirement,
       HOME funds allocated since 2002 are also subject to the National Defense Authorization Act which requires all funds
       from a fiscal year’s grant must be expended within eight years of the first day of the fiscal year for which the funds were
       appropriated. If this deadline is not met, the U.S. Treasury recaptures the funds and they are no longer available to the
       PJ.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.500(d)(1), 92.502(d)(1), and 92.504(a)
 Documentation:
     • Deadline Compliance Status Report and/or IDIS report PR27, Status of HOME Grants
     • Open Activities Report
     • IDIS report PR22, Status of HOME Activities
     • Program policies, procedures, and/or tracking systems/tools
     • Progress reports


54                                                                                                             Monitoring HOME
     • Monitoring reports and correspondence
     • Review of actions taken (correspondence, training, or technical assistance)
     • Evidence of terminated written agreement(s) and/or repayments of HOME funds spent on activity that did not
       proceed, if applicable

 HUD Reports that Help Track Project/Activity Progress
 The following HUD reports help the PJ track project status:
 • Deadline Compliance Status Report
 •   IDIS report PR27, Status of HOME Grants
 •   IDIS report PR22, Status of HOME Activities
 •   IDIS report PR25, Status of CHDO Funds by Fiscal Year
 • Open Activities Report
 • Expiring Funds Report.
 These reports are described in more detail in Attachment 3-A. The PJ monitor should use these reports to evaluate
 project progress. In addition, the PJ monitor should determine:
 • Whether someone on the PJ staff has the responsibility to review these reports on a regular basis (ideally, monthly
   or quarterly) to track carefully the progress of the PJ’s projects and funding commitments, CHDO reservations, and
   expenditures
 • Whether someone compares project file data with IDIS data on a regular basis to ensure that correct data is being
   entered into IDIS, including changes to existing projects.
 These functions might be the PJ monitor’s responsibility or might be assigned to PJ management or project
 management staff.


          HUD Checklist Exhibit 7-2 Selected Excerpts                                                  Notes

 9. Based on the Integrated Disbursements and Information
    System (IDIS) Report PR27 and/or the HOME Deadline
    Compliance reports, is the PJ making sufficient progress
    in committing funds to meet the 24-month deadline [e.g.,
    the PJ met its deadline in the past three months or, if the
    PJ continues to commit funds at its current monthly or
    quarterly commitment rate, it will meet its next deadline as
    established at 24 CFR 92.500(d)(1)(B)]?
      Yes       No
                                                         Definition of Funds Commitment
             HOME funds are committed when a legally binding written agreement is executed:
             • Between the PJ and a subrecipient, State recipient, or contractor to produce affordable housing or provide TBRA
             • Between the PJ and a CHDO, reserving funds to a CHDO
             • By the PJ (or subrecipient or State recipient) and a project owner for a specific local project:
     TIP




               — For rehabilitation or new construction, where construction is expected to begin in 12 months
               — For acquisition only, where title will be transferred within six months
               — For TBRA, where a rental assistance contract has been executed with owner or tenant.
             If a project is owned by the PJ or a State recipient, the project is committed when it has been set up in IDIS, and
             construction can be reasonably expected to begin within 12 months of the project set-up date.
             Monitors should verify that: (1) Legally binding written agreements are in the file to support funding commitments;
             (2) The dates of the project or activity set-up are the same as the dates of the funding commitments; and (3) For
             construction projects, construction start was reasonably expected to start within 12 months of the agreement (as
             evidenced by developer selection, architectural drawings, release of funds certification, project budget, and timeline).




Chapter 3: Monitoring Management and Administrative Requirements                                                                        55
 10. Based on the IDIS report PR27 and HOME Deadline
     Compliance reports, is the PJ making sufficient progress
     in reserving funds to CHDOs within the 24-month deadline
     [e.g., the PJ met its deadline in the past 3 months or, if
     the PJ continues to reserve funds at its current monthly or
     quarterly reservation rate, it will meet its next deadline as
     established at 24 CFR 92.500(d)(1)(A)]?
       Yes      No

                         Reserving CHDO Funds
           A PJ has reserved CHDO set-aside funds when it
     TIP




           enters into a written agreement with a CHDO for a
           specific amount of HOME funds for housing that will
           be owned, developed, or sponsored by the CHDO.
           Monitors should verify that legally binding written
           agreements are in the file to support CHDO funding
           reservations, and that CHDO set-aside funds are
           reserved in IDIS when the agreements are executed.

 11. Does the current rate of spending (as evidenced by the
     HOME Deadline Compliance Report or the IDIS report
     PR27) indicate that project funds will be spent by the
     5-year expiration date [e.g., based upon its current monthly,
     quarterly expenditure rates as established at 24 CFR
     92.500(d)(1)(c)]?
       Yes      No

 12. Based on the HOME Open Activities Report, is the PJ
     entering required data in IDIS timely (e.g., PJ completing
     projects in IDIS and entering beneficiary data within 120
     days of final draw)? [24 CFR 92.502(d)(1)]
       Yes      No
                                                        Understanding Open Activities
            The HOME Open Activities Report and the Status of HOME Activities Report (PR22) identify projects that are in open
            status. Using these reports, the PJ monitor should identify and determine the cause of:
     TIP




               • Stalled projects. The PJ monitor should determine if the project is behind schedule or if there is a problem with
                 timely IDIS data entry.
               • Cancelled projects. Projects may be cancelled because activity set-up data was not submitted timely, or a
                 client/other entity dropped out of a program. HUD automatically cancels a project where no disbursements are
                 made within 12 months of project set-up. (See HOME Facts, Vol. 3, No. 1, issued June 2010, http://www.hud.
                 gov/offices/cpd/affordablehousing/library/homefacts/volumes/vol3no1.cfm.)
               • Projects that are listed as final draw (FD). The PJ monitor should ensure completion data is entered into IDIS
                 so activities can be marked as complete.


 13. Does the PJ have a system for tracking the progress of
     projects from commitment to completion and occupancy?
       Yes      No




56                                                                                                                   Monitoring HOME
 14. Does the PJ review the progress of funded entities to
     ensure that project commitments result in disbursements
     and, ultimately, completed projects? [24 CFR 92.504(a)]
       Yes     No
                          Tracking Projects
         While HUD reports can help the PJ track project
   TIP


         progress, the PJ should also have its own system
         to track projects against the PJ’s performance
         benchmarks and timelines. These benchmarks
         should be stated in written agreements when a PJ
         uses subrecipients, State recipients, contractors,
         and/or CHDOs.

 15. If funded entities are not making adequate progress,
     does the PJ take action to correct the lack of progress
     (e.g., deobligating and reprogramming funds, provision of
     technical assistance, etc.)? [24 CFR 92.504(a)]
       Yes     No       N/A

                           Deobligating HOME Funds
         The PJ should have procedures in place for deobligating funds
   TIP




         when an entity is not performing and/or not meeting required
         benchmarks and timelines. If funds are deobligated, the
         project file should include documentation of the performance
         deficiencies, the terminated written agreement, and repayment
         of HOME funds. (For a discussion of program income
         requirements, see Subsection I of this chapter.)




C. Written Agreements
Background: A written agreement must be executed with each entity funded with HOME before any HOME funds are
committed or disbursed. The agreement should be a concise statement of the relationship between the PJ and the funded
entity, and include the conditions under which the HOME funds are provided. A properly written and executed agreement is
an extremely valuable management tool for verifying compliance and monitoring performance. It also enables a PJ to protect
its HOME investment. Written agreements must be carefully executed in order to cover the various parties and requirements
involved in a project.
To fully monitor all the applicable requirements for each type of written agreement, PJ monitors should use the following
HUD checklists:
    • Exhibit 7-14, Guide for Review of Beneficiary Written Agreements
    • Exhibit 7-15, Guide for Review of Contractor Written Agreements
    • Exhibit 7-16, Guide for Review of Owner, Developer, Sponsor Written Agreements
    • Exhibit 7-17, Guide for Review of State Recipient Written Agreements
    • Exhibit 7-18, Guide for Review of Subrecipient Written Agreements.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.504
 Documentation:
    • Sample written agreement(s) between the PJ and funded subrecipients; contractors; State recipients; owners, develop-
      ers, and sponsors; and beneficiaries



Chapter 3: Monitoring Management and Administrative Requirements                                                            57
     • IDIS and financial records, particularly those with dates for funds committed and first drawn by project
     • Amendments to written agreements, if any

           HUD Checklist Exhibit 7-2 Selected Excerpts                                     Notes

 16. Does the PJ execute written agreements with HOME
     recipients (e.g., homeowners, homebuyers, rental owners,
     subrecipients, contractors, CHDOs) before committing or
     disbursing funds? [24 CFR 92.504(b)]
       Yes      No
                     Executing Written Agreements
     TIP




           The PJ monitor must verify that written agreements:
           • Have been properly executed, with authorized
             signatures
           • Have been executed before or on same day as
             IDIS set up and drawdown dates.

 17. Do the written agreements include all required provisions?
     [24 CFR 92.504(c)]
       Yes      No                 Required Provisions of Written
                         TIP




                                             Agreements
                               HOME written agreements must contain
                               certain provisions, which are outlined
                               in 24 CFR 92.504 and summarized in
                               Attachment 3-B.

 18. Are written agreements effective for the performance
     period (subrecipients, State recipients, and contractors)
     or affordability period (homebuyers and rental project
     owners)? [24 CFR 92.504(c)]
       Yes      No



 19. If a project has changed in scope or financing, has an
     amendment to the written agreement been executed? 
       Yes      No
                         TIP




                                           Amending Written Agreements
                                PJ monitors should verify that written agreements are
                                amended when there are changes to the scope of
                                work, financing, or if HOMErequirements change or
                                were not fully conveyed in the original agreement.




D. HOME Subsidy
A number of requirements pertain to the form and amount of the HOME subsidy, including:
     1. Minimum and maximum HOME investment
     2. Subsidy layering analysis
     3. HOME eligible costs
     4. Forms of assistance



58                                                                                                          Monitoring HOME
1. Minimum and Maximum HOME Investment
                                                                      Policies and Procedures Review in Administrative Monitoring
Background: For all HOME activities except TBRA, the
minimum amount of HOME funds that must be invested                    When conducting the administrative monitoring review,
in any project is an average of $1,000 per HOME-assisted              the PJ monitor should verify that the PJ has policies,
unit in the project.                                                  procedures, and/or other systems in place to ensure
                                                                      that its programs comply with several key HOME Program
The maximum per unit HOME subsidy limit varies by                     requirements, including:
PJ and is determined by HUD based on the PJ’s Section
                                                                • HOME subsidy
221(d)(3) limits. The limit in effect at the time of project
or activity commitment is the applicable limit. The maxi-       • HOME affordability
mum per unit subsidy limits are available from the HUD          • Housing quality standards
Field Office or online at http://www.hud.gov/offices/cpd/
                                                                • Other Federal requirements.
affordablehousing/programs/home/limits/subsidylimits.
cfm. For some PJs in high cost areas, the limits have been      The PJ monitor determines if the PJ, State recipient, or
increased to a maximum of 210 percent of the basic limit.       subrecipient complies with these requirements in specific
For these PJs, HUD will allow, upon request, an increase        projects in its project monitoring, discussed in Chapters
in the per unit subsidy amount on a program-wide basis.         4-7 of this guidebook, for each of the HOME activity areas.
However, the absolute maximum subsidy limit that HUD
will allow is 240 percent of the basic 221(d)(3) limits. For more information on using the 221(d)(3) limits, see HOMEfires,
Vol. 9, No. 9, issued August 2008.
The minimum HOME investment and maximum per unit subsidy limits apply to only the HOME funds invested in the
project, for HOME-assisted units.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.205 and 92.250
 Documentation:
    • Program policies and procedures
    • HUD 221(d)(3) limits for each HOME Program year under review
    • IDIS report PR22, Status of HOME Activities

          HUD Checklist Exhibit 7-2 Selected Excerpts                                            Notes

 20. Does the PJ have procedures to adequately ensure that it
     complies with the minimum HOME investment requirement
     of 24 CFR 92.205(c) and the maximum HOME investment
     requirement of 24 CFR 92.250(a)?
     Yes        No
              Verify HOME Investment Amount on IDIS Report PR22
    TIP




            For a quick verification of compliance with the minimum
            and maximum per unit subsidy requirements, the PJ
            monitor can use the PR22 report which shows the amount
            of HOME investment divided by the number of HOME units
            in a project. Project files should be reviewed to confirm IDIS
            data and to uncover any possible problems.


2. Subsidy Layering Analysis
Background: Before committing HOME funds to a project that involves an investment of other public funds, a PJ must
evaluate the project in accordance with written subsidy layering guidelines to ensure that it will not invest any more HOME
funds, in combination with other governmental funds (Federal, State, or local), than are necessary to provide affordable
housing.




Chapter 3: Monitoring Management and Administrative Requirements                                                               59
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.250
 Documentation:
     • Subsidy layering policies and procedures

           HUD Checklist Exhibit 7-2 Selected Excerpts                                        Notes

 21. Has the PJ adopted and implemented subsidy layering
     procedures for examining projects that receive HOME and
     other public subsidies? [24 CFR 92.250(b)]
       Yes       No       N/A
              Coordinating Subsidy Layering Review with Other Public
     TIP




                                    Agencies
           The PJ may use another governmental entity’s (such as a
           housing tax credit allocating agency’s) subsidy layering analysis
           provided that the analysis reflects the final project financing,
           the total amount of HOME funds, and the number of HOME-
           assisted units.



3. HOME Eligible Costs
Background: HOME funds can be used only to pay HOME eligible costs that are reasonable and customary for the area. The
following are general categories of eligible costs. Attachment 3-C provides a detailed description of each of these costs, and
any HOME requirements related to them:
     • New construction
     • Rehabilitation
     • Reconstruction
     • Conversion
     • Site improvements
     • Acquisition of vacant land or property
     • Demolition of properties
     • Relocation costs
     • Refinancing
     • Capitalization of project reserves
     • Project-related soft costs.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.206
 Documentation:
     • Written agreement(s) between the PJ and any funded entities
     • PJ policies and procedures related to eligible costs and cost reasonableness reviews




60                                                                                                          Monitoring HOME
          HUD Checklist Exhibit 7-2 Selected Excerpts                                       Notes

 22. Does the PJ have systems to ensure that all costs paid
     with HOME funds are eligible as outlined in 24 CFR 92.206
     – 209?
       Yes      No
                               Ensuring Cost Eligibility
         The PJ may want to adopt policies that specify what the PJ
   TIP



         considers to be reasonable costs, particularly for line items that
         are often negotiated, such as developers and other professional
         fees. It must conduct a cost eligibility and reasonableness review
         of each project prior to paying or agreeing to pay any costs. Finally,
         the written agreement between the PJ and any funded entity should
         codify what costs are eligible to be paid with HOME funds.

 23. Does the PJ have systems to ensure that all costs paid
     with HOME funds are reasonable? [24 CFR 85.20(b)(5)]
       Yes      No




4. Forms of Assistance
Background: HOME allows virtually any form of financial assistance, or subsidy, to be provided for eligible projects and to
eligible beneficiaries. The HOME regulation lists the following forms of subsidy as eligible (described in detail in Attachment
3-D), and requires HUD approval of any other form of assistance:
     • Interest bearing loans or advances
     • Non-interest bearing loans or advances
     • Deferred loans (forgivable or repayable)
     • Grants
     • Interest subsidies
     • Equity investments
     • Loan guarantees and loan guarantee accounts.
The PJ decides what forms of assistance it will provide. Some forms of assistance will require legal instruments to implement.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.205(b)
 Documentation:
     • Program policies/procedures
     • Sample written agreement between PJ and funded entities
     • Consolidated Plan or annual action plan and evidence of HUD approval, if form of assistance requires HUD approval




Chapter 3: Monitoring Management and Administrative Requirements                                                            61
           HUD Checklist Exhibit 7-2 Selected Excerpts                                      Notes

 24. Do PJ policies and procedures specify the eligible forms
     of HOME assistance (e.g., equity investments, interest
     bearing and non-interest bearing loans and advances,
     interest subsidies, deferred payment loans or grants)? [24
     CFR 92.205(b)] 
       Yes       No


 25. If a form of assistance not listed above is used, has it
     been submitted to HUD in the Consolidated Plan, reviewed
     by HUD Headquarters, and approved by HUD? [24 CFR
     92.205(b)(1)] 
       Yes       No      N/A

          Identify Other Forms of Assistance in Consolidated Plan
  TIP




         If the PJ intends to use a form of assistance not listed
         above, the PJ’s Consolidated Plan or annual action plan
         should describe the proposed form of assistance. Once
         approved by HUD as part of the plan, no other HUD
         approval is required.


E. HOME Affordability Requirements
Background: Housing affordability in the HOME Program is created through a combination of income restrictions and rent
and/or sales price restrictions, as follows:
Income restrictions
     • Each PJ must use 100 percent of its HOME funds to assist low-income households. A low-income household has
       an annual gross income at or below 80 percent of the area median income, as determined by HUD and adjusted for
       household size.
     • For rental housing, for each annual HOME allocation that the PJ receives, 90 percent or more of the households ini-
       tially assisted through all the PJ’s rental housing programs combined (rental acquisition/development and tenant-based
       rental assistance) must have annual gross incomes at or below 60 percent of area median income (“the program rule”).
       Further, for rental properties with five or more HOME-assisted units, at least 20 percent of the units must be occupied
       by very low-income households (“the project rule”). A very low-income household has an annual gross income at or
       below 50 percent of the area median income, as determined by HUD and adjusted for household size.
Rent/Sales Price Restrictions
     • The rents for HOME-assisted units cannot exceed HUD-prescribed maximum HOME rents. HOME rents represent
       the maximum that tenants can pay for rent and utilities combined.
     • For homeownership activities, the purchase price (for acquisition or new construction)
       or after-rehabilitation value (for rehabilitation) of an assisted home cannot exceed 95 Chapters 4-7 of this
       percent of the median purchase price for the area.                                      guidebook provide guidance
                                                                                                 to PJ monitors for reviewing
     • For homebuyer activities, the PJ must impose long-term affordability through resale or
                                                                                                 specific projects for
       recapture provisions. The resale option ensures that the HOME-assisted unit remains
                                                                                                 compliance with the HOME
       affordable over the entire affordability period; the recapture option enables the PJ to
                                                                                                 income targeting and
       recapture all or a portion of the direct HOME subsidy if the property is transferred      affordability requirements
       or sold during the affordability period, so that these funds can be reinvested in other   for projects in each of the
       HOME-eligible activities. The PJ’s resale or recapture policies must be described in      funded activity areas.
       the PJ’s Consolidated Plan or annual action plan.


62                                                                                                          Monitoring HOME
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.203, 92.252, and 92.254
 Documentation:
    • Copies of the HUD income limits for the years being reviewed
    • Income policies and procedures, or other program descriptions, that identify the definition of income used for
      activities
    • Rental program policies and procedures or other program materials that identify the rent limits used for activities
    • Program procedures that specify how income and rent limits are conveyed to project owners and managers
    • Consolidated Plan or annual action plan with resale or recapture provisions
    • Homebuyer program policies or procedures that describe the PJ’s resale or recapture policies

         HUD Checklist Exhibit 7-2 Selected Excerpts                                        Notes

 26. Is the PJ using the current HOME income limits issued by
     HUD for its HOME-assisted programs? [24 CFR 92.252(a)
     and 92.254(a)(3)]
      Yes      No
                     Ensuring the Use of Current HOME Income Limits
  TIP




        The PJ’s program procedures should specify what income limits are
        used in a project and who on the PJ’s staff is responsible for distributing
        updated income limits to PJ program staff and project owners and
        developers that have responsibility for determining household income.
        HUD generally updates income limits in March and publishes them on the
        HOME Program website at http://www.hud.gov/homeprogram/.


 27. Does the PJ have procedures for ensuring that income
     determinations meet HOME requirements established in
     24 CFR 92.203?
      Yes      No
  TIP




                 Ensuring Accurate Income-Eligibility Determinations
        The PJ’s procedures should specify that the PJ/subrecipient must
        compare its determination of the household’s income with the current
        HOME income limits and this worksheet or form showing income-
        eligibility must be retained in the project file.


 28. Does the PJ use a single income definition for each
     program that it administers?
      Yes      No

                                   Income Definitions
        The PJ must choose among three definitions of income, in order to
        calculate a household’s annual gross income:
  TIP




         • Part 5 (Section 8) definition of annual (gross) income
         • IRS definition of adjusted gross income from IRS Long Form 1040
         • U.S. Census Bureau Long Form definition of annual income.
        The PJ can use a different definition for different funded programs/
        activities (e.g., TBRA and homeowner rehabilitation), but it must use the
        same definition for a single program or activity (e.g., the same definition
        for determining the household income of every TBRA applicant.).




Chapter 3: Monitoring Management and Administrative Requirements                                                            63
 29. If the PJ is undertaking rental activities, is it using the
     current rent limits? [24 CFR 92.252(a) and (b)]
       Yes       No       N/A
                           Ensuring Use of Correct HOME Rent Limits
           The PJ’s program procedures should specify what rent limits to use in a
     TIP


           project. For projects with five or more HOME-assisted units, projects must
           have two HOME rent levels: “high HOME rents" and “low HOME rents.”
           Low HOME rent units must be occupied by very low-income households.
           Generally, HUD updates income and rent limits in March and they
           are posted on the HOME Program website at http://www.hud.gov/
           homeprogram/.

 30. Does the PJ have procedures that ensure that rental project
     owners receive current income and rent limits pursuant to
     24 CFR 92.252(f)(2)?
       Yes       No       N/A


 31. If the PJ undertakes homebuyer assistance, has it
     established resale or recapture provisions that meet the
     requirements of 24 CFR 92.254(a)(5)(i) or (ii)? [24 CFR
     92.254(a)(5)(i)or (ii)]
       Yes       No       N/A

                 PJ’s Resale or Recapture Guidelines in
     TIP




                           Consolidated Plan
            The PJ is required to describe its resale or
            recapture provisions in its Consolidated Plan and
            annual action plan. The PJ monitor should check
            that the provisions in use are consistent with
            those in the Consolidated Plan.




F. Housing Quality Standards
Background: HOME-assisted properties must meet certain building codes and quality standards, depending on the activity
being undertaken and/or the type of housing. The minimum property standards that apply to each type of HOME activity
are provided in Attachment 3-E.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.251
                                                                                  The Housing Quality Standards checklist in this
 Documentation:                                                                  section helps the PJ monitor determine if the
                                                                                  PJ has sufficient policies and procedures in
     • Program policies and procedures that identify the local or national        place to ensure that HOME-assisted housing
       property codes and standards used for each of the PJ’s funded              meets applicable property standards. To
       activities                                                                 monitor compliance with these standards in
     • Project review procedures and/or construction oversight proce-             specific projects, the PJ monitor should use
       dures that describe the review process for work write-ups or plans         the checklists provided in Chapters 4 – 7 of
       and specifications, and procedures for inspections (initial, ongo-         this guidebook, for each HOME activity area.
       ing, and final) to ensure applicable property codes and standards          The following section, Other Requirements,
       are met                                                                    discusses property standards for accessibility
                                                                                  in HOME-assisted units.
     • Inspection forms
     • PJ’s written rehabilitation standards


64                                                                                                               Monitoring HOME
    • Sample written agreements between PJ and subrecipient, State recipient, contractors and/or developers (as applicable),
      or other evidence that the applicable property standards have been conveyed to construction contractors and other
      partners

          HUD Checklist Exhibit 7-2 Selected Excerpts                                       Notes

 32. Does the PJ have procedures that ensure that all HOME-
     assisted units meet applicable property standards at
     completion and, if applicable, throughout the period of
     affordability pursuant to 24 CFR 92.251?
       Yes      No
                                       Construction Oversight
         Program procedures must specify what property standards apply to each funded
         activity and must describe the construction oversight process. Construction
         oversight must include the PJ’s:
   TIP




          • Review and approval process for plans and specifications or work write-ups
          • Inspection process (initial, ongoing, and final)
          • Notice to proceed orders
          • Contractor work requirements (e.g., insurance, bonding, and not on the
            Federal excluded parties listing)
          • Retainage policies and requirements for its release
          • Workmanship guarantees and lien waivers/releases.

 33. Has the PJ adopted written rehabilitation standards (i.e.,
     methods and materials standards) for its rehabilitation
     programs? [24 CFR 92.251(a)]
       Yes      No      N/A


 34. Has the PJ identified property standards and codes
     applicable to HOME-assisted projects? [24 CFR 92.251]
       Yes      No



 35. Does the PJ have a construction management system
     that ensures that work is completed and performed in
     accordance with rehabilitation or construction methods
     and materials standards, building codes, etc., specified in
     the construction contract? (Note: Lack of documentation
     demonstrating that initial, progress, and final inspections
     are performed; no work write-ups or extremely general
     write-ups; frequent citizen complaints; apparent use of
     poor quality materials; recurrent housing problems; or
     difficulty maintaining properties in standard condition are
     all possible indicators of problems in this area.) [24 CFR
     92.505(a) and 24 CFR 85.36(b)(2)]
       Yes      No      N/A



G. Administrative Costs
Background: No more than 10 percent of the PJ’s annual allocation, plus 10 percent of its program income, can be spent on
eligible administrative and planning costs.
The PJ can choose to provide administrative funds to a State recipient or subrecipient, subject to this administrative cap. If
this is done, the PJ’s written agreement should specify the amount and use of the administrative funds. These funds should be
accounted for separately from other funds that are provided to the other entity.

Chapter 3: Monitoring Management and Administrative Requirements                                                           65
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.207 and 92.505(a)
 Documentation:
      • Drawdown reports and status reports from IDIS, as well as the HOME website’s production reports
      • Accounting records such as cash disbursements journal, invoices, and other back-up documentation
      • Time and expense reports for staff that show time charged to the HOME Program

           HUD Checklist Exhibit 7-21 Selected Excerpts                                              Notes

 36. Does a review of planning and administrative costs subject
     to the 10% limitation indicate that they have been properly
     classified? [24 CFR 92.207]
       Yes      No
                                     Eligible Administrative and Planning Costs
           In addition to staff salaries and related costs, other eligible planning and administrative costs
           include:
           • Goods and services necessary for administration (e.g., utilities, office supplies, etc.)
     TIP




           • Administrative services under third party agreements (e.g., legal services)
           • Costs related to administering a tenant-based rental assistance (TBRA) program
           • Public information costs
           • Fair housing activities
           • Indirect costs either under a cost allocation plan prepared in accordance with applicable
              Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Circular requirements or with an Indirect Cost Rate
              approved by the cognizant agency
           • Preparation of the Consolidated Plan, annual action plan, and annual performance reports
           • Costs of compliance with other Federal requirements.



H. Match
Background: Each PJ must make match contributions equaling 25 percent of the HOME funds it expends for certain hous-
ing activities each program year. HOME funds expended for program administration, CHDO operating expenses, CHDO
capacity-building, and CHDO predevelopment loans forgiven by the PJ are not required to be matched. Match funds must
constitute a permanent contribution to housing that is assisted with HOME funds, or to affordable housing that is not
HOME-assisted but meets key HOME requirements (“match-eligible”).
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.218, 92.219, 92.220(a) and (b), 92.508(a)(2)(ix)
 Documentation:
      • Match log and back-up documentation on source, form, and determination of amount of match
      • Project files that document commercial vs. residential space and the breakdown of HOME vs. non-HOME units, as
        applicable
      • Written agreements with property owner/manager of projects that are being counted as match
      • File documentation to support date of match credit




66                                                                                                             Monitoring HOME
         HUD Checklist Exhibit 7-13 Selected Excerpts                                               Notes

 37. Are match contributions eligible (e.g. non-federal
     contributions to eligible projects made in eligible form)? [24
     CFR 92.219; 24 CFR 92.220(a) and (b)]
     Yes       No
                                                Eligible Forms of Match
         Permanent contributions to HOME or other affordable housing. For investments in HOME-assisted
         housing, the following forms of match are eligible:
         • Cash from non-federal resources (such as State or local government, charitable organizations/
           foundations, private lenders)
  TIP




         • Forbearance of State and local taxes, charges, or fees
         • Donated real property, site preparation, or construction materials paid for with non-federal funds
         • Onsite or off-site infrastructure that is paid with non-federal funds and is required for HOME-
           assisted housing
         • Proceeds from multi- and single family affordable housing project bond financing, with some
           limitations [see 24 CFR 92.220(a)(5)]
         • Direct cost of supportive services or homebuyer counseling to families residing in HOME-assisted
           units
         • Value of donated labor, professional services, or equipment rentals.


 38. If contributions are made to non-assisted units in housing
     that is partially HOME-assisted, are at least 50% of the
     units in the project HOME-assisted? [24 CFR 92.219(a)(3)]
      Yes       No      N/A


 39. If contributions are made to the commercial space
     in mixed-use projects, is at least 51% of floor space
     residential and are at least 50% of the dwelling units
     HOME-assisted? [24 CFR 92.219(a)(4)]
      Yes       No      N/A



 40. If contributions are made to housing that is not HOME-
     assisted, does the housing or tenant-based rental
     assistance (TBRA) meet the requirements for HOME match-
     eligible housing or TBRA? [24 CFR 92.219(b)]
      Yes       No      N/A
                                      Match-eligible Housing
         Match-eligible contributions to TBRA must be made to tenants that: (1) Are
         low- or very low-income; (2) Meet the PJ’s tenant selection criteria; (3) Pay
         reasonable rent as determined by the PJ; and (4) Reside in a unit that meets
   TIP




         Housing Quality Standards.
         Match-eligible contributions to non-HOME affordable housing development must
         be invested in housing that meets HOME rental or homeownership affordability
         requirements outlined at 24 CFR 92.252 and 92.254, respectively. This means:
         (1) Occupants must be low-income; (2) Rental housing must be rented at no
         more than the HOME rents and remain affordable for the affordability period;
         (3) Homeownership housing must be sold initially at an affordable price, and if
         sold to a subsequent buyer during the affordability period, must be subject to
         either resale restrictions or recapture provisions.




Chapter 3: Monitoring Management and Administrative Requirements                                                67
 41. If contributions are made to housing that is not HOME-
     assisted, does the PJ have a written agreement with the
     owner of the housing that imposes and enumerates the
     affordability requirements and/or tenant protections, as
     applicable. 
                                            Written Agreements for Contributions to




                                     TIP
      Yes        No      N/A
                                                    “Match-eligible” Housing
                                            This written agreement must be executed
                                            before any match contributions may be
                                            made.


 42. If contributions are made to housing that is not HOME-
     assisted, are the forms of match eligible for this type of
     housing (i.e., not infrastructure, waived fees or charges,
     supportive services, or homebuyer counseling)?
       Yes       No      N/A



 43. Was the value of each matching contribution calculated
     properly? [24 CFR 92.220] 
       Yes       No      N/A
                                     TIP




                                               Determining the Value of Non-cash Match
                                           PJ must document the value of non-cash
                                           contributions and the process for determining
                                           value, and must retain source documentation to
                                           substantiate the value.


 44. Were the match contributions credited at the time the
     contributions were made? [24 CFR 92.220]
       Yes       No



 45. Does the PJ have a running match log indicating the type
     and amount of match contributions and the date credited?
     [24 CFR 92.508(a)(2)(ix)]
       Yes       No
                                           Match Log
     TIP




           The match log must be in sufficient detail for the PJ to ensure the match
           requirement will be met by the end of each Federal program year.
           The PJ should maintain source documentation to back up the match log.
           HUD Notice CPD-97-03, HOME Program Match Guidance, (issued March
           27, 1997) includes a sample HOME Match Log to help PJs establish and
           maintain effective match tracking systems.

 46. Do the match log and other records indicate that the PJ has
     met its annual match requirement [for the] program year
     reviewed? [24 CFR 92.218]
       Yes       No

 47. Has the PJ adequately documented the eligibility and value
     of match contributions? [24 CFR 92.219; 24 CFR 92.220;
     24 CFR 92.221 and 24 CFR 508(a)(2)(ix)]
       Yes       No



68                                                                                          Monitoring HOME
I. Program Income, Repayments, and Recaptured Funds
Background: Program income that is generated by the use of HOME funds must be used by the PJ, State recipients, or
subrecipients for HOME-eligible uses. Up to 10 percent of program income that is deposited into the PJ’s local account or
received and reported by its State recipients or subrecipients during the program year can be used for eligible administrative
and planning costs.
The PJ can permit its State recipients and subrecipients to retain program income to carry out HOME-eligible activities, pro-
vided it so specifies in its written agreement. Program income that is received by the PJ must be expended before additional
HOME funds are drawn down from the U.S Treasury. Further, program income that is received by the PJ must be reported
properly in IDIS.
On a program-wide basis, PJ monitoring staff should ensure that written agreements with State recipients and subrecipients
specify that any amount of funds recaptured as a result of a homebuyer property being sold within the affordability period
must be used for HOME projects in accordance with all HOME rules.
     • The agreements should specify that if recaptured funds are retained that these funds must be spent before additional
       HOME funds are requested from the PJ.
     • PJs may instead require that some or all of these entities return recaptured funds to the PJ, in which case the PJ itself
       must then use the funds in accordance with all HOME rules, and must spend these funds before requesting additional
       funds from the U.S. Treasury.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 85.20 and 24 CFR 92.502(c)(2), 92.504(c)(2(iii), 92.505(a), 92.508(a)(5)(iii)
 Documentation:
     • Cash receipts journal
     • Cash disbursements journal
     • Program procedures
     • Written agreements between the PJ and funded entities
     • IDIS reports PR27, PR05, and PR09
     • Accounting records, including HOME draw information
     • Program income reports
     • Monitoring reports/correspondence related to review of program income records of subrecipients or State recipients
     • CAPER (or PER for States)
     • Loan servicing reports




Chapter 3: Monitoring Management and Administrative Requirements                                                              69
           HUD Checklist Exhibit 7-2 Selected Excerpts                                             Notes

 48. Does the PJ maintain records regarding the source and
     application of program income, repayments, and recaptured
     funds? [24 CFR 92.508(a)(5)(iii)]
       Yes       No

                                            Program Income, Recaptured Funds, and Repayments
           Program income is the gross income received by a PJ, State recipient, or subrecipient directly generated from the use of
           HOME funds or matching contributions. Program income includes, but is not limited to:
           • Proceeds from the sale or long-term lease of real property acquired, rehabilitated, or constructed with HOME funds or
             matching contributions
           • Income from the use or rental of real property owned by a PJ, State recipient, or subrecipient that was acquired,
             rehabilitated, or constructed with HOME funds or matching contributions, minus the costs incidental to generating that
             income
           • Payments of principal and interest on loans made with HOME or matching funds, and proceeds from the sale of loans
     TIP




             or obligations secured by loans made with HOME or matching contributions
           • Interest on program income
           • Any other interest or return on the investment of HOME and matching funds
           • Program income derived from consortium activities remains consortium program income – even if those activities were
             carried out in, or by, a jurisdiction that has left the consortium.
           Program income must be used for HOME-eligible activities, and up to 10% of the program income in a given year can be
           used to pay eligible administrative and planning costs.
           Recaptured funds are any amount of HOME funds that are recaptured when a homebuyer property is sold during the
           affordability period. These funds must be used for HOME projects (not administration) in accordance with all HOME rules.
           Repayments are funds returned for housing that does not meet the affordability requirements for the duration of the
           affordability period, or for funds invested in a project that was terminated prior to completion. Repayments are paid
           back to whichever HOME account they were drawn from (either the local HOME Investment Trust Fund or the Treasury
           HOME Investment Trust Fund). See CPD Notice 97-09, HOME Program Income, Recaptured Funds, Repayments and CHDO
           Proceeds (September 12, 1997) for more information.



           HUD Checklist Exhibit 7-20 Selected Excerpts                                            Notes

 49. Are revenue-generating activities being undertaken?
       Yes       No

      The PJ, State recipient, or subrecipient must track how
      much money has been generated in the time period
      between the start of the PJ’s program year and the date of
      the monitoring. (Looking at the current year’s budget may
      not evidence revenue-generating activities as the income
      could be coming from prior year activities.)




70                                                                                                                  Monitoring HOME
 50. If revenue-generating activities are being undertaken, has
     the PJ established revenue accounts to record program
     income?
      Yes       No

     The PJ, State recipient, or subrecipient must be able to
     show how it accounts for the revenue.
     There should be receivables in the accounting records (and
     Chart of Accounts) to record revenues. The key is that the
     PJ must have a mechanism in place to record revenues
     when the transaction happens.
     It is best to have revenues go into the grant cash account
     for which a daily cash balance report is available (or
     generated from a computerized system).
     The trial balance should reflect that such accounts are set
     up.
     The annual action plan should reflect what program income
     the PJ anticipated.

 51. Does the PJ disburse program income to pay program costs
     before making cash withdrawals from the U.S. Treasury?
     [24 CFR 92.502(c)(2)]
      Yes       No       N/A
     Determine whether the cash account is used so that
     program income received (principal and interest payments,
     rental income, etc.) is used to pay program costs first. If
     something has been paid, ask for records or information on
     the accounts.



 52. Does the PJ have a system/procedures for tracking
     program income received by subrecipients, State recipients
     or contractors administering all or a portion of the
     PJ’s HOME program? [24 CFR 85.20(b)(3) and 24 CFR
     92.505(a)]
      Yes       No       N/A
                                     Program Income Generated by State Recipients and Subrecipients
             TIP




                     Written agreements between the PJ and State recipients, subrecipients, and consortium members
                     must specify whether program income will be returned to the PJ or retained by the other entity. If
                     retained, the written agreement must state the specific uses.
                     CHDOs may be allowed to retain and use project proceeds; the written agreement must specify
                     the allowable uses of those funds. If the CHDO’s project proceeds are returned to the PJ, they are
                     considered program income. (See Chapter 2 for further information on project proceeds).

 53. If program income is retained by subrecipients, State
     recipients or contractors administering all of a portion of
     the PJ’s HOME program, does the PJ have a system for
     ensuring that such income is reported in a timely and
     accurate manner?
      Yes       No       N/A




Chapter 3: Monitoring Management and Administrative Requirements                                                          71
 54. Upon expiration of any agreements between the PJ and
     subrecipients, State recipients or contractors, does the PJ
     have a system for ensuring:
      i.   The transfer of any funds to be returned to the PJ;
           and/or
      ii. The transfer of outstanding loans or accounts
          receivable?
       [24 CFR 92.504(c)(2)(vii) and 24 CFR 85.20(b)(3)]
        Yes       No      N/A


 55. Does the program income information in the PJ’s official
     accounting records for the period covered by the most
     recently completed performance report match the
     information in IDIS? [24 CFR 85.20(b)(1) and 24 CFR
     92.505(a)]
        Yes       No
                                            Reconciling Local Program Income Records with IDIS
     TIP




           Monitors should periodically compare local accounting records on program income receipts with program income records
           in IDIS. Monitors can use IDIS to print out the Drawdown Voucher Summary Report (PR05) and the Program Income
           Audit Trail (PR09) at any time. The Drawdown Voucher Summary Report identifies the date, amount, type of funds, and
           other information about all of the PJ’s vouchers. The Program Income Audit Trail displays an audit trail of program income
           receipts.

 56. If the PJ provides loans, does it have a system for properly
     servicing all loans (including deferred payment loans and
     loans in a revolving fund) that includes:
      i.   Written loan agreements that clearly describe the
           repayment terms, what constitutes a default and how
           it can be cured, and what actions the PJ will take if the
           default is not cured, and (if applicable) what is pledged
           as security for the loan?
      ii. Collection procedures that provide for the recognition of
          all current amounts due, payments received, notification
          to borrower when payments are overdue, a process for
          taking action on defaulted loans, and criteria for writing
          off bad debts?
        Yes       No      N/A




J. Other Requirements
Background: Other Federal requirements include:
      • Equal opportunity and fair housing
      • Affirmative marketing
      • Minority and women’s business outreach
      • Environmental review
      • Acquisition, relocation, displacement, and one-for-one replacement of housing
      • Labor standards
      • Lead-based paint
      • Debarment and excluded parties check.


72                                                                                                                    Monitoring HOME
 The administrative monitoring review focuses on whether the PJ is cognizant of the other Federal requirements that
 apply to its HOME activities, and whether it has a system in place to ensure that those requirements are met. For an
 in-depth review of how effective these systems are and whether these requirements are met for specific projects, PJ
 monitors should use the HUD monitoring guidance in the CPD Grantee Monitoring Handbook, available online at http://
 www.hud.gov/offices/cpd/library/monitoring/handbook.cfm#7:
 • Chapter 21: Environmental Monitoring
 • Chapter 22: Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity
 • Chapter 23: Labor Standards Administration
 • Chapter 24: Lead-based Paint Monitoring
 • Chapter 25: Relocation and Real Property Acquisition
 • Chapter 27: Flood Insurance Protection.
 These requirements are also covered in Chapters 4 – 7 of this guidebook, for evaluating compliance in specific projects
 for each of the four HOME activities.

Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.251(a)(3), 92.351- 92.355, and 92.525(a)
 Documentation:
    • Program procedures that identify requirements for accessibility standards
    • Inspection forms (initial, ongoing, and final) and work write-ups or plans and specifications
    • PJ’s affirmative marketing policy
    • Affirmative marketing procedures, required forms, and recordkeeping requirements
    • Environmental review program procedures, required forms, and recordkeeping requirements
    • Acquisition and relocation program procedures, required forms, and recordkeeping requirements
    • PJ’s Anti-displacement and Relocation Assistance Plan
    • Labor standards program procedures, required forms, and recordkeeping requirements
    • Lead-based paint program procedures, required forms, and recordkeeping requirements
    • Flood area review procedures, required forms, and recordkeeping requirements
    • Flood plain map showing areas that have been designated

         HUD Checklist Exhibit 7-2 Selected Excerpts                                       Notes

 57. Does the PJ have a system to ensure that projects meet
     the accessibility standards of Section 504, as applicable,
     pursuant to 24 CFR 92.251(a)(3)?
      Yes      No       N/A


 58. Does the PJ have procedures to ensure that the following
     requirement, if applicable, [is] incorporated into its
     programs and projects: Affirmative marketing pursuant to
     24 CFR 92.351?
      Yes      No       N/A




Chapter 3: Monitoring Management and Administrative Requirements                                                      73
 59. Does the PJ have procedures to ensure that the following
     requirement, if applicable, [is] incorporated into its
     programs and projects: Environmental review pursuant
     to 24 CFR 92.352? (This determination may be based
     upon the use of appropriate exhibits in Chapter 21; on the
     projects sampled; or by use of staff interviews and other
     verification methods.)
      Yes       No       N/A


 60. Does the PJ have procedures to ensure that the following
     requirement, if applicable, [is] incorporated into its
     programs and projects: Relocation pursuant to 24 CFR
     92.353?
      Yes       No       N/A




         HUD Checklist Exhibit 20-1 Selected Excerpts                 Notes

 61. Is there evidence to show that the jurisdiction: Has in effect
     and has been following a residential anti-displacement
     and relocation assistance plan? [24 CFR 91.525(a); the
     certification]
      Yes       No       N/A




          HUD Checklist Exhibit 7-2 Selected Excerpts                 Notes

 62. Does the PJ have procedures to ensure that the following
     requirement, if applicable, [is] incorporated into its
     programs and projects: Labor standards pursuant to 24
     CFR 92.354?
      Yes       No       N/A



 63. Does the PJ have procedures to ensure that the following
     requirement, if applicable, [is] incorporated into its
     programs and projects: Lead hazard reduction pursuant to
     24 CFR 92.355? (This determination may be based upon
     use of the exhibits in Chapter 24; projects sampled; or
     staff interviews and other verification methods.)
      Yes       No       N/A

 64. Has the PJ complied with the flood insurance protection
     requirements when assistance was used for acquisition
     or construction (including rehabilitation) of real property
     located within the Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA)?
     (Use Exhibit 27-1, Guide for Review of Flood Insurance
     Protection.) [24 CFR 92.352]
      Yes       No       N/A




74                                                                            Monitoring HOME
K. Recordkeeping
Background: The PJ and all its HOME-funded entities (especially its State recipients, subrecipients, and contractors) must
retain written and/or electronic records to document compliance with HOME requirements. At a minimum, the following
records must be maintained by the PJ to remain in compliance with the HOME regulations:
    • PJ designation. Records concerning designation as a PJ (e.g., award letters from HUD for each program year)
    • Program records, including:
       — Efforts to maximize participation by the private sector as required by 24 CFR 92.200
       — Forms of assistance used
       — Subsidy layering guidelines (See HUD Notice CPD 98-01, Layering Guidance for HOME Participating Jurisdic-
         tions When Combining HOME Funds With Other Government Subsidies, issued January 22, 1998.)
       — Multifamily refinancing guidelines, if applicable
       — Procedures for establishing 95 percent of median purchase price for the area (homebuyer and homeowner pro-
         grams only)
       — Resale/recapture guidelines (homebuyer programs only)
       — TBRA records, including: Consolidated Plan TBRA certification; market conditions/needs assessment; selection
         policies and criteria; supporting documentation if using preferences; and rent standards and minimum tenant
         contribution
       — Compliance with requirement that initially, for each annual HOME allocation, 90 percent of assisted families in
         rental housing (including rental development and TBRA programs combined) have annual gross incomes at or
         below 60 percent of median
       — Compliance with matching requirements including a match log
       — Records documenting compliance with the following: 24-month commitment deadline; minimum fifteen percent
         set-aside for CHDO eligible activities; and 10 percent cap on administrative and planning costs.
    • Project records. See Chapters 4-7 of this guidebook for discussion of recordkeeping requirements for each HOME-
      funded activity.
    • CHDO records. See Chapter 2 of this guidebook for a discussion of CHDO recordkeeping requirements.
    • Financial records.
    • Program administration records, including:
       — Written agreements
       — Documents to demonstrate compliance with applicable uniform administrative requirements
       — Reports and correspondence related to inspections, monitoring reviews and audits, and resolution of any findings
         or concerns.
    • Other Federal requirement records. See applicable HUD checklists, as identified in Chapters 4-7 of this guidebook
      for each HOME activity.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.508
 Documentation:
    • Policies and procedures regarding recordkeeping and records retention
    • Program and project records




Chapter 3: Monitoring Management and Administrative Requirements                                                         75
            HUD Checklist Exhibit 7-2 Selected Excerpts                                                Notes

 66. Does the PJ have an adequate recordkeeping policy?
       Yes        No

                                   Recordkeeping Policy
           The PJ should have a recordkeeping policy that:
           • Lists what records to keep
     TIP




           • Specifies in what form the records are kept (electronic and/or
             hard copy)
           • Identifies where records are kept (ideally in central, locked files)
           • Specifies the records retention period.
           In addition, the PJ should articulate recordkeeping requirements
           in written agreements with State recipients, subrecipients,
           contractors; and owners, developers, and sponsors.


 67. Does the PJ maintain records to demonstrate compliance
     with HOME requirements? [24 CFR 92.508]
       Yes        No

                         Spot Sampling to Assess Recordkeeping Practices
     TIP




           PJ monitors should conduct spot sampling to verify that the PJ (or State
           recipient, subrecipient, or contractor) is following the recordkeeping policy.
           Records must be organized to permit an effective HUD and/or PJ review. Files
           must be complete and contain all information needed to determine whether
           HOME Program requirements have been met.


 68. Are records retained for the time periods specified in the
     HOME final rule? [24 CFR 92.508(c)]
       Yes        No

                                                           Records Retention Periods
           Generally, HOME-related records must be retained for five years after project completion. Some records, however, must be
           kept for up to five years after the period of affordability. Specific records retention requirements include:
 TIP




           • Rental. General records must be kept for five years after project completion. Tenant income-eligibility certification, rent,
             and inspection information must be kept for five years, up until five years after the affordability period terminates.
           • Homeownership. Homeownership records must be kept for five years after project completion. Resale and recapture
             records must be kept for the full period of affordability plus five years.
           • TBRA. TBRA records must be kept for five years after rental assistance ends.
           • Written Agreements. Generally, all written agreements must be maintained for five years after the agreement ends.
           • Displacement and Acquisition. Displacement and acquisition records must be kept for five years after final payment to
             those displaced.

 69. Does the PJ have a policy that provides HUD and its
     representatives and the general public with reasonable and
     timely access to its records? 
       Yes        No
                                                        Access to Records
 TIP




           Citizens, public agencies, and other interested parties should have reasonable access to records,
           consistent with applicable State and local laws regarding privacy and obligations of confidentiality.
           HUD, including the Inspector General and its representatives, have the right to access any records related
           the use of HOME funds of any PJ, State recipient, subrecipient, or contractor for auditing, excerpt, or
           transcript purposes.




76                                                                                                                       Monitoring HOME
                                                    Attachment 3-A
                       Using HUD Reports to Manage HOME Funds and Track Progress
HUD issues a number of reports that can help PJ staff track the progress of the PJ’s projects.
     • Deadline Compliance Status Report. HUD posts this report on the Internet at http://www.hud.gov/offices/cpd/
       affordablehousing/reports/index.cfm. This report is used to verify that the commitment, CHDO reservation, and
       expenditure amounts are equal to or greater than the cumulative HOME allocation amount. If this report shows an
       existing shortfall, the PJ should verify the accuracy and timeliness of its IDIS data entries and review written agree-
       ment documentation. If the shortfall is due to problems with IDIS reporting, then the PJ should work with its HUD
       representative to correct the information. Otherwise, the PJ should try to commit, reserve for CHDOs, or expend its
       shortfall amounts as quickly as possible in order to meet HUD deadlines.
     • IDIS Report PR27, Status of HOME Grants Report. The PR27 contains basic financial information on HOME
       grants; subgrants; and subfunds including commitments, disbursements, administrative funds; and CHDO reserva-
       tions. The PJ should periodically review the following data:
       — Status of Commitments from Authorized Funds helps the PJ determine if all of its funds are committed for older
         years.
       — Status of Disbursements shows if funds being drawn in a timely fashion. This is especially important if the PJ is
         expending its own funds first and drawing down for reimbursement.
       — HOME Activities Commitments/Disbursement identifies if funds available are being committed to activities, and if
         committed funds committed are being drawn.
       — CHDO Funds identifies the status of CHDO funds, including whether CHDO funds available are fully reserved,
         whether funds reserved for CHDOs are committed to activities, and if funds committed to CHDO activities are
         being disbursed.
     • IDIS Report PR22, Status of HOME Activities Report. The PR22 provides the status of each activity (a specific
       HOME project) entered into IDIS. This report can be used in a number of ways:
       — If the PR27 indicates a slow rate of disbursement, the PJ can review the PR22 and compare the commit date (date
         the activity was set up in IDIS) to the amount drawn and status date to identify which activities are experiencing
         slow disbursements.
       — Review the activities that are designated as open ("OP") and identify the stalled projects (where the last activity
         status date is greater than six months old and/or no draws have occurred). PJ staff should seek additional informa-
         tion to determine the cause of inactivity.
       — Identify any cancelled activities ("XX"), or whether there are a large number of cancelled activities. PJ staff should
         seek additional information about the nature and cause of the cancelled activities. While an occasional canceled
         project is not typically cause for concern, if there are a number of cancelled projects, there may be problems with
         the PJ’s up-front project underwriting, project selection, or project commitment process.
       — Identify activities that are designated as final draw ("FD") where the status date is greater than 120 days. These
         projects should be completed (“CP”) and beneficiary data should be submitted and entered into IDIS. PJ moni-
         tors should follow up to secure this information and complete the project.
     • Open Activities Report. This report is posted on the Internet at http://www.hud.gov/offices/cpd/affordablehous-
       ing/reports/open/. This report is generated using the same data that is reported on the PR22 report, discussed above;
       however, this information is based on monthly data. Monitors can use this report or download a more recent copy of
       the PR22 to pinpoint the most current activity performance issues.
     • IDIS Report PR25, Status of CHDO Funds by Fiscal Year. The PR25 is a high level report that displays CHDO
       funds reserved, committed to activities, and disbursed by fiscal year. This report can be used to analyze whether funds
       are being committed to activities in a timely manner, whether funds are being spent in a timely manner, and whether
       any CHDO activities are stalled.



Chapter 3: Monitoring Management and Administrative Requirements                                                             77
                                                       Attachment 3-B
                                             Provisions in Written Agreements
                            Required provision        + Recommended provision         NA Not applicable
                                                                PJ Agreement With...
      Required                                          Project
     Provisions                                                                                                      Tenants
                          State                         Owners,
     (§92.504)                         Subrecipients                Contractors      Homebuyers    Homeowners       Receiving
                        Recipients                     Sponsors,
                                                                                                                      TBRA
                                                       Developers
Use of HOME
Funds                                                                                                            +

Description of the        + as            + as                         + as
                                                           +                              +                NA          NA
Project                 applicable      applicable                   applicable
Roles and
Responsibilities             +              +              +              +               +                NA          NA

Performance
Standards                    +              +              +              +              NA                NA          NA

Affordability               as            + as
(§92.252 or                                                         Convey to 3rd
                        applicable      applicable
§92.254)               and convey to   and convey to                parties, as                          NA          NA
                                                                     applicable
                        3rd parties     3rd parties
Project                     as            + as                         + as
Requirements            applicable      applicable                   applicable                                    §92.209
(as applicable in      and convey to   and convey to               and convey to    §92.254(a)     §92.254(b)     and §92.253
Subpart F)                              3rd parties                  3rd parties        only           only            only
                        3rd parties
Property
                        + Convey to    + Convey to                   + Convey to
Standards
(§92.251 and
                       3rd parties as 3rd parties as               3rd parties as       NA                           NA
                         applicable     applicable                    applicable
§92.355)
Other Federal
Requirements                                                           except
                                                                      §92.505,
(Subpart H except                                                §92.506, and
                                                                                         NA                NA          NA
§92.352 and
§92.357)                                                              §92.352

Affirmative                                                             + as
Marketing                                                            applicable
(§92.351)                                                        and convey to
                                                                                         NA                NA          NA
                                                                     3rd parties
Conflict of Interest
                             +              +              +              +              NA                NA          NA

Program Income
                                                        NA             NA              NA                NA          NA

Uniform
Administrative
Requirements                                            NA             NA              NA                NA          NA
(§92.505)
Requests for
                                                                       + as
Disbursement of                                                   applicable
                                                                                         NA                NA          NA
Funds
Reversion of                                                           + as
Assets                       +                           NA
                                                                     applicable
                                                                                         NA                NA          NA

Records and                                                            + as
Reports                                                           applicable
                                                                                         NA                NA          NA




78                                                                                                              Monitoring HOME
                         Required provision        + Recommended provision         NA Not applicable
                                                             PJ Agreement With...
     Required                                        Project
    Provisions                                                                                                Tenants
                       State                         Owners,
    (§92.504)                      Subrecipients                 Contractors      Homebuyers    Homeowners   Receiving
                     Recipients                     Sponsors,
                                                                                                               TBRA
                                                    Developers
Monitoring
                          +              +              +              +               +                +       +

Enforcement of
the Agreement
                                                                    + as
(§92.252, 92.254                                               applicable
                                                                                      NA                NA      NA
and 24 CFR Part
85 as applicable)
Duration of the
Agreement                                                                          +                +       +

Conditions
                     + convey to    + convey to                   + convey to
for Religious
Organizations
                    3rd parties as 3rd parties as               3rd parties as       NA                NA      NA
                      applicable     applicable                    applicable
(§92.257)
CHDO Provisions      + convey to    + convey to                   + convey to
(§92.300 and        3rd parties as 3rd parties as               3rd parties as       NA                NA      NA
§92.301)              applicable     applicable                    applicable
Close-out
Requirements              +              +              +              +              NA                NA      NA




Chapter 3: Monitoring Management and Administrative Requirements                                                         79
                                                     Attachment 3-C
                                                    HOME Eligible Costs
The following costs are eligible HOME costs:
     • New construction. HOME funds may be used for new construction of both rental and ownership housing. Any
       project that includes the addition of dwelling units outside the existing walls of a structure is considered new
       construction.
     • Rehabilitation. This includes the alteration, improvement, or modification of an existing structure. It also includes
       moving an existing structure to a foundation constructed with HOME funds. Rehabilitation may include adding
       rooms outside the existing walls of a structure, but adding a housing unit is considered new construction.
     • Reconstruction. This refers to rebuilding a structure on the same lot where housing is standing at the time of project
       commitment. HOME funds may be used to build a new foundation or repair an existing foundation. Reconstruction
       also includes replacing a substandard manufactured house with a new manufactured house. During reconstruction, the
       number of rooms per unit may change, but the number of units may not.
     • Conversion. Conversion of an existing structure from another use to affordable residential housing is usually classified
       as rehabilitation. If conversion involves additional units beyond the walls (envelope) of an existing structure, the entire
       project will be deemed new construction. Conversion of a structure to commercial use is prohibited.
     • Site improvements. Site improvements must be comparable with improvements to surrounding standard projects.
       This would include developing new, onsite improvements (sidewalks, utility connections, sewer and water lines, etc.)
       where none are present. Building new, off-site utility connections to an adjacent street is also eligible. Off-site infra-
       structure is not eligible as a HOME expense, but may be eligible for match credit.
     • Acquisition of property. Acquisition of existing standard property, or substandard property in need of rehabilitation,
       is eligible as part of either a homebuyer program or a rental housing project.
     • Acquisition of vacant land. HOME funds may be used for acquisition of vacant land only if construction will begin
       on a HOME project within 12 months of purchase. Land banking is prohibited.
     • Demolition. Demolition of an existing structure may be funded with HOME funds if construction will begin on the
       HOME project within 12 months.
     • Relocation costs. The Uniform Relocation Act and Section 104(d) (also known as the Barney Frank Amendments)
       apply to all HOME-assisted properties. Both permanent and temporary relocation assistance are eligible costs. Staff
       and overhead costs associated with relocation assistance are also eligible.
     • Refinancing. HOME funds may be used to refinance existing debt on single family, owner-occupied properties in
       connection with HOME-funded rehabilitation. The refinancing must be necessary to reduce the owner’s overall hous-
       ing costs and make the housing more affordable. Refinancing for the purpose of taking out equity is not permitted.
       HOME may also be used to refinance existing debt on multifamily projects being rehabilitated with HOME funds, if
       refinancing is necessary to permit or continue long-term affordability, and is consistent with PJ-established refinancing
       guidelines.
     • Capitalization of project reserves. HOME funds may be used to fund an initial operating deficit reserve for new con-
       struction and rehabilitation projects for the initial rent-up period. The reserve may be used to pay for project operating
       expenses, scheduled payments to a replacement reserve and debt service for a period of up to 18 months.
     • Project-related soft costs. HOME funds may be used for project-related soft costs. These must be reasonable and
       necessary. Examples of eligible project soft costs include: finance-related costs; architectural, engineering, and related
       professional services; homebuyer counseling, provided the recipient of counseling ultimately becomes the owner of
       a HOME-assisted unit; project audit costs; affirmative marketing and fair housing services to prospective tenants or
       owners of an assisted project; and PJ staff costs directly related to projects (not including TBRA).




80                                                                                                               Monitoring HOME
                                                   Attachment 3-D
                                             Eligible Forms of Assistance
The following are eligible forms of HOME assistance:
    • Interest bearing loans or advances. These loans are amortizing loans. Repayment is expected on a regular basis, usu-
      ally monthly, so that over a fixed period of time, all of the principal and interest is repaid.
    • Non-interest bearing loans or advances. The principal amount of such loans is paid back on a regular basis over time,
      but no interest is charged.
    • Deferred loans (forgivable or repayable). These loans are not fully amortized. Instead, some, or even all, principal
      and interest payments are deferred to some point in the future. Deferred loans can be structured in many different
      ways.
    • Grants. Grants are provided with no requirement or expectation of repayment.
    • Interest subsidies. This is usually an up-front discounted payment to a private lender in exchange for a lower interest
      rate on a loan. An interest subsidy may also be a deposit in an interest-bearing account from which monthly subsidies
      are drawn and paid to a lender along with the homeowner’s monthly payment.
    • Equity investments. An equity investment is an investment made in return for a share of ownership. Under this form
      of subsidy, the PJ acquires a financial stake in the assisted property and is paid a monetary return on the investment if
      money is left after expenses and loans are paid.
    • Loan guarantees and loan guarantee accounts. HOME funds may be pledged to guarantee loans or to capitalize a
      loan guarantee account. A loan guarantee or a loan guarantee account ensures payment of a loan in case of default.
Other forms of assistance require HUD approval. If the PJ intends to use a form of assistance not listed above, the PJ’s Con-
solidated Plan or annual action plan should describe the proposed form of assistance. Once approved by HUD as part of the
plan, no other HUD approval is required,




Chapter 3: Monitoring Management and Administrative Requirements                                                             81
                                                             Attachment 3-E
                                     Summary of Applicable Property Standards by Activity
                    Activity                                               Minimum Property Standard to be Met
    Tenant-based rental assistance             Section 8 HQS
    Acquisition of existing housing (no        Applicable State or local housing quality standards and code requirements if no local
    rehabilitation or construction)            standards/codes apply, Section 8 HQS
    Rehabilitation of housing                  Local written rehabilitation standards and
                                               State and local code requirements and if no local codes apply, one of the following national
                                               model codes:1
                                               • Uniform Building Code (ICBO)
                                               • National Building Code (BOCA)
                                               • Standard Building Code (SBCCI) or
                                               • Council of American Building Officials one- or two-family code (CABO) or
                                               • Minimum Property Standards at 24 CFR 200.925 or 200.926 (FHA) and
                                               Handicapped accessibility requirements, where applicable.
    New construction of housing                State and local code requirements, or if no State and local codes apply, one of the following
                                               national model codes:
                                               • Uniform Building Code (ICBO)
                                               • National Building Code (BOCA)
                                               • Standard Building Code (SBCCI) or
                                               • Council of American Building Officials one- or two-family code (CABO) or
                                               • Minimum Property Standards (FHA) at 24 CFR 200.925 (for multifamily) or 200.926 (for
                                                 one- and two-unit dwellings)
                                               International Energy Conservation Code
                                               Handicapped accessibility requirements, where applicable
                                               New construction of rental housing must meet site and neighborhood standards at 24 CFR
                                               893.6(b)
    New manufactured housing                   Construction and Safety Standards of 24 CFR 3280
                                               Installation in accordance with State or local codes or the manufacturer’s written
                                               instructions


1
     Since the promulgation of the HOME Program regulations, these code issuing agencies have merged to form the International Code Council (ICC).
     The model codes used for the HOME Program are no longer being updated. In their stead, the ICC has issued the International Building Code. HUD
     will consider whether changes to the HOME regulations incorporating the International Building Code are appropriate. The HOME Program web
     page provides updated information on all HOME requirements. (See http://www.hud.gov/offices/cpd/affordablehousing/programs/home/index.
     cfm.) For more information about the International Building Code, see http://www.iccsafe.org.




82                                                                                                                            Monitoring HOME
Chapter 4: Homeowner Rehabilitation Programs


This chapter describes how to monitor HOME-funded homeowner rehabilitation programs. It is organized into sections that
correlate to the three key stages of monitoring:
     • Section 1. Pre-monitoring (program design and operations). Pre-monitoring is a systematic way for the PJ to gather
       background information on the program’s administration. It helps the PJ assess if the program administrator has poli­
       cies and procedures in place to facilitate HOME compliance and helps the PJ prepare for a monitoring site visit.
     • Section 2. Project (or case file) monitoring. The core of the PJ’s monitoring, project monitoring is a systematic way
       to review specific case files to assess whether the program administrator follows its procedures in a consistent way while
       implementing the program, and whether each case is in compliance with the HOME requirements.
     • Section 3. Program monitoring. Program monitoring is a systematic way to review the overall performance and com­
       pliance of the program. It helps the PJ to identify patterns and trends in the program, and helps the PJ draw conclu­
       sions about the program administrator’s policies, procedures, practices, and outcomes.
A homeowner rehabilitation program can be administered by the PJ itself, or by a subrecipient, State recipient, or contractor.
This chapter uses the term “program administrator” to refer to any of these entities.

Basis of this Chapter
The checklists in this chapter are based on HUD Checklist Exhibits 7-0 (HOME Pre-monitoring Preparation for Homeowner
Rehabilitation), Exhibit 7-3 (Guide for Review of Homeowner Rehabilitation Projects), and Exhibit 7-4 (Guide for Review of
Homebuyer Programs). The HUD checklist questions cited in this chapter have been revised slightly for use by the PJ, rather
than HUD. The numbering is sequential for all questions; the original HUD checklist numbering has not been retained.
Questions that are denoted with the icon  have been added to facilitate a PJ’s review; these questions are not on the HUD
checklists.
Complete copies of the HUD checklists are found in the CPD Grantee Monitoring Handbook, available online at
http://www.hud.gov/offices/cpd/library/monitoring/handbook.cfm#7. Chapter 7 of this handbook covers the HOME
Program.

Framework for the Monitoring Review
This chapter provides guidance on monitoring the key HOME Program requirements of a homeowner rehabilitation program
and the checklists in this chapter can be used instead of the HUD checklists found in the CPD Grantee Monitoring Handbook.
In addition to the key HOME requirements covered in this chapter, there are a number of additional requirements that the
PJ monitor needs to review to conduct a comprehensive monitoring review of a homeowner rehabilitation program:
     • Program Administration. To monitor requirements related to the administration and management of the program,
       refer to other chapters of this guidebook, depending on what entity administers the program:
       — Use Chapter 2, Section 2 of this guidebook to monitor the State recipients' and subrecipients' compliance with
         applicable uniform administrative requirements, and the PJ’s management and oversight of these funded entitites
         when these entities administer the program.
       — Use Chapter 3 of this guidebook to monitor the PJ’s administrative and management systems. This should be
         done regardless of how the homeowner rehabilitation program is administered.



Chapter 4: Homeowner Rehabilitation Programs                                                                                  83
     • Written Agreements. To monitor whether the HOME written
       agreement adequately conveys HOME requirements and whether            The guidebook has adapted the HUD
       it is enforceable, use one of the following HUD checklists,           monitoring checklists for key HOME Program
       depending on what type of entity administers the program.             requirements for use by the PJ when it
                                                                             monitors itself and its funded entities. For
        — Exhibit 7-15, Guide for Review of Contractor Written Agree­
                                                                             these areas of review, the PJ monitor is
          ments, when a contractor administers program
                                                                             directed to other chapters of this guidebook.
        — Exhibit 7-17, Guide for Review of State Recipient Written          For some areas of review (such as other
          Agreements, when a State recipient administers program             Federal requirements, procurement, and
                                                                             written agreements), the HUD checklists
        — Exhibit 7-18, Guide for Review of Subrecipient Written Agree­
                                                                             have not been adapted for PJ use and the PJ
          ment, when a subrecipient administers program.
                                                                             monitor is directed to the HUD checklists in
     In addition, regardless of who administers the program, the PJ          the CPD Grantee Monitoring Handbook. The
     monitor should review the written agreement with the assisted hom­      PJ monitor should be able to use these HUD
     eowner. To do this, it can use the following HUD Checklist:             checklists in their existing form.
        — Exhibit 7-14, Guide for Review of Beneficiary Written
          Agreements.
     • Other Federal Requirements. There are several cross-cutting Federal requirements that apply to homeowner rehabili­
       tation activities, and the PJ monitor should use the following HUD checklists to monitor those aspects of compliance:
        — Exhibit 21-1, Guide for Environmental Review of the Community Development Block Grant, HOME Investment
          Partnerships, Emergency Shelter Grants, and Housing for Persons With AIDS Programs by the Community Planning
          and Development (CPD) Representative
        — Exhibit 22-3, Guide for Review of Civil Rights-Related Program Requirements for the HOME Investment Partnerships
          Program, Sections B (beneficiary data) and D (minority and women’s business enterprise)
        — Exhibit 24-1, Guide for Review of Lead-based Paint Compliance in Properties Receiving Federal Rehabilitation
          Assistance.
        — Exhibit 27-1, Guide for Review of Flood Insurance Protection.

Resources
The following attachments are provided at the end of this chapter to facilitate the monitoring review:
     • Attachment 4-A: Client File Form – Homeowner Rehabilitation
     • Attachment 4-B: Summary of Lead-based Paint Requirements for Homeowner Rehabilitation
     • Attachment 4-C: Summary of Key HOME Homeowner Rehabilitation Rules and How to Document
     • Attachment 4-D: Other Federal Requirements for Homeowner Rehabilitation.


Section 1. Pre-Monitoring Review: Design and Operation of the Homeowner
Rehabilitation Program
 Overview of the Pre-Monitoring Review
Pre-monitoring helps the PJ:
     • Gather background information about how the program administrator has designed its homeowner rehabilitation
       program
     • Prepare for an onsite monitoring visit
     • Begin to assess whether the program administrator has the necessary policies and procedures in place to administer the
       program in compliance with the HOME requirements.

84                                                                                                         Monitoring HOME
Pre-monitoring is not required before every onsite monitoring visit. It is recommended when:
    • The program administrator is new
    • The PJ monitor is reviewing the program administrator for the first time
    • The subject under review appears to pose a high risk.
 Organization of this Section
This section reviews key program design and operational requirements of a homeowner rehabilitation program, including:
    A. Participant selection and marketing
    B. Program administration
    C. Income definition
    D. Maximum property value
    E. Property type
    F. Property standards
    G. Loan and/or grant terms
    H. Refinancing
    I. Contractor listings
    J. Client complaints and dispute resolution
    K. Summary of pre-monitoring review results
 Instructions
The PJ monitor should copy and use the checklists in this chapter to conduct its pre-monitoring review. For each area of
review, the PJ monitor should review relevant documents and answer each checklist question.
The first column, “HUD Checklist Exhibit 7-0 Selected Excerpts,” provides the HUD checklist question. It may be adapted
somewhat (indicated by the use of [brackets]) for use by PJs.
The second column, “What to Analyze,” provides guidance to help the PJ monitor assess compliance.
The third column, “Follow-up Needed at Site Visit,” provides space for the PJ monitor to make notes that will facilitate the
onsite review. This might be a record of items where a determination of compliance could not be made during pre-monitor­
ing, or a list of questions the PJ monitor will want to ask of the program administrator when on site.
 Documentation
    • Copy of the HOME regulations found at 24 CFR Part 92
    • HOME income limits in effect for the years under review
    • Desk review monitoring file, if available
    • Written agreement(s) with subrecipient, State recipient, or contractor
    • Written agreement between the PJ and the program administrator
    • Homeowner rehabilitation program policies and procedures
    • Program guide for applicants
    • Application form/package
    • Participant selection policy



Chapter 4: Homeowner Rehabilitation Programs                                                                               85
     • Marketing procedures/plan
                                                                                                  The PJ monitor should
     • Marketing advertisements and flyers                                                        request any documents
                                                                                                  that it does not have
     • Guidance on how to make income determinations provided by the PJ to State recipient,
                                                                                                  from the program
       subrecipient, or contractor, if applicable)
                                                                                                  administrator prior to
     • State, local, or national property codes and standards used for activity                   conducting the pre-
                                                                                                  monitoring review.
     • Written rehabilitation standards
     • List of contractors and documentation of qualifications, if available
     • Conflict resolution procedures and documentation that any complaints were handled in accordance with such
       procedures
     • Disciplinary procedures for poor performing contractors

A. Participant Selection and Marketing
Background: The HOME Program requires that homeowner rehabilitation programs be administered in an equitable manner
and in compliance with fair housing legislation.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.350
 Documentation:
     • Participant selection policy
     • Marketing procedures/plan
     • Marketing advertisements and flyers
     • Application form/package
     • Homeowner rehabilitation program policies and procedures

  HUD Checklist Exhibit 7-0/Selected
                                                       What to Analyze                 Follow-up Needed at Site Visit
              Excerpts

 1. Are written informational materials
    such as marketing materials,
    informational materials for
    potential applicants, application
    forms, etc. about the program
    available? If “yes” obtain copies.
      Yes     No


 2. How are homeowners selected?         If first-come first-served, selection
                                          procedures should specify that a date
      First come, first served
                                          and time must be stamped on each
      Lottery                            application upon receipt.
      Other – specify:                   If lottery, selection procedures should
                                          clearly state the date of the lottery draw
     ___________________________
                                          and that applicants will be notified in
      Yes        No                     writing of outcome.
                                          If other, the selection procedures must
                                          reflect an equitable process.




86                                                                                                        Monitoring HOME
 3. Does the program administrator          Selection policy must:
    have a procedures manual that           • State that applicants that are not
    outlines policies with respect to:        selected will be notified in writing
    (a) Initial eligibility screenings of   • Specifically prohibit unlawful
        applicants                            discrimination, favoritism towards
    (b) Program education for                 friends or relatives, and potential
        homeowners                            conflicts of interest.
    (c) Procedures for notifying            Selection policy should:
     Yes        No                        • Specify selection criteria (such as
                                              urgency of repairs, needs, income,
                                              etc.)
                                            • Accurately and clearly explain the
                                              income limits of the program
                                            • Specify what documentation the
                                              applicant must submit to demonstrate
                                              that he/she meets the selection
                                              criteria.
                                            Marketing should be conducted to
                                            reach a full range of potential clients.
                                            Marketing materials:
                                            • Must include fair housing language
                                              and logo
                                            • Should be written in clear and simple
                                              terms
                                            • Should be available in other
                                              languages.



B. Program Administration
Background: The PJ monitor needs to identify who is primarily responsible for the administration of the homeowner reha­
bilitation program and whether any other entities play a key role in the program’s administration.
Regulatory Basis: Recommended
 Documentation:
    • Written agreement(s) between the PJ and the State recipient, subrecipient, or contractor, if applicable

  HUD Checklist Exhibit 7-0/Selected
                                                         What to Analyze                 Follow-up Needed at Site Visit
              Excerpts

 4. Does the PJ directly administer the     The PJ must have a written agreement
    homeowner rehabilitation program        with the entity carrying out the program
    or does it use a subrecipient, State    administration.
    recipient, or contractor for this       The program administrator must have
    purpose?                                a written agreement with any other
     PJ                                    entity that it provides HOME funding to
     subrecipient                          administer a portion of the program, if
                                            applicable.
     State recipient
     contractor




Chapter 4: Homeowner Rehabilitation Programs                                                                              87
 5. Does the program administrator
    contract with any other entity
    for services related to the
    administration of the homeowner
    rehabilitation program (such as a
    nonprofit organization that might
    carry out marketing and intake
    procedures)? 
 Who?
 _________________________________
 For what services?
 _________________________________
      Yes     No



C. Income Definition
Background: All HOME funds must benefit low-income households. A low-income household is defined as a household
with an income at or below 80 percent of the area median income as determined by HUD, adjusted for household size.
In order to meet this requirement, the program administrator determines the income-eligibility of households assisted with
HOME funds. Income-eligibility is based on the anticipated annual income of all family memebers in the household using
one of the following definitions:
     • Part 5 (Section 8) definition of annual income
     • Internal Revenue Service (IRS) definition of adjusted gross income from IRS Form 1040 Long Form
     • U.S. Census Bureau Long Form definition of annual income.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.203
 Documentation:
     • Written agreement between the PJ and the State recipient, subrecipient, or contractor, as applicable
     • Guidance on income determinations provided by the PJ to the State recipient, subrecipient, or contractor,
       as applicable
     • Program administrator’s policies and procedures identifying the definition of income used for the activity
     • Copies of the HUD income limits in effect for the year(s) under review




88                                                                                                            Monitoring HOME
  HUD Checklist Exhibit 7-0/Selected
                                                     What to Analyze                     Follow-up Needed at Site Visit
              Excerpts

 6. What definition of income is         The PJ must instruct the program
    being used for the homeowner         administrator about which definition
    rehabilitation program?              must be used (ideally, in the written
     Part 5 (Section 8) definition of   agreement).
      annual income                      The same definition of income must be
     Internal Revenue Service (IRS)     used consistently within the homeowner
      defnition of adjusted gross        rehabilitation program.
      income from IRS Form 1040          The PJ should provide guidance on how
      Long Form                          to use the definition.
     U.S. Census Bureau Long Form       The program administrator’s policies and
      definition of annual income        procedures should require staff to use
                                         the PJ-adopted definition of income in its
                                         income-eligibility determinations.



 7. Obtain the HUD income limits for
    year(s) being monitored [24 CFR
    92.203(b)]
 Applicable years:
 ________________________________




D. Form of Assistance
Background: Typically, the PJ determines what form of assistance is provided to the homeowners, and communicates this
to the program administrator. HOME allows virtually any form of financial assistance, or subsidy, to be provided for eligible
projects and to eligible beneficiaries, including:
    • Interest bearing loans or advances. These loans are amortizing loans. Repayment is expected on a regular basis, usu­
      ally monthly, so that over a fixed period of time, all of the principal and interest is repaid.
    • Non-interest bearing loans or advances. The principal amount of such loans is paid back on a regular basis over time,
      but no interest is charged.
    • Deferred loans (forgivable or repayable). These loans are not fully amortized. Instead, some, or even all, principal
      and interest payments are deferred to some point in the future.
    • Grants. Grants are provided with no requirement or expectation of repayment.
    • Interest subsidies. This is usually an up-front discounted payment to a private lender in exchange for a lower interest
      rate on a loan. An interest subsidy may also be a deposit in an interest-bearing account from which monthly subsidies
      are drawn and paid to a lender along with the homeowner’s monthly payment.
    • Loan guarantees and loan guarantee accounts. HOME funds may be pledged to guarantee loans or to capitalize a
      loan guarantee account. A loan guarantee or a loan guarantee account ensures payment of a loan in case of default.
    • Other forms approved by HUD. Other forms of assistance require HUD approval. If the PJ intends to use a form
      of assistance not listed above, the PJ’s Consolidated Plan or annual action plan should describe the proposed form of
      assistance. Once approved by HUD as part of the plan, no other HUD approval is required.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.205(b)
 Documentation:
    • Written agreement between the PJ and the State recipient, subrecipient, or contractor, as applicable


Chapter 4: Homeowner Rehabilitation Programs                                                                                 89
  HUD Checklist Exhibit 7-0/Selected
                                                      What to Analyze                   Follow-up Needed at Site Visit
              Excerpts

 8. Does the [program administrator]
    grant or loan the funds to
    homeowners?
      Grant     Loan


 9. Is the form of assistance permitted   The program administrator must provide
    by the HOME Program (check            HOME funds in the form of assistance
    applicable form)?                    that is specified by the PJ.
      Interest bearing loans or          If “other form of assistance” is used, the
        advances                          PJ must have documentation of this form
                                          of assistance in the PJ’s Consolidated
      Non-interest bearing loans or
                                          Plan or annual action plan and must have
        advances
                                          evidence of HUD approval.
      Deferred payment loans
      Grant
      Interest subsidies
      Loan guarantee
      Other form of assistance
       (Specify:

        ___________________________)

 10. If funds are loaned, what are the
     loan terms? 

 _________________________________

 _________________________________

 _________________________________




E. Maximum Property Value [203(b) Limit]
Background: The value of a HOME-assisted property after rehabilitation must not exceed 95 percent of the median purchase
price for the area.
At this writing, the Section 203(b) mortgage limits exceed the 95 percent of the median purchase price limits imposed by the
HOME Program statute. HUD authorizes PJs to determine their own limits in accordance with procedures described in the
HOME regulations at 24 CFR 92.254, or to use the greater of:
     • Section 203(b) mortgage limits established as of February, 2008 or
     • Actual 95 percent of median sales price limits for their areas.
HUD has published and periodically updates a Value Limits Spreadsheet with current limits for each county in the U.S. This is
found at http://www.hud.gov/offices/cpd/affordablehousing/programs/home/limits/maxprice.cfm.
See HUD’s HOMEfires, Vol. 10 No. 1, issued January, 2009 for more information on this limit.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 95.254(b)
 Documentation:

90                                                                                                         Monitoring HOME
    • Written agreement between the PJ and the State recipient, subrecipient, or contractor, as applicable
    • Procedures identifying what 95 percent of median purchase price limits are to be used

  HUD Checklist Exhibit 7-0 Selected
                                                      What to Analyze                    Follow-up Needed at Site Visit
              Excerpts

 11. What does the program               The PJ must use one of the approved
     administrator use to represent      limits—FHA 203(b), HUD-determined
     the 95% of median purchase price    95% of median purchase price, or
     limit?                             PJ-determined.
      FHA 203(b) limit (2008 limit)     If the PJ determines the median
                                         purchase price limits, the PJ must have
      HUD-determined 95 percent of
                                         HUD approval to conduct its own market
        median purchase price limit
                                         survey. The file should contain evidence
        from Value Limits Spreadsheet
                                         that the market survey is updated
      PJ-determined limit               annually and submitted to HUD for review
                                         and approval.

 12. Obtain the figure if the Federal
     Housing Administration (FHA)
     203(b)-determined limits are
     used or review PJ submission if
     PJ-determined.
     [24 CDR 92.254(a)(2)(iii)]


 13. How does the program                These three methods of determining the
     administrator determine the         after rehabilitation value of the property
     after-rehabilitation value of the   are the only methods approved by HUD.
     property?                          • If using an estimate of value, it must
      Estimate of value                   be conducted by a qualified person for
                                           the PJ, State recipient, independent
      Appraisal
                                           contractor, or subrecipient. Project files
      Tax assessment                      must contain the estimates of value
                                           and document the basis for the value
                                           estimates.
                                         • If using an appraisal, it can be prepared
                                           by a licensed fee appraiser or by a
          Finding the Purchase Price
                                           PJ's staff appraiser. Project files must
                    Limits                 document the appraised value and the
          The HUD-determined 95%           appraisal approach used.
  TIP




          of median purchase price       • If using tax assessment, a
          limits and the FHA 203(b)        comparable property located in the
          limits are available on the      same neighborhood may be used to
          HOME Program website             establish the after-rehabilitation value
          at http://www.hud.gov/           if the assessment is current and
                                           accurately reflects market value after
          homeprogram/.
                                           rehabilitation. Assessments based
          Applicable Limit:                on a percentage of market value may
          ________________________         be used, if adjusted to reflect actual
                                           market value.




Chapter 4: Homeowner Rehabilitation Programs                                                                              91
 14. Does the program administrator         The program administrator must have
     have procedures in place to            procedures in place that ensure that
     ensure that the after-rehabilitation   it determines that the actual after-
     value of a property does not           rehabilitation value is equal to or less
     exceed 95% of area median              than the HUD limits prior to committing
     purchase price?                       any HOME funds.
      Yes      No

 15. Does the PJ have procedures in         The PJ must inform the State recipient,
     place to ensure that it informs        subrecipient, or contractor of the current
     the program administrator of the       after rehabilitation value limits each year.
     current after-rehabilitation value
     limits on an annual basis? 
      Yes      No




F. Property Type
Background: HOME funds can be used to rehabilitate a wide variety of single family structures, with one to four units.
Ownership interest must be in fee simple title, 99-year leasehold interest, or cooperative or mutual housing if State law recog­
nizes these as forms of homeownership.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.2
 Documentation:
     • Written agreement between the PJ and the State recipient, subrecipient, or contractor, as applicable
     • Program procedures and/or application materials that identify what property types are eligible for the program

  HUD Checklist Exhibit 7-0/Selected
                                                         What to Analyze                   Follow-up Needed at Site Visit
              Excerpts

 16. Check applicable property              Only these property types are eligible
     types permitted in the program         under the HOME Program.
     application materials and policy/
     procedures:                                   Single Family Housing with 2 to
      Traditional single family housing                        4 Units
        (one to four units)
                                                    When HOME funds are used
                                             TIP




      Condominium unit                             to assist units other than the
      Cooperative unit                             unit that is owner-occupied,
      Unit in a mutual housing project             these units are subject to
                                                    the HOME rental housing
      Manufactured home, including
                                                    requirements. See Chapter 6
       a mobile home
                                                    of this guidebook for guidance
      Yes      No                                 on monitoring HOME rental
                                                    housing.

 17. Has the PJ notified the State          The PJ must notify the State recipient,
     recipient, subrecipient, or            subrecipient, or contractor of the eligible
     contractor of the eligible property    property types (ideally through the written
     types?                                agreement).
      Yes      No




92                                                                                                            Monitoring HOME
 18. Does program administrator have        The program administrator must
     policies and procedures in place       have procedures in place to verify the
     to ensure that the ownership           eligibility of the property (type and form
     interest is eligible?                 of ownership) prior to committing HOME
                                            funds to the project.
      Yes      No




G. Property Standards
Background: HOME-assisted properties must meet all applicable State and local codes or a national model building code if
no local codes are present. The PJ must adopt written rehabilitation standards that describe the methods and materials of the
rehabilitation work.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.251(a)(1)
 Documentation:
    • Written agreement between the PJ and the State recipient, subrecipient, or contractor, as applicable
    • Program administrator’s procedures for reviewing work write-ups and inspections to ensure compliance with applicable
      code and property standards
    • State, local, or national code used for activity
    • Written rehabilitation standards

  HUD Checklist Exhibit 7-0/Selected
                                                         What to Analyze                 Follow-up Needed at Site Visit
              Excerpts

 19. What property standards apply
     to the homeowner rehabilitation
     program?
 _________________________________
 _________________________________
 _________________________________
 _________________________________
 _________________________________
 Obtain copy if monitoring rehabilitation
 work. [24 CFR 92.251(a)(1)]

 20. Does the PJ have written               The PJ must communicate the applicable
     rehabilitation standards, as           codes and property standards to
     required by HOME regulations?          the State recipient, subrecipient, or
      Yes      No                         contractor (in written agreement).
                                            The program administrator’s procedures
                                            should reflect use of the requisite codes
                                            and standards.
                                            The program administrator’s policies
                                            and procedures must ensure that work
                                            write-ups or plans and specifications
                                            are reviewed for compliance with
                                            applicable codes and standards prior to
                                            rehabilitation start.




Chapter 4: Homeowner Rehabilitation Programs                                                                               93
H. Refinancing
Background: Refinancing is an eligible HOME activity as long as it is done in combination with rehabilitation and refinanc­
ing is necessary to reduce the overall housing cost to the owner. Rehabilitation must be the primary use of the HOME funds.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.206(b)(1)
 Documentation:
     • Written agreement between the PJ and the State recipient, subrecipient, or contractor, as applicable
     • Procedures that outline the conditions required to qualify for refinancing

  HUD Checklist Exhibit 7-0/Selected
                                                     What to Analyze                      Follow-up Needed at Site Visit
              Excerpts

 21. Are HOME funds used to refinance    The written agreement must specify that
     homeowner debt? [24 CFR             refinancing can only be undertaken in
     92.206(b)(1)]                       conjunction with rehabilitation when it is
      Yes     No                       necessary to reduce the owner’s housing
                                         costs.
                                         Application materials should clearly state
                                         the program administrator’s policy to
                                         undertake refinancing only in conjunction
                                         with rehabilitation, when it lowers the
                                         owner’s housing costs.
                                         Procedures should describe the program
                                         administrator’s underwriting guidelines to
                                         determine when refinancing is eligible.



I. Contractor Listing
Background: The construction contractor that carries out HOME-funded rehabilitation work may be selected either by the
homeowner, the PJ, or the subrecipient, State recipient, or contractor. The construction contractor must be qualified to per­
form the work, and must charge a reasonable cost for work performed.
When the PJ, State recipient, or subrecipient selects the contractor, then that entity must comply with Federal procurement
rules regarding competitive bidding. It must:
     • For bids estimated at over $100,000, follow requirements for solicitation by sealed bid, including the issuance of a
       public invitation for bids and an effort made to solicit more than one bid
     • For bids estimated below $100,000, follow informal procurement for small purchase procedures with solicitation of
       several price quotes, if possible
     • Document the reasons each contractor is not selected; and retain the documentation in the files.
When the homeowner or the PJ’s contractor selects the rehabilitation contractor, the Federal competitive bidding require­
ments do not apply. However, a cost reasonableness test must be applied. A staff member of the program administrator who
is familiar with the property and with local construction costs and methods should review the homeowner’s bid before a
contractor is selected.
Some PJs maintain a list of “qualified” contractors. The PJ should have written standards that specify the minimum qualifica­
tions and experience a contractor needs in order to be included on the list.
The requirements for State PJs may vary, as the State procurement rules apply.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.505 and 24 CFR 85.36




94                                                                                                            Monitoring HOME
 Documentation:
    • Procedures that explain how rehabilitation contractors are chosen
    • Written agreement between the PJ and the State recipient, subrecipient, or contractor, as applicable
    • Procedures that outline how contractors qualify for the list
    • List of contractors and documentation of qualifications, if available

  HUD Checklist Exhibit 7-0/Selected
                                                      What to Analyze                    Follow-up Needed at Site Visit
              Excerpts

 22. Who selects the contractor?
      PJ
      Homeowner
      Program administrator




 23. Does the program administrator      The written agreement between the PJ
     have written policy that explains   and the State recipient, subrecipient,
     how contractors are selected?      or contractor should clearly state what
                                         procurement requirements apply to
                                         the selection of contractors in the
                                         homeowner rehabilitation program.
                                         The program administrator must
                                         have procedures that specify what
                                         procurement process will be used to
                                         select contractors, how contractor
                                         qualifications will be evaluated, and
                                         that the administrator will verify that a
                                         contractor is not included on the Federal
                                         excluded parties listing prior to securing
                                         its services, and has required bonding
                                         and insurance.


 24. (b) Does the [PJ or program         The PJ or program administrator should
     administrator] maintain a list of   have clearly written criteria that specify
     qualified contractors?              the minimum qualifications required of
     Yes       No                      contractors on the list.
                                         The PJ or program administrator must
                                         have a policy in place that enables
                                         qualified contractors to be added to
                                         the list on a regular basis (such as
                                         through the issuance of a Request for
                                         Qualifications).




J. Client Complaints and Dispute Resolution
Background: Complaints are often the result of a lack of understanding about the program or its procedures. By provid­
ing homeowners and contractors with easy-to-understand information about what to expect throughout the rehabilitation
process, PJs and their program administrators can minimize conflicts and improve compliance. However, some conflicts are
inevitable. PJs should also have conflict/complaint resolution procedures in case of dispute with contractors.




Chapter 4: Homeowner Rehabilitation Programs                                                                              95
Regulatory Basis: Recommended
 Documentation:
     • Program guide for applicants
     • Conflict resolution procedures and documentation that any complaints were handled in accordance with such
       procedures
     • Disciplinary procedures for poor performing contractors

  HUD Checklist Exhibit 7-0/Selected
                                                     What to Analyze                  Follow-up Needed at Site Visit
              Excerpts

 25. Does the [PJ or program            Dispute resolution procedures should:
     administrator] have procedures     • Describe how complaints will be
     for resolving disputes between       handled, by whom, and by when
     contractors and homeowners?
                                        • Encourage rehabilitation staff to
      Yes     No                        informally resolve conflicts early in the
                                          disagreement
                                        • Turn to third party conflict resolution
                                          when program administrator cannot
                                          resolve the conflict.
                                        It is advisable, (but not required), to
                                        require the homeowner and contractor
                                        to sign an arbitration clause prior to
                                        commencement of work.


 26. Does the PJ or program             Disciplinary procedures for poor-
     administrator have policies        performing contractors should:
     or procedures in place for         • Define poor performance
     disciplinary procedures for poor
     performing contractors?            • Specify process for how poor
                                          performance will be identified
      Yes     No
                                        • Identify who will determine whether
                                          or not, and when, to take disciplinary
                                          action. (Effective programs typically
                                          use a system of progressive discipline,
                                          including probation, suspension, and
                                          debarment for contractors.)
                                        • Identify actions that would be cause
                                          for immediate debarment.


 27. Has [HUD or the PJ] received
     an unusually high number
     of complaints regarding the
     homeowner rehabilitation program
     during the past 12-24 months?
      Yes     No




96                                                                                                       Monitoring HOME
                                     Summary of Pre-monitoring Review
                                        Homeowner Rehabilitation Program
Instructions: Using the completed checklists from the pre-monitoring review, complete the following chart to summarize the
monitoring results. The written documentation that should have been examined includes: written agreement between the PJ
and State recipient, subrecipient, and contractor, if applicable; agreement with homeowner; and program policies, procedures,
and materials.

                            No Apparent Problems
                                 with written                                   Follow-Up Needed
                               documentation

 A. Participant selection
    and marketing

 B. Program
    administration


 C. Income definition


 D. Form of assistance


 E. Maximum property
    value


 F. Property type


 G. Property standards


 H. Refinancing


 I. Contractor listing


 J. Client complaints and
    dispute resolution




Chapter 4: Homeowner Rehabilitation Programs                                                                              97
Section 2. Project (Case File) Monitoring
 Overview of the Project Monitoring Review
During project monitoring, the PJ monitor:
     • Reviews individual project files for the owner-occupied rehabilitation program
     • Determines whether the program administrator complies with the HOME requirements in the implementation of the
       program.
The program administrator should have a project file (also known as a “case file”) for each homeowner that receives HOME
assistance. The PJ monitor must review a sufficient sample of project files to determine that the program administrator is
complying with all applicable HOME requirements. Generally, the PJ monitor should randomly select at least ten percent of
the files, or a minimum three project files if the program is small. In addition, it should select the files of any project that it
has concerns may be at risk for noncompliance or performance difficulties.
When the PJ uncovers instances of noncompliance in the project review, it must take steps to see that the noncompliance is
corrected in each instance.
Note, the results of project monitoring can be aggregated, or looked at in their entirety, to draw conclusions about the overall
performance of the program administrator. This process can be done at the conclusion of the Project Monitoring review, or it
can be done as part of the PJ’s program monitoring, which is discussed in Section 3 of this chapter.
 Organization of this Section
This section is organized into the following sections:
     A. Participant eligibility
     B. Property eligibility
     C. Eligible and reasonable costs
     D. Property and rehabilitation standards
     E. Contractor selection
     F. Construction management
     G. Loan processing and servicing
     H. Long-term monitoring for occupancy (optional)
 Instructions
The PJ monitor should copy and use the checklists in this chapter to conduct its project monitoring review. For each area of
the review, the PJ monitor should review relevant documents and answer each checklist question. A separate checklist should
be completed for each project file reviewed.
The first column, “HUD Checklist Exhibit 7-3 Selected Excerpts,” provides the HUD checklist questions. It may be adapted
somewhat (indicated by the use of [brackets]) for use by PJs.
The second column, “Identified Problems,” lists potential compliance issues. The PJ monitor should check off any of the
“Identified Problems” that he or she encounters while reviewing project files.
At the end of each subsection is a "Notes" section for the PJ to make notes and recommended actions.
 Documentation
The following documents are needed for an onsite project monitoring review:
     • Pre-monitoring review, if available




98                                                                                                               Monitoring HOME
     • Copy of the HOME regulations found at 24 CFR Part 92
     • HOME income limits in effect for the years under review

A. Participant Eligibility
The requirements related to participant eligibility describe who is eligible to receive homeowner rehabilitation assistance.
Participant eligibility covers the following topics:
     1. Income-eligibility
     2. Occupancy
     3. Ownership
     4. Written agreement with homeowner
1. Income-eligibility
Background: Income-eligibility refers to the requirement that every homeowner that is assisted with HOME funds must have
an annual gross income that is at or below 80 percent of the area median income.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.203(b), 92.203(a)(2), 92.254(b), and 92.508(a)(3)(v)
 Documentation:
     • Application that lists all household members and states the income/employment of each household member, including
       the applicant’s position, income, and length of time at job
     • Procedures that detail how to determine the household income (and the applicable income definition) for the activity
     • Source documentation of income for all household members
     • Documentation that compares the household’s income to the HUD income limit for the applicable household size
     • Worksheet that shows how anticipated household income was calculated and compares it to current HUD income
       limits
     • Acceptance or rejection letter based upon income determination

              HUD Checklist 7-3 Selected Excerpts                                      Identified Problems

 1. Was the applicable definition of income used (e.g., selected    Wrong definition used
    for this homeownership rehabilitation program)?
                                                                    No definition used
      Yes     No

 2. Did the PJ correctly apply income inclusions and exclusions     Household size not verified (application and personal
    for the chosen income definition and was the calculation         interview)
    performed correctly? [24 CFR 92.203(b)]                         All applicable income not “counted” as income
      Yes     No                                                  Income that could have been excluded was counted
                  Resources for Calculating Income                  Anticipated income (expected in the next twelve months)
                                                                     not used
          HUD provides two key resources to assist with
                                                                    Income for all household members not counted
          making income-eligibility determinations:
   TIP




          1. Online income calculator at http://www.hud.gov/
             offices/cpd/affordablehousing/training/web/
             calculator/calculator.cfm
          2. Technical Guide for Determining Income and
             Allowances for the HOME Program (HUD 1780­
             CPD, January 2005), available from Community
             Connections, 1-800-998-9999.



Chapter 4: Homeowner Rehabilitation Programs                                                                                   99
 3. Was household income supported with source                       Income not verified with source documentation
    documentation? [24 CFR 92.203(a)(2)]
                                                                     Insufficient source documentation
       Yes     No
                                                                               Acceptable Forms of Source Documentation




                                                                       TIP
                                                                                  • Pay stubs
                                                                                  • Bank statements
                                                                                  • Income verification forms for other sources
                                                                                     of income (such as Social Security
                                                                                     Administration)

 4. Was the [household’s] annual income less than or equal to        No documentation to show comparison of HUD income limits
    80% of the area median income? [24 CFR 92.254(b)]                 to the household income
       Yes     No                                                  Wrong HUD income limits used (e.g., wrong year)
                                                                     Household received funds, but was over-income

 5. For [household] information, is the following documentation      Application not complete
    in the file: Completed application?
                                                                     No application in file
       Yes     No

 6. For [household] information, is the following documentation      No income verification in file
    in the file: Verification of Income? [24 CFR 92.508(a)(3)(v)]
       Yes     No

 7. For household information, is the following documentation in     No approval/rejection notice in file
    the file: Approval notification/documents?
       Yes     No

 8. Did program administrator make the income-eligibility            Income-eligibility determined after conveying HOME
    determination in a timely manner (within six months of the        assistance
    provision of assistance)?                                       Income-eligibility outdated
 Date of income determination: ___________________________
 Date of loan or grant agreement: _________________________
                                                                       TIP




                                                                                   Timing of Income-eligibility Determination
                                                                              If more than six months passes between the
                                                                              time of application and the time when HOME
                                                                              assistance is provided, the program administrator
                                                                              must conduct an updated income determination.




2. Occupancy
Background: The homeowner must occupy the home as its principal residence. Properties used as second homes or tempo­
rary residences cannot be assisted.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.254(b)(2) and 92.508(a)(3)(xi)
 Documentation:
      • Written agreement between PJ/program administrator and the homeowner
      • Participant certification (with signature) that the property is and will continue to be primary residence
      • Evidence that the program administrator verified the participant resides in the home as their primary residence (such
        as inspector/staff site visit or utility bills)




100                                                                                                                Monitoring HOME
              HUD Checklist 7-3 Selected Excerpts                                          Identified Problems

 9. Does the file documentation include a documentation
    demonstrating that the household uses this property as its
    principal residence (e.g., utility bill)? [24 CFR 92.254(b)(2)]
     Yes        No

 10. For [household] information, is the following documentation       No verification of the homeowner’s principal residency
     in the file: Documentation of principal residency? [24 CFR
     508(a)(3)(xi)]
 Possible forms of verification:
      Onsite inspection
      Review of utility bills
      Other (specify: ____________________________)
     Yes        No



3. Ownership
Background: Ownership refers to the form of ownership the owner has in the assisted property.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.254(c) and 92.508(a)(3)(xi)
 Documentation:
    • Deed or other documentation showing type of ownership
    • Title search report or preliminary title opinion

              HUD Checklist 7-3 Selected Excerpts                                          Identified Problems

 11. Check the form of ownership: 
      Fee simple title
      A 99-year leasehold interest (or 50-year leasehold on
        trust or restricted Indian lands)
      Ownership or membership in a cooperative or mutual
        housing project (where an ownership interest under
        State law)
      Another form of ownership approved by HUD
       Specify:_________________________________________
       Does file contain HUD approval letter?
         Yes       No

 12. Check the form of documentation in file:                         No documentation
      Title search report or other similar documented review of
        ownership
      Copy of recorded lien(s), if any




Chapter 4: Homeowner Rehabilitation Programs                                                                                     101
 13. Did program staff obtain evidence of ownership? (Note: A      No verification of form of ownership
     deed alone is not sufficient documentation. A title search
                                                                   No documentation of form of ownership:
     or a recent review of recorded ownership information
     should have been conducted.) [24 CFR 92.254(c)]                   No deed
       Yes       No                                                  No title report

                             Verifying Clear Title                 Ownership is not free and clear
                                                                   Insufficient documentation of free and clear ownership
              File should include evidence of that the property
      TIP



              is clear of any outstanding debt and liens on
              the property, restrictions or encumbrances
              that unduly restrict the marketable nature of
              the ownership interest. It should also include
              loan payment history to determine whether the
              homeowner is current on mortgage payments
              and/or at risk for foreclosure.



4. Written Agreement with Homeowner
Background: The program administrator must execute a written agreement with the homeowner prior to disbursing HOME
funds. The PJ may permit a subrecipient, State recipient, or contractor to enter into the homeowner agreement, or it may
execute the agreement itself. If the State recipient or subrecipient enters into an agreement with the homeowner, it must be
assignable to the PJ.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.504(c)(5), 92.504(b)(5), and 92.508(a)(3)(ii)
 Documentation:
      • Written agreement between the program administrator and the homeowner
      • Loan Agreement, if applicable
      • Promissory Note, if applicable

                HUD Checklist 7-3 Selected Excerpts                                       Identified Problems

 14. Regarding legal documents, is there a Homeowner HOME          No written agreement between the program administrator
     Written Agreement in the file? [24 CFR 92.504(b)(5) and        and the homeowner
     92.508(a)(3)(ii)]                                             Improper authorization of written agreement (i.e., not
       Yes       No                                               properly signed)

 15. Does the written agreement with the homeowner include         Key provisions missing from agreement:
     all required provisions? (Complete HUD Checklist [Exhibit
                                                                       Amount of HOME funds
     7-14, Guide for Review of Beneficiary Written Agreements,
     Section B. Homeowners], to answer this question.) [24 CFR         Form of assistance
     92.504(c)(5)]                                                     Maximum after-rehabilitation value
       Yes       No                                                  Principal residency
                                                                       If agreement is between the State recipient or
                                                                          subrecipient and the homeowner, assignability of the
                                                                          agreement to the PJ
                                                                   Written agreement not clearly written for homeowner to
                                                                    understand
                                                                   Agreement executed after initial drawdown date
                                                                   Amendment(s) not properly executed (signed and dated)
                                                                   No documented justification for amendment(s)




102                                                                                                             Monitoring HOME
 16. If HOME funds were provided to the owner in the form        Loaned funds, but no executed loan agreement with the
     of a loan, does the program administrator have a loan        homeowner
     agreement and a promissory note with the homeowner that     Loan terms not clearly stated in loan agreement
     clearly states the loan terms?
                                                                 No promissory note executed
     Yes      No




NOTES on Participant Eligibility




B. Property Eligibility
A number of HOME requirements pertain to the eligibility of the property or site selection, including:
    1. Eligible property structure
    2. Minimum and maximum per unit investment
    3. Property value
    4. Environmental review
    5. Uniform Relocation Act requirements

1. Eligible Property Structure
Background: HOME rules specify the types of property that are eligible for funding.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.2


Chapter 4: Homeowner Rehabilitation Programs                                                                              103
 Documentation:
      • Documentation of property type (application, if it identifies the property type; inspection; site visit; photos)
      • Map or tax information indicating location of property

               HUD Checklist 7-3 Selected Excerpts                                             Identified Problems

 17. Was the property listed as a single family home (1-4 units)?       Property ineligible
     Check property type (eligible types): 
                                                                        No/insufficient documentation of property type
       Single family property of one to four units
       Manufactured or mobile homes
       Condominium
       A cooperative unit or unit in a mutual housing project (if
        State law recognizes these as forms of homeownership)
           Yes      No

 18. Was the property within the PJ’s boundaries?                      Property not in boundaries
       Yes     No                                                     No documentation of location
                      TIP




                                                         Properties with 2- to 4- Units

                            If HOME funds are used to assist the rental units in a structure with two to four
                            units, the HOME rental rules apply (including provisions regarding tenant occupancy,
                            initial rent levels and long-term affordability). See Chapter 6 to monitor rental units.




2. Minimum and Maximum HOME Investment
Background: The HOME program sets both a minimum and maximum amount of HOME funds that can be invested in a
project.
      • The minimum amount of HOME funds that can be invested in a project is an average of $1000, multiplied by the
        number of HOME-assisted units in the project.
      • The maximum per unit subsidy limit varies by PJ and is determined by HUD based on the PJ’s Section 221(d)(3)
        program limits. The limit in effect at the time of project commitment is the applicable limit.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.250(a) and 92.205(c)
 Documentation:
      • Copy of the 221(d)(3) limits for the year the project was funded
      • Worksheet or form that shows that the program administrator determined that the amount provided was less than the
        applicable 221(d)(3) limit
      • Agreement, grant, loan, or other documentation that shows amount of assistance




104                                                                                                                    Monitoring HOME
              HUD Checklist 7-3 Selected Excerpts                                          Identified Problems

 19. Was the amount of HOME subsidy at or below the                  HOME investment is greater than the maximum 221(d)(3) limit
     applicable maximum per unit subsidy limit for the unit? [24     Wrong subsidy limit used (wrong year)
     CFR 92.250(a)]
                                                                     No verification/comparison that the investment was less than
     Yes       No                                                  the 221(d)(3) limit
                                                  Maximum Per Unit Subsidy (221(d)(3) Limits
              The maximum per unit subsidy limits are based on the 221(d)(3) limits and are available from the HUD
       TIP



              Field Office or online at http://www.hud.gov/offices/cpd/affordablehousing/ programs/home/limits/
              subsidylimits.cfm.

              For some PJs, the 221(d)(3) limits have been increased to 210% of the base limit. For these PJs, HUD allows
              an increase in the per unit subsidy amount on a program-wide basis, upon request, up to no more than 240% of
              the base 221(d)(3) limits. For more information, see HOMEfires, Vol. 9, No. 4, issued August, 2008, and found at
              http://www.hud.gov/offices/cpd/affordablehousing/library/homefires/volumes/vol9no4.cfm.


 20. Was the amount of HOME subsidy equal to or greater than         HOME subsidy less than $1,000 per unit
     the $1,000 minimum per unit subsidy? [24 CFR 92.205(c)]         Ineligible costs included in determination of subsidy amount
     Yes       No                                                  No verification/comparison that the HOME subsidy was greater
                Deduct Ineligible Costs Before Determining           than $1,000 per unit
    TIP




                            Per Unit Investment

            The PJ monitor should deduct ineligible costs from
            the project work write-up or cost estimate before it
            determines whether the project has satisfied the
            minimum investment per unit requirement.




3. Maximum Property Value
Background: The value of a HOME-assisted property after rehabilitation must not exceed 95 percent of the median purchase
price for the area.
At this writing, the Section 203(b) mortgage limits exceed the 95 percent of the median purchase price limits imposed by the
HOME Program statute. HUD authorizes PJs determine their own limits in accordance with procedures described in the
HOME regulations at 24 CFR 92.254, or to use the greater of:
    • Section 203(b) mortgage limits established as of February, 2008; or
    • Actual 95 percent of median sales price limits for their areas.
HUD publishes and periodically updates a Value Limits Spreadsheet with current limits for each county in the U.S. This is
available online at http://www.hud.gov/offices/cpd/affordablehousing/programs/home/limits/maxprice.cfm.
See HUD’s HOMEfires, Vol. 10 No. 1, issued January, 2009 for a detailed discussion of this issue.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.254(b)(1) and 24 CFR 92.508.(a)(3)(x)
 Documentation:
    • PJ’s basis of the 95 percent median sales price
    • Documentation of how the after-rehabilitation value was determined
    • Documentation showing that the program administrator compared the after-rehabilitation value to the 95 percent
      median sales price limit (form or memo to file)




Chapter 4: Homeowner Rehabilitation Programs                                                                                        105
              HUD Checklist 7-3 Selected Excerpts                                        Identified Problems

 21. PJ’s basis of the 95% median sales price (check one):       Property ineligible
       203(b) limit for year project was funded, or February     No/insufficient documentation of property type
        2008 for projects funded in 2008 to the present
       For years 2008 to the present, the HUD-determined
        95% of median sales price
       The PJ-determined (and HUD-approved) 95% of median
        sales price
       Yes     No

 22. Is the estimated after-rehabilitation property value less    After-rehabilitation value exceeds limit
     than or equal to 95% of the median single family purchase
                                                                  Wrong 95% of median sales price figure used
     price for the area as determined by HUD/PJ? [24 CFR
     92.254(b)(1)]                                                No documentation of HUD approval, if PJ determined the
                                                                   value of 95% median purchase price limit itself
       Yes     No
                                                                  No documentation of property’s after-rehabilitation value
                                                                  No verification/comparison of after-rehabilitation value and
                                                                   95% of median purchase price for the area

 23. Regarding property information, is the following             After-rehabilitation value not determined with one of the
     documentation in the file: Appraisal/value estimate? [24      HUD-approved methods
     CFR 92.508.(a)(3)(x)]                                        No documentation of the after-rehabilitation value
       Yes     No

 24. Documentation of how the after-rehabilitation value was
     determined (check one): 
       Appraisal
       Tax assessment (based on current value of a
         comparable rehabilitated property)
       Expert estimate of the value that explains its
         methodology and calculations.



4. Environmental Review
Background: HOME-funded activities are subject to the environmental review requirements at 24 CFR Part 58. In sum­
mary, the PJ must conduct an environmental review and issue an Environmental Review Record (ERR) for the homeowner
rehabilitation program before the program administrator commits any HOME funding. Individual homeowner rehabilitation
projects are typically categorically excluded subject to 24 CFR 58.5, which means that a broad review is completed of the
program and placed in the file and then site specific reviews are completed for certain statutory items when project sites are
known. Therefore, the ERR must contain the program documentation as well as the site specific checklists indicating that the
24 CFR 58.5 items were reviewed and appropriately addressed.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.352 and 92.508(a)(7)(iii)
 Documentation:
      • Environmental Review Record (ERR)
      • IDIS report / List of funded projects




106                                                                                                            Monitoring HOME
              HUD Checklist 7-3 Selected Excerpts                                        Identified Problems

 25. Does the file contain evidence that the environmental         No documentation of PJ’s environmental review
     review requirements were met? (Complete HUD Checklist
                                                                   Individual projects were not reviewed
     Exhibit 21-1 to answer this question.) [24 CFR 92.352]
                                                                   Identified environmental concerns not addressed
      Yes     No
                                                                   Request for Release of Funds (RROF) was issued after
                                                                    project funds were spent
                                                                   Projects identified in IDIS, where no RROF has been issued

                                                Key Provisions of Environmental Review
              TIP


                     For more information, see HUD Notice CPD 01-11, Environmental Review and the HOME
                     Investment Partnerships Program, issued July 17, 2001, available at http://www.hud.gov/
                     offices/cpd/lawsregs/notices/ 2001/01-11.pdf, and HOMEfires Vol. 4, No. 2 at http://www.
                     hud.gov/offices/cpd/affordablehousing/library/homefires/volumes/vol4no2.cfm.

 26. Regarding property information, is the following              Environmental screening checklist not completed for the
     documentation in the file: Environmental screening             specific site
     checklist? [24 CFR 92.508.(a)(7)(iii)]
      Yes     No


5. Uniform Relocation Act and Section 104(d)
Background: Federal relocation requirements generally do not apply to homeowner rehabilitation programs since participa­
tion is voluntary and usually does not involve permanent displacement. However, if the owner's home is a multi-unit struc­
ture with rental units, tenants are covered by the Uniform Relocation Act (URA) and may also be covered by the relocation
requirements of Section 104(d) of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, as amended.
In addition, if lead hazard reduction work is performed as part of the rehabilitation, temporary relocation may be required.
Although the PJ/program administrator is not obligated to provide financial assistance for temporary relocation, it must
ensure the family is relocated to a suitable, decent, safe and similarly accessible dwelling unit that does not have lead-based
paint hazards. See 24 CFR 35.1345 for more information.
PJs are permitted (but not required) to temporarily relocate households while work is being completed. For example, a PJ
might choose to relocate a household if rehabilitation work requires shutting off heat or plumbing. Temporary relocation
costs are eligible HOME expenses.


 If project does not have any temporary relocation, skip this section and proceed to Section C, Eligible and Reasonable
 Costs.


Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.353
 Documentation:
     • Temporary relocation policy
     • Payment expense log for the resident




Chapter 4: Homeowner Rehabilitation Programs                                                                                  107
      • Evidence that the relocation dwelling was safe and sanitary

              HUD Checklist 7-3 Selected Excerpts                                       Identified Problems

 27. Does the property include rental units?                      If “yes,” see Attachment 6-D, found at the end of Chapter 6,
                                                                    for a summary of lead-based paint requirements for rental
       Yes     No
                                                                    housing

 28. Does the PJ have a temporary relocation plan?                 No temporary relocation plan
       Yes     No                                                No clear policy on benefits in the temporary relocation plan
                                                                    (benefits not distributed in a fair, nondiscriminatory manner)
                                                                   PJ’s temporary relocation plan not followed

 29. If relocation was required for the project, is there any      No inspection (or no documentation) of temporary relocation
     documentation on the relocation for the project?
                                                                   Resident not offered a suitable, safe, and sanitary dwelling
       Yes     No                                                No inspection of temporary unit
                                                                   Resident not reimbursed for all reasonable out-of-pocket
                                                                    expenses, including increases in monthly rent/utility costs
                                                                   No documentation to justify temporary relocation costs



NOTES on Property Eligibility Summary




C. Eligible/Reasonable Costs
The PJ monitor’s review of costs should include a review of:
    1. Eligibility of HOME costs
    2. Reasonableness of HOME costs
    3. Eligibility of refinancing
    4. Form of assistance



108                                                                                                               Monitoring HOME
1. Eligibility of HOME Costs
Background: HOME funds can be used to pay the hard rehabilitation costs necessary to meet required property standards;
associated soft costs (e.g., fees, insurance, or appraisals); and general property improvements that are considered standard or
customary for the area.
Costs associated with constructing or rehabilitating detached garages or other “out-buildings" generally are not eligible for
HOME funding. Further, HOME funds cannot be used to pay for luxury improvements – i.e., improvements that are not
considered necessary or customary to the area. Figure 4-1 summarizes eligible hard and soft rehabilitation costs under the
HOME Program.
                           Figure 4-1. HOME-Eligible Homeowner Rehabilitation Costs
 Hard Costs                                                      Soft Costs
 Meeting the rehabilitation standards                            Financing fees
 Meeting applicable codes, standards and ordinances              Credit reports
 Essential improvements                                          Title binders and insurance
 Energy-related improvements                                     Recordation fees, transaction taxe
 Lead-based paint hazard reduction                               Legal and accounting fees
 Accessibility for disabled persons                              Appraisals
 Repair or replacement of major housing systems                  Architectural/engineering fees, including specifications and
                                                                 job progress inspections
 Incipient repairs and general property improvements of a
 non-luxury nature                                               Project costs incurred by the PJ that are directly related to
                                                                 a specific project
 Site improvements and utility connections
                                                                 Refinancing of secured existing debt if the housing is
                                                                 owner-occupied and refinancing allows the overall costs
                                                                 of borrower to be reduced and the housing is made more
                                                                 affordable

Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.206
 Documentation:
     • Cost estimate or work write-up
     • Rehabilitation contract
     • Invoices, timesheets, cost allocation plans
     • IDIS activity set-up sheet and draw record
     • Budget review sheet/log for project

              HUD Checklist 7-3 Selected Excerpts                                       Identified Problems

 30. Are all costs detailed on the cost estimate and in the        Ineligible costs included on:
     rehabilitation contract eligible under the HOME Program?
                                                                       Cost estimate
     [24 CFR 92.206]
                                                                       Rehabilitation contract
      Yes     No
                                                                   Project costs not clearly identified in cost estimate or
                                                                    rehabilitation contract




Chapter 4: Homeowner Rehabilitation Programs                                                                                   109
 31. Are all IDIS draw downs supported by invoices, timesheets,      Insufficient documentation of draws
     or cost allocations plans as applicable? 
                                                                     Costs not accurately set up in IDIS
                                                                     IDIS draw downs not supported by actual expenditures

 32. If costs are shared across multiple units, does the project     No/insufficient documentation of cost allocation
     file contain a worksheet or some other statement of
                                                                     Inequitable distribution of shared costs
     cost allocation to demonstrate how the allocation was
     determined?

 33. If costs were not eligible, was another source of funds used    Ineligible costs paid with HOME
     for these costs?
                                                                     No documentation of another source for ineligible costs
       Yes     No



2. Cost Reasonableness
Background: The HOME uniform administrative requirements and OMB Circular A-87 require that all HOME expendi­
tures be reasonable and customary. PJs or program administrators must assess project cost reasonableness prior to soliciting
contractor services and committing HOME funds.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.505(a) and 24 CFR 85.22
 Documentation:
      • In-house cost estimate or work write-up
      • Documentation of bid solicitation
      • Documentation that program administrator compared bids received to in-house cost estimate
      • Draw requests

              HUD Checklist 7-3 Selected Excerpts                                        Identified Problems

 34. Did program administrator prepare an in-house cost              No in-house estimate prepared
     estimate prior to seeking contractor bids/cost estimates?
                                                                     Contractor hired/funding commitment made before In-house
                                                                     estimate complete
       Yes     No

 35. Do the costs appear reasonable (e.g., based upon the            Costs unreasonable
     [program administrator] cost estimate and costs of
                                                                     No verification of cost reasonableness (comparison of
     comparable work in the area)? [24 CFR 92.505(a) and 24           in-house estimate and bids)
     CFR 85.22 and OMB A-87, Attachment A, Section C.2)]

                                           Controlling Costs when Homeowner Selects Contractor
                      TIP




                            Even if the homeowner selects the contractor, the program administrator should
                            recommend that the homeowner solicit at least three cost estimates and
                            the program administrator must evaluate the homeowner’s selection for cost
                            reasonableness prior to making a funding commitment.


 36. If contractors' bids/cost estimates were not reasonable,        No satisfactory explanation of resolution (e.g., project was
     what did the program administrator do?                          re-bid, bids were accepted because homeowner paid for the
                                                                      cost overage, etc.)
 _____________________________________________
 _____________________________________________




110                                                                                                               Monitoring HOME
3. Refinancing
Background: HOME funds may be used to refinance existing debt on single family, owner-occupied properties in connection
with HOME-funded rehabilitation only when the refinancing is necessary to reduce the owner’s overall housing costs and to
make the housing more affordable. Refinancing for the purpose of taking out equity is not permitted. Further, debt must be
secured by the housing; refinancing personal loans (car loans, credit cards, etc.) is not permitted.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.206(b)(1)
 Documentation:
    • Worksheet or form that shows the reduction in overall housing costs to the homeowner
    • Copy of the refinanced loan document(s)

             HUD Checklist 7-3 Selected Excerpts                                         Identified Problems

 37. If HOME funds were used for refinancing, is there              No documentation of reduction in overall housing costs
     documentation in the file demonstrating that the
                                                                    Calculation of reduction in overall housing costs done
     household’s overall housing costs were reduced?                 incorrectly
     Yes       No      N/A                                       No reduction in overall housing costs
                                                                    No refinanced loan document(s) in file



4. Form of Assistance
Background: HOME funds can be provided in one of the following eligible forms:
    • Grants
    • Deferred-payment loans
    • Non-interest-bearing loans
    • Interest-bearing loans
    • Interest subsidies
    • Loan guarantees.
Note, these forms of assistance are each described in Attachment 3-D, found at the end of Chapter 3.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.205(b)(1)
 Documentation:
    • Written agreement between the program administrator and the homeowner
    • Loan document, if applicable
    • Consolidated Plan or annual action plan that describes other form of assistance, if applicable, and evidence of HUD
      approval

             HUD Checklist 7-3 Selected Excerpts                                         Identified Problems

 38. Was the subsidy provided in an eligible form of investment     No documentation on form of assistance
     (i.e., equity investments, interest bearing or non-interest
                                                                    Form of assistance ineligible (See next question to verify
     bearing loans or advances, interest subsidies, deferred         HUD approval.)
     payment loans, grants or loan guarantees)? [24 CFR
     92.205(b)(1)]
     Yes       No




Chapter 4: Homeowner Rehabilitation Programs                                                                                      111
 39. If the subsidy was provided in a form not listed above, was    No evidence of HUD approval
     that form approved by HUD? [24 CFR 92.205(b)(1)]
                                                                    Other form of assistance not described in PJ's Consolidated
       Yes     No                                                  Plan



NOTES on Eligible and Reasonable Costs




D. Property and Rehabilitation Standards
The program administrator must have a system in place to ensure that the property-related requirements are met, including:
      1. Property standards
      2. Work write-ups
      3. Inspections
      4. Lead-based paint requirements
      5. Onsite inspections for rehabilitation quality

1. Property Standards
Background: The applicable property standards for HOME-assisted owner-occupied rehabilitation projects, including manu­
factured housing, are:
      • Local written rehabilitation standards




112                                                                                                               Monitoring HOME
       • State and local code requirements, or if no local codes apply, one of the following national model codes:1
          — Uniform Building Code (ICBO)
          — National Building Code (BOCA)
          — Standard Building Code (SBCCI)
          — Council of American Building Officials one- or two-family code (CABO)
          — Minimum Property Standards at 24 CFR 200.925 or 200.926 (FHA)
       • Handicapped accessibility requirements, where applicable.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.251
 Documentation:
       • Copy of PJ’s written rehabilitation standards
       • Specification/work write-up
       • Inspections reports, including final inspection upon project completion

                 HUD Checklist 7-3 Selected Excerpts                                               Identified Problems

    40. Applicable code(s): 
    _____________________________________________
    _____________________________________________

    41. Was an initial inspection conducted to determine extent of
        rehabilitation needed to meet applicable codes? 
        Yes       No

    42. Was the work performed in accordance with the PJ’s written           Rehabilitation standard not adequate
        rehabilitation standards? [24 CFR 92.251(a)(1)]
                                                                             No rehabilitation standard
        Yes       No
                                                                             Rehabilitation standard not conveyed to the State recipient,
                                                                              subrecipient, or contractor
                                                                             Specific construction issues identified in inspection:
                                                                                ___________________________________________________
                                                                                ___________________________________________________

    43. Does the final inspection confirm that the property met              No final inspection report in file
        all applicable property standards at completion? [24 CFR
                                                                             Final inspection report unclear
        92.251(a)(1)]
                                                                             Applicable codes and rehabilitation standards not met, and
        Yes       No                                                        no follow-up conducted



2. Work Write-ups
Background: The program administrator must develop a work write-up or cost estimate for each project. A good work write­
up/cost estimate should include:
       • Detailed description of work to be performed to serve as the basis for obtaining bids from contractors

1
    Since the promulgation of the HOME Program regulations, these code issuing agencies have merged to form the International Code Council (ICC).
    The model codes used for the HOME Program are no longer being updated. In their stead, the ICC has issued the International Building Code. HUD
    will consider whether changes to the HOME regulations incorporating the International Building Code are appropriate. The HOME Program web
    page provides updated information on all HOME requirements. (See http://www.hud.gov/offices/cpd/affordablehousing/programs/home/index.
    cfm.)


Chapter 4: Homeowner Rehabilitation Programs                                                                                                 113
      • Description of repairs necessary to eliminate code violations and generally improve the property
      • Specifications of the type of repairs, their location and scope, the method and quality of materials to be used, and any
        special requirements
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.205, 24 CFR 92.251, 24 CFR 92.505(a), and 24 CFR 85.36
 Documentation:
      • Work write-up/cost estimate
      • Initial inspection report
      • Written rehabilitation standards

               HUD Checklist 7-3 Selected Excerpts                                            Identified Problems

 44. Does the project file include the following: Work write-up/        No documentation
     cost estimate? [24 CFR 92.205(a) and 24 CFR 85.36(f)]
       Yes     No

 45. Does the work write-up: include all work noted on the initial      No initial inspection report in file
     inspection report? [24 CFR 92.251]
                                                                        Work on initial inspection report not included in work write-up
       Yes     No                                                     Work write-up includes extensive work that is not included in
                                                                         initial inspection report

 46. Does the work write-up: reflect the PJ’s written rehabilitation    Does not meet PJ’s rehabilitation standard
     standards? [24 CFR 92.251(a)(1)]
       Yes     No

 47. Was the work write-up written with enough detail to enable         Not sufficient:
     a contractor to provide a reliable bid? [24 CFR 92.505(a)
                                                                            Excessive change orders
     and 24 CFR 85.36(c)(3)(i) and 85.36(d)(2)(i)(A)]
                                                                            Wide variance in bid amounts
       Yes     No
                                                                            Other: _________________

 48. Did the owner sign a statement approving the proposed              No owner authorization in file
     work and the work write-up/cost estimate? 
       Yes     No



3. Inspections
Background: The program administrator should conduct three types of inspections:
      • Initial inspection to identify the extent of necessary rehabilitation.
      • Payment/Progress inspections, conducted prior to payment, to verify that work is done according to the rehabili­
        tation standards and applicable codes. PJ or program administrator can determine how frequently contractors can
        submit payment requests. Typically, program administrators retain a small amount (often 10 percent) from each pay­
        ment until all work is completed and all contract close-out documentation has been received. This is not required by
        HOME.
      • Final inspection, done in the presence of the owner and the contractor, to verify that all work specified in the write-
        up and construction contract is performed properly and that the appropriate property standards and codes are met. If
        additional work is required, the inspector prepares a detailed list (a “punch list") that the contractor must complete.
        Final payment to the contractor is made only after all punch list items are completed and re-inspected. Upon satisfac­
        tory re-inspection, the program administrator issues a Certificate of Final Inspection. Where building code inspections
        are required, the building code inspectors’ reports or other required documentation from the jurisdiction should be
        included in the project file.


114                                                                                                                   Monitoring HOME
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.205(a), 92.251(a)(1), 92.508(a)(3)(iv), and 24 CFR 85.36(f )
 Documentation:
     • Initial inspection report
     • Progress inspection reports (or log with notes)
     • Final inspection report

              HUD Checklist 7-3 Selected Excerpts                                      Identified Problems

 49. Does the project file include documentation of initial        No documentation
     inspection? [24 CFR 92.205(a) and 24 CFR 85.36(f)]
                                                                   Conditions identified in inspection report do not meet
      Yes     No                                                applicable property standards or codes
                                                                   Inspection conducted by unqualified inspector

 50. Does the project file include documentation of progress       No documentation
     inspection? [24 CFR 92.205(a) and 24 CFR 85.36(b)(2)]
                                                                   No progress inspection report for each payment
      Yes     No
                                                                   Payments made before progress inspections completed

 51. Does the final inspection confirm that all necessary work     No final inspection report
     was completed? [24 CFR 92.251(a)(1)]
                                                                   Items not completed per final inspection, but no
      Yes     No                                                re-inspection



4. Lead-based Paint Requirements
Background: The “level of assistance” dictates the required type of lead hazard evaluation and reduction in homes construc­
tion pre-1978, as follows:
     • Level of Assistance under $5,000. Documentation of a paint test of disturbed surfaces, notice of lead hazard evalu­
       ation, evidence of paint repaired by qualified workers who followed safe work practices, clearance, and notice of lead
       hazard reduction activities before reoccupancy.
     • Level of Assistance between $5,000–$25,000. Documentation of a risk assessment or an inspection that presumed
       there was lead-based paint in the home, notice of lead hazard evaluation or presumption, evidence of interim controls
       or standard treatments by qualified workers who followed safe work practices, clearance, and notice of lead hazard
       reduction activities before reoccupancy.
     • Level of Assistance over $25,000. Documentation of a risk assessment or an inspection that presumed there was
       lead-based paint in the home, notice of lead hazard evaluation or presumption, evidence of abatement activities
       by qualified workers who followed abatement practices, clearance, and notice of lead hazard reduction activities
       before reoccupancy.
The level of assistance number is determined by calculating the lesser of the Federal funds per unit or the rehabilitation hard
costs per unit (exclusive of the lead hazard evaluation and reduction costs).
If lead hazard reduction activities occurred, a clearance test must be conducted and the unit must pass clearance.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.355, 92.508(a)(3)(iv), and 24 CFR Part 35


 If the home was constructed in 1978 or after, the PJ monitor can skip this section and proceed to Subsection 5, Onsite
 Inspections for Rehabilitation Quality.
 For properties constructed after 1978, this checklist identifies the key lead requirements and documentation required.
 For a complete review of compliance with the lead-based paint requirements, monitors must complete HUD Checklist
 Exhibits 24-1, 24-2, and 24-3, Lead Hazards Monitoring Guidance for Rehabilitation.




Chapter 4: Homeowner Rehabilitation Programs                                                                                 115
 Documentation:
      • Documentation that homeowner received a copy of the Lead-based Paint Pamphlet
      • Documentation that homeowner received a Notice of Lead Hazard Evaluation or Notice of Presumption
      • Risk assessment, if applicable
      • Evidence that qualified contractors were used
      • Clearance test, if applicable
      • Documentation that homeowner received a Notice of Lead Hazard Reduction Activities, if applicable
      • Abatement report, if applicable

               HUD Checklist 7-3 Selected Excerpts                                        Identified Problems

 52. Did the program administrator make a determination of the
     level of assistance for the project? 
       Yes      No

 53. If the project was constructed before 1978, does project
     comply with lead safe housing requirements at 24 CFR
     Part 35? (Complete Lead Hazards Monitoring Guidance for
     Rehabilitation HUD Checklist, Exhibit 24-1 to answer this
     question.)
       Yes      No

 54. Based on HUD Checklist Exhibit 24-1, which of the following     No documentation of the determination of the level of
     items are required:                                             assistance
       Risk assessment, if applicable                               Level of assistance determined incorrectly
       Evidence that qualified contractors were used                Incorrect level of lead hazard evaluation and reduction
       Clearance test, if applicable                                 conducted for level of assistance

       Documentation that homeowner received a Notice of            No evidence that owner received the lead-based paint
         Lead Hazard Reduction Activities, if applicable              pamphlet
                                                                     No evidence that owner received Notice of Lead Hazard
       Abatement report, if applicable
                                                                      Evaluation or Notice of Presumption
       Yes      No                                                 Results of clearance test not in file, where needed
                                                                     No reevaluation conducted, where home did not pass
                                                                      clearance

 55. Regarding Property Information, is the following                No documentation
     documentation in the file: Notification of Lead-Based Paint?
     [24 CFR 92.508.(a)(3)(iv)]
       Yes      No



5. Onsite Inspections for Rehabilitation Quality
Background: Properties are required to be rehabilitated up to the applicable          This checklist can be used by a PJ
codes and standards.                                                                  monitor that is not on the inspection
                                                                                      staff, for a common sense review of
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.251                                                       compliance with applicable codes and
 Documentation:                                                                      standards. The monitor can then raise
                                                                                      concerns with an inspector, as needed.
      • Monitoring report/notes from onsite inspection




116                                                                                                                Monitoring HOME
              HUD Checklist 7-3 Selected Excerpts                                           Identified Problems

 56. If the project has been selected for an onsite inspection to                       Identifying Problems when On Site
     examine the quality of the rehabilitation work, the monitor




                                                                        TIP
     should perform a walk-through of the property with the                    When visiting homes, monitors should be careful
     initial inspection, the work write-up, and the final inspection           not to create problems between homeowners
     report.                                                                   and program staff or contractors. If a problem is
                                                                               encountered, the monitor should communicate
                                                                               concerns to the progam administrator and not the
                                                                               homeowner.

 57. Based upon observable conditions, have the deficiencies            Deficiencies not corrected
     identified in the initial inspection report been corrected?
                                                                        Work does not appear to be of standard quality
     [24 CFR 92.251]
                                                                        New problems apparent
     Yes       No

 58. If the homeowner was interviewed, is s/he satisfied with           Homeowner is dissatisfied
     the rehabilitation?
                                                                        Homeowner identified new problems/concerns
     Yes       No

 59. Is the property free of all obvious property standard              Obvious property violations or hazards
     violations? [24 CFR 92.251(a)(1)]
                                                                        Specify:
     Yes       No
                                                                         ____________________________________________________



NOTES on Property and Rehabilitation




Chapter 4: Homeowner Rehabilitation Programs                                                                                       117
E. Contractor Selection
Background: The contractor that carries out HOME-funded rehabilitation work may be selected either by the homeowner,
the PJ, or another entity administering the program (subrecipient, State recipient, or contractor). There are specific rules
about contractor eligibility and how contractors are selected, depending on who selects them.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.350(a), 92.505(a) and 24 CFR 85.36(c)(9)
 Documentation:
      • Print-out of the page that states the contractor is not on the Federal excluded parties list
      • Bidding procedures
      • Documentation of bids collected and reviewed
      • Documentation of contractor selection (worksheet or notes of bid review)

               HUD Checklist 7-3 Selected Excerpts                                             Identified Problems

 60. Does the project file include verification of contractor           No documentation that excluded parties list was checked
     eligibility, e.g. that awards were not made to any party
                                                                        Excluded parties list checked after issuance/approval of
     excluded, disqualified or otherwise ineligible (i.e.,
                                                                       contract
     suspension, debarment or limited denial of participation)
     for Federal procurement or nonprocurement programs? [24            Contractor is excluded but selected anyway
     CFR 92.350(a)]
                                       TIP




       Yes     No                                            Excluded Parties List
                                              Contractors must be checked at the website
                                              http://www.epls.gov/index.html to verify their
                                              eligibility to participate in federally-funded work.


 61. Was the rationale for the selection of the contractor              No justification of contractor selection
     documented? [24 CFR 92.505(a) and 24 CFR 85.36(c)(9)]
       Yes     No

 62. Does the file contain evidence the program administrator           No evidence of contractor review
     verified the quality of work, references, licenses and
                                                                        Review of contractor was cursory and insufficient
     insurance coverage of the selected contractor? 
                                                                        Insufficient justification for contractor selection
       Yes     No

 63. If the PJ selected the contractor, was a competitive bid           No documentation of competitive bid process
     process used? [24 CFR 92.505(a) and 85.36(c) and (d)]
                                                                        Bid process not executed properly
       Yes     No

 64. If the homeowner solicited bids, was more than one bid             No documentation of solicited bids
     solicited?
                                                                        Only one bid solicited
       Yes     No

NOTES on Contractor Selection




118                                                                                                                     Monitoring HOME
F. Construction Management
The program administrator must monitor and document the construction process to ensure that the following construction
management requirements are met:
    1.Pre-construction conference
    2.Construction contract
    3.Progress inspections
    4.Appropriate approvals
    5.Change orders
    6.Lien releases and warranty information

1. Pre-construction Conference
Background: The pre-construction conference is a recommended step to see that the owner and the contractor have shared
expectations about the work to be completed and the rehabilitation process. It should be conducted onsite with the owner
and the contractor before the execution of any construction contract.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.505(a) and 24 CFR 85.36(b)(2)
 Documentation:
    • Pre-construction notes or minutes

             HUD Checklist 7-3 Selected Excerpts                                    Identified Problems

 65. Was a pre-construction conference conducted and             No conference held
     documented in the file? [24 CFR 92.505(a) and 24 CFR
                                                                 Conference held, but no documentation retained
     85.36(b)(2)]
     Yes      No



2. Construction Contract
Background: Prior to the start of construction, the owner and contractor must execute a rehabilitation contract and the pro­
gram administrator should subsequently issue a notice to proceed.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.505(a), 92.508(a)(3)(ii) and 24 CFR 85.20(b)(6)
 Documentation:
    • Construction contract
    • Notice to proceed


Chapter 4: Homeowner Rehabilitation Programs                                                                             119
              HUD Checklist 7-3 Selected Excerpts                                         Identified Problems

 66. Did the homeowner and contractor execute a rehabilitation     No contract in file
     contract? [24 CFR 92.505(a) and 24 CFR 85.20(b)(6)]
                                                                   Contract not properly executed
       Yes     No


 67. Does the file contain a notice to proceed?                   No notice to proceed in file
       Yes     No



3. Progress Inspections
Background: Progress inspections document that the work being done adheres to the rehabilitation contract and all appli­
cable codes and standards prior to contractor payment.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.505(a) and 24 CFR 85.36(b)(2)
 Documentation:
      • Progress/payment inspection reports (log or notes)

              HUD Checklist 7-3 Selected Excerpts                                         Identified Problems

 68. Were progress inspections of the project performed prior      No progress inspection reports on file
     to approving the contractor’s request for payment? [24 CFR
                                                                   Progress inspections not done for:
     92.505(a) and 24 CFR 85.36(b)(2)]
                                                                       Payment requests
       Yes     No
                                                                       Change orders
                                                                       Client complaints
                                                                       Project delays
                                                                       Critical point in construction (e.g., when work will be
                                                                         covered by other work, such as before drywall covers
                                                                         the electrical, plumbing, framing rough-in, etc.)
                                                                   Progress inspection not signed by homeowner



4. Appropriate Approvals
Background: Prior to the final payment to the contractor and the release of liens, the homeowner should agree that the work
was completed satisfactorily.
Regulatory Basis: Recommended
 Documentation:
      • Documentation of homeowner approval (signature) on final payment request/draw or similar documentation

              HUD Checklist 7-3 Selected Excerpts                                         Identified Problems

 69. Did the owner approve final payment to the contractor?        No documentation of homeowner approval
       Yes     No                                                Homeowner approval secured after final payment/draw
                                                                    request



5. Change Orders
Background: Any change in the scope of work or budget for a project must be documented and approved by the PJ or pro­
gram administrator as a change order before the work is initiated.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.505(a), 92.508(a)(3)(ii), and 24 CFR 85.20(b)(6) and 85.36(f )(1)

120                                                                                                             Monitoring HOME
 Documentation:
    • Change orders with backup documentation
    • Documentation that costs were reviewed for eligibility and reasonableness

             HUD Checklist 7-3 Selected Excerpts                                     Identified Problems

 70. Did the [program administrator] and the owner review and    No change order on file for each change in scope of work
     approve change orders for any changes in the scope of        that occurred
     work? [24 CFR 92.505(a) and 24 CFR 85.20(b)(6) and          Insufficient backup documentation or justification for change
     85.36(f)(1)]                                                 orders
     Yes      No                                               Revised scope of work does not meet applicable codes
                                                                 Program administrator did not approve change order(s) prior
                                                                  to work being done


6. Lien Releases and Warranty Information
Background: A release of liens signed by all parties must be executed upon completion of the rehabilitation work. The con­
tractor should provide all warranties or affidavits to the homeowner.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.505(a) and 24 CFR 85.36(b)(2)
 Documentation:
    • Lien release form signed by the PJ and/or homeowner
    • Warranty information and documentation that it was provided to the homeowner (e.g., signature on form indicating
      receipt)

             HUD Checklist 7-3 Selected Excerpts                                     Identified Problems

 71. Does the project file contain: Contractor warranty or       No contractor warranty or equipment warranties on file
     equipment warranties? [24 CFR 92.505(a) and 24 CFR
     85.36(b)(2)]
     Yes      No



NOTES on Construction Management




Chapter 4: Homeowner Rehabilitation Programs                                                                                 121
G. Loan Processing and Servicing
Program administrators have a great deal of flexibility in the loan processing and servicing functions of homeowner rehabilita­
tion programs. However, there are several HOME requirements concerning loan documentation, repayment and use of loan
funds, including:
      1. Underwriting procedures
      2. Loan approval
      3. Loan documentation

 If the HOME funds were not provided in the form of a loan, then the PJ monitor can skip this section and proceed to
 Subsection I, Long-Term Monitoring for Occupancy (optional).



1. Underwriting Procedures
Background: The HOME Program requires the PJ to ensure that all costs are necessary and reasonable. The program admin­
istrator has considerable flexibility in how to do this.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.505 and OMB Circular A-87
 Documentation:
      • Program's underwriting policies and procedures
      • Documentation that shows how loan amount was calculated
      • Letter of acceptance or rejection of loan
      • Loan agreement

               HUD Checklist 7-3 Selected Excerpts                                       Identified Problems

 72. Has the PJ provided the program administrator with              No underwriting procedures
     program procedures for underwriting? 
       Yes     No

 73. Has program administrator followed PJ’s underwriting            PJ did not give administrator underwriting guidance
     guidance? 
       Yes     No

 74. Is there a worksheet or other documentation showing how         No documentation on how loan amount was determined
     the loan amount was calculated? 
                                                                     Errors made in loan amount calculations
       Yes     No                                                  Underwriting policy not followed

 75. Are there acceptance and rejection letters in regards to the    No acceptance and/or rejection letters on file
     loan in the file? 
                                                                     Acceptance letters not clear about terms of loan
       Yes     No                                                  Reasons for rejection unclear

 76. Is there a copy of the loan agreement in the file?             No loan agreement on file
       Yes     No                                                  Loan agreement not satisfactory [did not contain required
                                                                      provisions per 24 CRF 92.504(c)(5)]



2. Loan Approval
Background: At the time the loan documents are executed, the program administrator must provide truth-in-lending materi­
als to the borrower and fully explain the borrower's rights to cancel the assistance.

122                                                                                                               Monitoring HOME
Regulatory Basis: Truth in Lending Act of 1968
 Documentation:
    • Date of approval
    • Truth-in-Lending Disclosure Statement

              HUD Checklist 7-3 Selected Excerpts                                         Identified Problems

 77. Is there a date on the approval determination?                 No date on approval determination
     Yes       No

 78. Is there a copy of the truth-in-lending notice in the file?    Truth-in-lending notice not on file
     Yes       No



3. Loan Documentation
Background: Loan documents must be consistent, complete, properly executed, properly recorded and reflect all applicable
HOME and other Federal requirements. In addition, HOME rules require that the homeowner signs a written agreement
that includes the required HOME provisions. The written agreement must be executed before any HOME funds may be
dispersed.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.205(b)(1), 92.505(a), 92.508(a)(3)(ii), and 24 CFR 85.20(b)
 Documentation:
    • Signed loan agreement
    • Deed of trust or note and mortgage
    • Evidence that documents were recorded with the local government
    • Documentation of additional funding sources (e.g., copy of application, budget documents, or financial records indi­
      cating the HOME portion of payments)
    • Executed written agreement between program administrator and homeowner
    • Truth-in-Lending Disclosure Statement
    • Right to Cancel or Right of Rescission

              HUD Checklist 7-3 Selected Excerpts                                         Identified Problems

 79. Did the homeowner sign the loan agreement? [24 CFR             No loan agreement on file
     92.205(b)(1); 24 CFR 92.505(a) and 24 CFR 85.20(b)(2)
                                                                    Homeowner did not sign
     and 85.20(b(6)]
     Yes       No

 80. Were loan documents recorded? [24 CFR 92.505(a) and 24         No evidence that documents were recorded
     CFR 85.20(b)(3)]
     Yes       No

 81. If funding sources in addition to HOME were used, do           No documentation on other sources of funds
     project records include documentation of the source and
     application of funds for the project? [24 CFR 92.508(a)(3)
     (ii); 24 CFR 92.505(a) and 24 CFR 85.20(b)]
     Yes       No




Chapter 4: Homeowner Rehabilitation Programs                                                                           123
 82. Regarding legal documents, are there closing documents in   Missing documents:
     the file? [24 CFR 92.508(a)(3)(ii)]                             Written agreement
       Yes     No                                                  Deed of trust or promissory note
                                                                     Signed and notarized mortgage
                                                                     Truth-in-Lending Disclosure Statement
                                                                     Right to Cancel (Right to Rescission)



NOTES on Loan Processing and Servicing




H. Long-term Monitoring for Occupancy (Optional)
Background: The HOME Program does not require long-term occupancy for homeowner rehabilitation programs, but the
PJ may choose to impose it.
Regulatory Basis: None
 Documentation:
      • Documentation of homeowner’s ongoing occupancy (e.g., utility bills, copy of annual insurance policy statement, or
        other)




124                                                                                                           Monitoring HOME
               HUD Checklist 7-3 Selected Excerpts                                      Identified Problems

 83. If the PJ requires long-term monitoring for occupancy,         No documentation of ongoing occupancy
     is there evidence in the file of PJ staff checking for this
     ongoing occupancy? 
     Yes       No

    Check form of evidence in the file:
      Utility bills
      Insurance policies (Note, PJs can be listed on an
        insurance policy as a “loss payee” or additional parties.
        Once the PJ’s contact information is added to the
        policy, it will be notified every time a claim is made or
        when the policy is renewed or expired. Most insurance
        declaration pages state whether the property is the
        principal residence of the owner, rental property, or not
        otherwise occupied by the owner.
      Mail service. Post office can verify if mail is being
        delivered to the address or if a forwarding address has
        been filed.
      Tax records. City tax department can verify the address
        to which the property tax bill is mailed.
      Inspection. Staff can perform an inspection to ensure
        the owners reside at the property.


NOTES on Long-term Monitoring for Occupancy




Chapter 4: Homeowner Rehabilitation Programs                                                                  125
                                  Summary of Results: Project Monitoring
                                         Homeowner Rehabilitation Program
Instructions: Using the completed checklists, complete the following chart to assist with summarizing the monitoring results.

                              No Apparent Problems           Problems Identified                  Follow-Up Needed

 A. Participant eligibility
      1. Income-eligibility

      2. Occupancy

      3. Ownership

      4. Written agreement
         with homeowner

 B. Property eligibility
      1. Eligible property
         structure

      2. Minimum and
         maximum HOME
         investment

      3. Maximum property
         value

      4. Environmental
         review

      5. Uniform Relocation
         Act and Section
         104(d)

 C. Eligible/reasonable
 costs
      1. Eligible HOME
         costs

      2. Cost
         reasonableness

      3. Refinancing

      4. Form of
         assistance

 D. Property and
 rehabilitation standards
      1. Property standards

      2. Work write-ups

      3. Inspections

      4. Lead-based paint
         requirements




126                                                                                                        Monitoring HOME
   5. Onsite Inspections
      for Rehabilitation
      Quality

 F. Construction
 management
   1. Pre-construction
      conference

   2. Construction
      contract

   3. Progress
      inspections

   4. Appropriate
      approvals

   5. Change orders

   6. Lien releases
      and warranty
      information

 G. Loan processing and
 servicing
   1. Underwriting
      procedures

   2. Loan approval

   3. Loan
      documentation


 H. Long-term monitoring
 for occupancy
 (optional)




Chapter 4: Homeowner Rehabilitation Programs   127
Section 3. Program Monitoring: Homeowner Rehabilitation Program
 Purpose of the Program Review
The program review helps the PJ assess how well the homeowner rehabilitation program is operating. Ideally, it is done in
conjunction with the pre-monitoring review of policies and procedures (Section 1 of this chapter) and the project file review
(Section 2 of this chapter). It helps the PJ answer:
      • Does the program administrator comply with HOME requirements in all cases? By looking at all the results of the
        project file review, the PJ monitor can more identify areas where the program administrator performs consistently and
        where there are recurring problems.
      • Does the program administrator have effective written documentation supporting the program? This includes
        the written agreement with the PJ; and policies, procedures, and other program materials that clearly state HOME
        requirements and expectations. By evaluating the program’s written documentation, the PJ monitor can determine if
        the program administrator has adequate systems in place to promote compliance and performance.
 How this Section Is Organized
The checklist in this section summarizes the HOME requirements that are reviewed in detail in Section 1 (pre-monitoring
review) and the Section 2 (project review). This section does not use HUD checklist questions verbatim, as do the other sec­
tions of this chapter. However, this section is covers the same HOME requirements and is organized in the same manner as
the HUD Checklist Exhibit 7-4, Guide for Review of Homeowner Rehabilitation Programs, and includes following sections:
      A. Project recordkeeping
      B. Participant eligibility
      C. Property requirements
      D. Property standards
      E. Eligible/reasonable costs
      F. Contractor selection
      G. Construction management
      H. Loan processing and servicing

                                                                           How to Use the Program Review
 Instructions
                                                           The PJ monitor can use the program review in a few different
The PJ monitor should use one copy of the checklist        ways:
in this section of this chapter to conduct a program
review the homeowner rehabilitation program admin­         • To consolidate the results of a pre-monitoring and project
                                                             monitoring review. To do this, complete the questions in
istrator (funded entity or PJ).
                                                             Column 2. For any area where there is a potential problem,
Column 1, “HOME Requirement,” identifies the                 also complete Column 3.
HOME requirement under review.                             • To conduct a cursory review of the program’s operations.
In columns 2a, 2b, and 2c, “Program Implementa­              To do this, complete the questions in Column 3 only. This
tion,” the PJ monitor summarizes its findings of the         results in a review of the written documentation and program
project monitoring review and indicates how often the        policies and procedures that constitute the foundation of the
program administrator effectively met the requirement        program’s operation.
(always, sometimes, never).                                • To interview staff. To do this, ask the interviewee how the
In columns 3a, 3b, and 3c, “Effectiveness of Docu­           requirement specified in Column 1 is implemented. Take
mentation,” the PJ monitor documents the findings of         notes in Column 3(c), and on other paper, to the extent
                                                             possible. Use interview results in conjunction with desk and
the pre-monitoring review, if it was done, or reviews
                                                             project file reviews to draw conclusions about the program’s
the program’s written documentation. The PJ moni­
                                                             operations.
tor checks whether the requirement was: (1)Stated in


128                                                                                                         Monitoring HOME
the written agreement between the PJ and the State recipient, subrecipient, or contractor (if applicable) in column 3a, (2)
Adequately reflected in the program administrator’s policies and procedures in column 3b, or (3) Documented in other writ­
ten documentation (such as program application) in column 3c.
A "Notes" section is provided at the end of each subsection for the PJ monitor to make notes on findings and recommended
actions, as needed.

 Documentation
The following documents are needed for a program review:
     • Copy of the HOME regulations found at 24 CFR Part 92
     • Written agreement between the PJ and the State recipient, subrecipient, or contractor, if applicable
     • Written agreement with the homeowner
     • Pre-monitoring file(s) or checklist results, if available
     • Project case file monitoring file(s) or checklist results, if available

            1. HOME Requirement                   2. Effectiveness of Implementation         3. Effectiveness of Documentation

                                                 Project monitoring shows that program
                                                    administrator complied with this       This requirement is clearly stated in….
                                                            requirement…
      Does the program administrator or
                 developer…                          (a)          (b)             (c)          (a)              (b)            (c)
                                                   Always      Sometimes         Never       Written      Administrator’s     Other
                                                                                         Agreement with     Policies &      (Specify)
                                                                                               PJ          Procedures
 RECORDKEEPING
 1. Document HOME compliance through
    effective recordkeeping (overall)
    [24 CFR 92.508(a)(3)]
 Notes:




 PARTICIPANT ELIGIBILITY – Income
 1. Use current HOME income limits
     [24 CFR 92.254(b)]
 2. Use one of the three permissible
    definitions of income
    [24 CFR 92.203(d)]
 3. Include anticipated household income for
    a 12 month period
    [24 CFR 92.203(d)]
 4. Verify household income with source
    documentation
    [24 CFR 92.203(a)(1)]
 5. Make accurate household income
    determinations
    [all of the above combined
    correctly]




Chapter 4: Homeowner Rehabilitation Programs                                                                                     129
             1. HOME Requirement                  2. Effectiveness of Implementation         3. Effectiveness of Documentation

                                                 Project monitoring shows that program
                                                    administrator complied with this       This requirement is clearly stated in….
                                                            requirement…
       Does the program administrator or
                  developer…                         (a)         (b)           (c)             (a)              (b)            (c)
                                                   Always     Sometimes       Never          Written      Administrator’s     Other
                                                                                         Agreement with     Policies &      (Specify)
                                                                                               PJ          Procedures
Notes:




PARTICIPANT ELIGIBILITY – Ownership and Occupancy Status
1. Verify participant ownership of property
   (deed alone is insufficient; must also
   use title report or review of ownership
   records)
      [24 CFR 92.254(c)]
2. Verify participant’s principal residency at
   property
      [24 CFR 92.254(b)(3)]
Notes:




PROPERTY REQUIREMENTS
1. Invest no less than $1,000 per unit
      [24 CFR 92.205(c)]
2. Invest no more than the Section 221(d)
   (3) maximum subsidy limit per unit
      [24 CFR 92.254(b)(1)]
3. Invest only in properties that are
   valued at or below 95% of area median
   purchase price
      [24 CFR 92.254(b)(1)]
4. Determine 95% of area median purchase
   price by using one of the following:
      • HUD-determined value limits
      • 203(b) limits in effect in 2008
      • PJ-determined and HUD-approved
        limits
      [24 CFR 92.254(b)(1) and HOMEFires
      Vol. 10, No.1, issued January 2009]
5. Use one of the approved methods to
   determine after-rehabilitation value
      • Appraisal
      • Tax records
      • Estimate by qualified staff
      [24 CFR 92.254(b)]




130                                                                                                               Monitoring HOME
           1. HOME Requirement                    2. Effectiveness of Implementation         3. Effectiveness of Documentation

                                                 Project monitoring shows that program
                                                    administrator complied with this       This requirement is clearly stated in….
                                                            requirement…
     Does the program administrator or
                developer…                           (a)         (b)           (c)             (a)              (b)            (c)
                                                   Always     Sometimes       Never          Written      Administrator’s     Other
                                                                                         Agreement with     Policies &      (Specify)
                                                                                               PJ          Procedures
    *Environmental review is the PJ’s
    responsibility.
    If the program administrator is the PJ,
    secure an environmental review for
    the program and specific sites prior to
    committing HOME funds
    If program administrator is not the PJ,
    secure environmental clearance from the
    PJ prior to committing funds to a specific
    site.
    [24 CFR 92.352]
Notes:




PROPERTY STANDARDS
1. Review and approve work write-ups or
   plans and specifications for compliance
   with applicable property standards and
   PJ’s written rehabilitation standard prior
   to construction start
    [24 CFR 92.251(a)(1)]
2. Comply with all applicable property
   standards (i.e., units are in standard
   condition upon completion)
    [24 CFR 92.251(a)(1)]
3. Conduct initial and final inspections to
   monitor construction progress
    [Recommended practice]
4. Comply with PJ’s written rehabilitation
   standard (i.e., units are constructed with
   requisite methods and materials)
    [24 CFR 92.251(a)]
5. Comply with lead hazard reduction
   requirements for level of assistance
    [24 CFR 92.355 and Part 35]
    *For comprehensive review, use HUD
    Checklist Exhibits 24-1, 24-2, or 24-3.
Notes:




Chapter 4: Homeowner Rehabilitation Programs                                                                                     131
             1. HOME Requirement                   2. Effectiveness of Implementation         3. Effectiveness of Documentation

                                                  Project monitoring shows that program
                                                     administrator complied with this       This requirement is clearly stated in….
                                                             requirement…
       Does the program administrator or
                  developer…                          (a)         (b)           (c)             (a)              (b)            (c)
                                                    Always     Sometimes       Never          Written      Administrator’s     Other
                                                                                          Agreement with     Policies &      (Specify)
                                                                                                PJ          Procedures
ELIGIBLE AND REASONABLE COSTS
1. Verify that project costs identified in work
   write-ups, proposals, and contracts are
   allowable and reasonable
      [24 CFR 92.206, 92.505(a) and 24 CFR
      85.22]
2. Document the actual cost of the
   rehabilitation work
      [24 CFR 92.508(a)(3)(ii)]
3. Provide HOME funds in an eligible form
   of investment (i.e., interest or non-
   interest bearing loans or advances,
   interest subsidies, deferred payment
   loans, grants, or loan guarantees)
      [24 CFR 92.205(b)]
4. Secure HUD approval for any form of
   investment used, but not eligible (listed
   in the question above)
      [24 CFR 92.205(b)(1)]
      *PJ responsibility.
Notes:




CONTRACTOR SELECTION
1. Award contracts only to contractors
   that are NOT excluded, disqualified or
   otherwise ineligible (i.e., suspension,
   debarment or limited denial of
   participation) for Federal procurement or
   nonprocurement programs
      [24 CFR 92.350(a)]
2. If a pre-qualified list of contractors is
   maintained, regularly review the list
   of firms to verify their continuation of
   eligibility (not suspended or debarred),
   licensure, quality performance, and
   insurance coverage
      [24 CFR 92.350(a), 92.505(a) and 24
      CFR 85.36(c)(4)]




132                                                                                                                Monitoring HOME
           1. HOME Requirement                   2. Effectiveness of Implementation         3. Effectiveness of Documentation

                                                Project monitoring shows that program
                                                   administrator complied with this       This requirement is clearly stated in….
                                                           requirement…
     Does the program administrator or
                developer…                          (a)         (b)           (c)             (a)              (b)            (c)
                                                  Always     Sometimes       Never          Written      Administrator’s     Other
                                                                                        Agreement with     Policies &      (Specify)
                                                                                              PJ          Procedures
3. Use a competitive bidding process (i.e.,
   public invitation for bids; solicitation
   of multiple bid; cost reasonable test
   applied)
    [24 CFR 92.505(a) and 24 CFR 85.36(c)
    (4)]
    *This is required when the PJ or a
    subrecipient selects contractors, but not
    when the owner does.
Notes:




CONSTRUCTION MANAGEMENT
1. Inspect projects to assess rehabilitation
   progress on a regular basis
    [24 CFR 92.505(a) and 24 CFR 85.36(b)
    (2)]
2. Inspect projects prior to processing
   payment requests to confirm that all
   specified work has been satisfactorily
   completed
    [24 CFR 92.505(a) and 24 CFR 85.36(b)
    (2)]
3. Review and approve [or secure PJ
   approval of] requests for change orders
    [24 CFR 92.505(a) and 24 CFR 85.36(f)]
4. Have and use (as needed) an effective
   dispute resolution process for conflicts
   between homeowners and contractors
    [24 CFR 92.505(a) and 24 CFR 85.36(b)
    (12)]
5. Have and use (as needed) an effective
   dispute resolution process for conflicts
   between homeowners and contractors
    [24 CFR 92.505(a) and 24 CFR 85.36(b)
    (12)]
6. Implement effective procedures to
   ensure that contractors perform in
   accordance with the terms of their
   contracts
    [24 CFR 85.36(b)(2)]




Chapter 4: Homeowner Rehabilitation Programs                                                                                    133
            1. HOME Requirement                2. Effectiveness of Implementation         3. Effectiveness of Documentation

                                              Project monitoring shows that program
                                                 administrator complied with this       This requirement is clearly stated in….
                                                         requirement…
       Does the program administrator or
                  developer…                      (a)         (b)           (c)             (a)              (b)            (c)
                                                Always     Sometimes       Never          Written      Administrator’s     Other
                                                                                      Agreement with     Policies &      (Specify)
                                                                                            PJ          Procedures
Notes:




LOAN PROCESSING AND SERVICING
1. Properly execute and record all loan
   instruments
      [24 CFR 92.505(a) and 24 CFR 85.20(b)
      (3)]
2. Accurately determine that the assisted
   household’s overall housing costs are
   reduced, when/if the program permits
   refinancing
      [24 CFR 92.206(b)]
Notes:




134                                                                                                            Monitoring HOME
                                                           Attachment 4-A
                                  Client File Form – Homeowner RehabilitationAnswer
                                        Are Items in Project Case File?                         Answer
              Underwriting and Applicant Processing
              1. Application form; authorization to release information                       Yes        No
              2. Source documentation and calculation of income                               Yes        No
              3. Documentation of principal residence                                         Yes        No
              4. Documentation of ownership                                                   Yes        No
              5. Designation of property type and location                                    Yes        No
              6. Project underwriting worksheet                                               Yes        No
              7. Origination checklist                                                        Yes        No
              8. Project activity log                                                         Yes        No
              9. Verification of utility expenses (for past 12 months)                        Yes        No
              10. Credit report                                                               Yes        No
              Legal and Financial Documents
              11. Documentation of all costs and compliance with subsidy limits               Yes        No
              12. Written agreement                                                           Yes        No
              13. Mortgage documents or note                                                  Yes        No
              14. Title search and title insurance                                            Yes        No
              15. Copy of deed                                                                Yes        No
              16. Closing documents                                                           Yes        No
              17. Flood insurance                                                             Yes        No
              18. Property insurance                                                          Yes        No
              19. Program income records                                                      Yes        No
              Construction Management
              20. Lead-based paint notification pamphlet receipt                              Yes        No
              21. Lead hazard risk assessment or other lead hazard evaluation; lead hazard
                                                                                              Yes        No
                  evaluation and reduction notices to occupant
              22. Property inspection checklists to determine compliance with local codes
                                                                                              Yes        No
                  and written rehabilitation standards
              23. Environmental review checklist                                              Yes        No
              24. Relocation notices; documentation of assistance                             Yes        No
              25. Work specifications and program-generated cost estimate                     Yes        No
              26. Documentation of after-rehabilitation property value                        Yes        No
              27. Bid documents; bid analysis                                                 Yes        No
              28. Verification of contractor eligibility                                      Yes        No
              29. Contract for construction work                                              Yes        No
              30. Pre-construction conference report                                          Yes        No
              31. Notice to proceed                                                           Yes        No
              32. Change orders                                                               Yes        No
              33. Ongoing and final inspection reports; building code compliance
                                                                                              Yes        No
                  inspections
              34. Payment records and lien releases                                           Yes        No
              35. Warranties and guarantees                                                   Yes        No
              36. Onsite monitoring of construction work performed                            Yes        No




Chapter 4: Homeowner Rehabilitation Programs                                                                    135
                                                Attachment 4-B
               Summary of Lead-Based Paint Requirements for Homeowner Rehabilitation
                                                                       Rehabilitation
                                                                        (Subpart J)
                                                                         Chapter 4
                                      <$5,000                       $5,000 – $25,000                    >$25,000
Approach to Lead Hazard    Do no harm                         Identify and control lead       Identify and abate lead hazards
Evaluation and Reduction                                      hazards
Notification               Notice of Lead Hazard              Notice of Lead Hazard           Notice of Lead Hazard
                           Reduction                          Evaluation and Notice of Lead   Evaluation and Notice of Lead
                                                              Hazard Reduction                Hazard Reduction
Lead Hazard Evaluation     Paint Testing (of surfaces to be   Paint Testing and Risk          Paint Testing and Risk
                           disturbed)                         Assessment                      Assessment
Lead Hazard Reduction      Repair surfaces disturbed          Interim Controls                Abatement (Interim Controls on
                           during rehabilitation                                              exterior surfaces not disturbed
                                                                                              by rehabilitation)
                           • Safe work practices              • Safe work practices           • Safe work practices
                           • Clearance                        • Clearance                     • Clearance
Ongoing Maintenance        For HOME rental only               For HOME rental only            For HOME rental only
EIBLL Requirements         No                                 No                              No
Options                    • Presume lead-based paint         • Presume lead-based paint      • Presume lead-based paint
                           • Use safe work practices on         and/or hazards                  and/or hazards
                             all surfaces                     • Use standard treatments       • Abate all applicable surfaces




136                                                                                                        Monitoring HOME
                                               Attachment 4-C
                Summary of Key HOME Homeowner Rehabilitation Rules and How to Document
                                                                                               Documentation
                                               Key HOME Requirement
                                                                                          (See checklists for details)
Eligible Activities
Eligible Activities                   • Rehabilitation, reconstruction           • Document all expenditures
                                                                                 • Document initial inspection work
                                                                                   specifications and write-up and include
                                                                                   picture of unit
Eligible Participants
Owner Income                          • Gross income < 80 percent of median      • Completed application in the project file
                                        income based on the upcoming 12          • Source documentation (wage
                                        months                                     statements, interest statements) in the
                                      • Income is defined by one of three          project file
                                        options: Section 8 annual income;        • Completed calculation of income (done
                                        annual income under Census long form;      in accordance with selected income
                                        or adjusted gross income under IRS         definition)
                                        Form 1040
Owner Occupancy                       • Applicant must occupy unit as his/her    • Client must sign a clause on the
                                        principal residence                        application form certifying that the
                                                                                   property will be the principal residence
                                                                                   of the owner
                                                                                 • This clause must also be included in the
                                                                                   written agreement
Ownership of Property                 Applicant must have ownership of the       • Title check documentation in project file
                                      property through:                          • Copy of deed or other ownership
                                      • Fee simple title                           document in the project file
                                      • 99-year leasehold interest
                                      • Ownership/membership in a cooperative
                                        or mutual housing project
                                      • Other forms approved by HUD.
Eligible Properties
Property Type                         Eligible property types include:           • If two to four units, indicate status
                                      • One- to four-unit property                 of non-owner-occupied units in the
                                                                                   application
                                      • Condominium unit
                                                                                 • If non-owner occupied units were
                                      • Cooperative or mutual housing unit, if     assisted with HOME funds, agreement
                                        recognized by State law                    with homeowner must impose HOME
                                      • Manufactured or mobile home.               rental requirements (See Chapter 6 to
                                                                                   monitor rental units.)
Property Location                     Property must be located within geographic • Application must include address in PJ’s
                                      area of the PJ                               geographic area. A map may also be
                                                                                   included
HOME Minimum and Maximum Subsidy      • A minimum of $1,000 in HOME funds        • Maintain records on expenditures in
                                        must be invested in each assisted unit     project file demonstrating that the per-
                                      • The maximum per-unit subsidy limit is      unit HOME investment exceeded $1,000
                                        determined by HUD                        • Maintain records on expenditures in
                                                                                   the project file indicating total HOME
                                                                                   subsidy did not exceed maximums
                                                                                   provided by HUD (221(d)(3) limits)




Chapter 4: Homeowner Rehabilitation Programs                                                                                137
Property Value       After-rehabilitation value must not exceed   • If using local value limits, document
                     95% of the area median purchase price          data used to determine limits as well
                     • Use Feb. 2008 203(b) limits                  as evidence of HUD approval in the
                                                                    program file
                     • HUD-determined 95% of area median
                       purchase price, or                         • Document method for determining value
                                                                    in the project file
                     • Establish local limits and obtain HUD
                       approval                                   • Copy of value estimate in project file

Property Standards   • Property must meet PJ’s written            • Document local code or model code
                       rehabilitation standards                     used in program files
                     • Property must meet applicable codes        • Maintain written rehabilitation standards
                       (State or local codes/standards or one       in program files
                       of three nationally accepted codes/        • Keep inspection checklist and work
                       standards)                                   write-up in project file
                                                                  • Include inspection report or certification
                                                                    by inspector in project file




138                                                                                         Monitoring HOME
                                                    Attachment 4-D
                           Other Federal Requirements for Homeowner Rehabilitation
     Other Federal       Apply to Homeowner
                                                   Special/Issues/Considerations             Regulatory Citations and References
     Requirement           Rehabilitation?
Nondiscrimination and Equal Access Rules
Fair Housing and Equal   Yes                   PJ must affirmatively further fair housing   • 24 CFR 92.202 and 92.250
Opportunity                                    in jurisdiction                              • Title VI of Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42
                                                                                              U.S.C. 2000d et. seq.)
                                                                                            • Fair Housing Act (42 U.S.C.
                                                                                              3601-3620)
                                                                                            • Executive Order 11063 (amended by
                                                                                              Executive Order 12259)
                                                                                            • Age Discrimination Act of 1975, as
                                                                                              amended (42 U.S.C. 6101)
                                                                                            • 24 CFR 5.105(a)
Affirmative Marketing    No                                                                 • 24 CFR 92.351
Handicapped              Yes                   Program accessibility requirements           • Section 504 of the Rehabilitation
Accessibility                                                                                 Act of 1973 (implemented at
                                                                                              24 CFR Part 8)
                                                                                            • For multifamily buildings only, 24
                                                                                              CFR 100.205 (implements the Fair
                                                                                              Housing Act)
Employment and Contracting Rules
Equal Opportunity        Yes                   Small projects offer opportunities for       • Executive Order 11246 (implemented
Employment                                     minority and resident-contractors              at 41 CFR Part 60)
Section 3 Economic       Yes, if amount of    Include Section 3 clause in contracts         • Section 3 of the Housing and
Opportunity              assistance exceeds   and subcontracts                                Urban Development Act of 1968
                         $200,000 or contract                                                 (implemented at 24 CFR Part 135)
                         or subcontract
                         exceeds $100,000
Minority/Women           Yes                   PJs must develop procedures and              • Executive Orders 11625, 12432 and
Employment                                     include in contracts and subcontracts          12138
                                                                                            • 24 CFR 85.36(e)
Davis-Bacon              No                                                                 • 24 CFR 92.354
                                                                                            • Davis-Bacon Act (40 U.S.C. 276a
                                                                                              – 276a-5)
                                                                                            • 24 CFR Part 70 (volunteers)
                                                                                            • Copeland Anti-Kickback Act (40 U.S.C.
                                                                                              276c)
Conflict of Interest     Yes                                                                • 24 CFR 92.356
                                                                                            • 24 CFR 85.36
                                                                                            • 24 CFR 84.42
Debarred Contractors     Yes                   PJ should check HUD’s list of debarred       • 24 CFR Part 5
                                               contractors
Other Federal Requirements
Environmental Reviews    Yes                   • Neighborhood reviews may facilitate        • 24 CFR 92.352
                                                 targeted programs, but individual          • 24 CFR Part 58.35 a(4)
                                                 checklists still required for each
                                                 project site                               • National Environmental Policy Act
                                                                                              (NEPA) of 1969
                                               • Special attention should be paid
                                                 to flood insurance and historic
                                                 requirements




Chapter 4: Homeowner Rehabilitation Programs                                                                                       139
Flood Insurance         Yes for PJs that are   • Must obtain flood insurance if located   • Section 202 of the Flood Disaster
                        cities/counties          in a FEMA designated 100-year flood        Protection Act of 1973 (42 U.S.C.
                        No for State             plain                                      4106)
                        programs               • Community must be participating in
                                                 FEMA’s flood insurance program
Site and Neighborhood   No                                                                • 24 CFR 893.6(b)
Standards
Lead-Based Paint        Yes for pre-1978       • Notices to owners                        • 24 CFR 92.355
                        units                  • Paint testing of surfaces to be          • Lead Based Paint Poisoning
                        EPA's Renovation,        disturbed                                  Prevention Act of 1971 (42 U.S.C.
                        Repair, and Painting   • Risk assessment, if applicable, based      4821 et. seq.)
                        Rule applies             on level of rehabilitation assistance    • 24 CFR Part 35
                                               • Appropriate lead-hazard reduction        • 24 CFR 982.401(j) (except paragraph
                                                 activity (based on level of                982.401(j)(1)(i))
                                                 rehabilitation assistance)               • 40 CFR Part 745
                                               • Safe work practices and clearance
                                               • Provisions included in all contracts
                                                 and subcontracts
Relocation              Yes                    • Relocation is required if tenants are    • 24 CFR 92.353
                                                 living in the other units                • Uniform Relocation Assistance and
                                               • Relocation is not required for owner-      Real Property Acquisition Policies Act
                                                 occupied units                             of 1970 (URA) (42 U.S.C. 4201-4655)
                                                                                          • 49 CFR Part 24
                                                                                          • 24 CFR Part 42 (subpart B)
                                                                                          • Section 104(d) “Barney Frank
                                                                                            Amendments”




140                                                                                                             Monitoring HOME
Chapter 5: Homebuyer Programs


This chapter describes how to monitor HOME and American Dream Downpayment Initiative (ADDI)-funded homebuyer
programs. It includes guidance for when HOME assistance is: (1) provided for rehabilitation or new construction of afford­
able housing for low-income households, and (2) provided directly to the homebuyer (e.g., downpayment, closing cost, or
mortgage assistance).
The chapter is organized into three sections that correlate to the three key stages of monitoring:
     • Section 1. Pre-monitoring (program design and operations). Pre-monitoring is a systematic way for the PJ to gather
       background information on the program’s administration. It helps the PJ assess if the program administrator has poli­
       cies and procedures in place to facilitate HOME compliance and helps the PJ prepare for a monitoring site visit.
     • Section 2. Project (or case file) monitoring. The core of the PJ’s monitoring, project monitoring is a systematic
       way to review specific project/case files to assess whether the program administrator follows its procedures in a con­
       sistent way while implementing the program, and to determine whether each case is in compliance with the HOME
       requirements.
     • Section 3. Program monitoring. Program monitoring is a systematic way to review the overall performance and com­
       pliance of the program. It helps the PJ identify patterns and trends in the program, and helps the PJ draw conclusions
       about the program administrator’s policies, procedures, practices, and outcomes.
Before monitoring homebuyer activities, the PJ needs to identify the role of the entity it will monitor. Homebuyer programs
might be administered by the PJ itself, a subrecipient, State recipient, or contractor. These entities are referred to as “program
administrators” in this chapter. PJs also monitor the entities that carry out development activities—the project owners, devel­
opers, and sponsors. These entities are referred to as “developers” or “owners” in this chapter. Depending on the homebuyer
program design, the responsibility for compliance may lie with one or more of these entities. Where possible, the checklist
identifies the likely responsible party.

Basis of this Chapter
The checklists provided in this chapter are based on HUD Checklist Exhibits 7-0 (HOME Pre-monitoring Preparation for
Homebuyer Assistance Programs), 7-5 (Guide for Review of Homebuyer Projects), and 7-6 (Guide for Review of Homebuyer Pro­
grams). The checklists in this chapter can be used instead of the checklists in the CPD Grantee Monitoring Handbook. The
HUD checklist questions cited in this chapter have been revised slightly for use by the PJ, rather than HUD. In addition,
some new questions have been added to the HUD checklists to facilitate the PJ’s review. All the questions are numbered
sequentially; the original HUD checklist numbering has not been retained. Questions that are not on the original HUD
checklists are denoted with the icon .
Complete copies of the HUD checklists are found in the CPD Grantee Monitoring Handbook, available online at http://www.
hud.gov/offices/cpd/library/monitoring/handbook.cfm#7. Chapter 7 of this handbook covers the HOME Program.

Framework for the Monitoring Review
In addition to the key HOME requirements covered in this chapter, there are a number of additional requirements that the
PJ monitor needs to review to conduct a comprehensive monitoring review of a homebuyer program.
     • Program and Project Administration. To monitor requirements related to the administration and financial




Chapter 5: Homebuyer Programs                                                                                                 141
        management of the program, refer to other chapters of this guidebook, depending on what entity administers the
        program:
        — Use Chapter 2, Section 1 of this guidebook when funding CHDOs to undertake homebuyer projects with set-
          aside funds, and when using CHDO set-aside funds for a project that also includes downpayment assistance.
          (Note, CHDO set-aside funds cannot be used to administer a downpayment assistance program independent of
          an eligible CHDO set-aside project.) This chapter helps the PJ assess whether the CHDO meets HOME eligibil­
          ity criteria, and how well the PJ is managing its CHDOs.
        — Use Chapter 2, Section 2 of this guidebook when using a State recipient or subrecipient (including a CHDO that
          is acting as a subrecipient) to administer the homebuyer program. This chapter helps the PJ monitor assess the
          funded entity’s compliance with applicable uniform administrative requirements, and the PJ’s management and
          oversight of these funded entities.
        — Use Chapter 3 of this guidebook to monitor the PJ’s administrative and management systems. This should be
          done regardless of what entity administers the homebuyer program.
      • Written Agreements. To monitor whether the HOME written agreement adequately conveys HOME requirements
        and whether it is enforceable, use one of the following HUD checklists, depending on what type of entity administers
        the program, or if funds are provided directly for project development:
        — Exhibit 7-15, Guide for Review of Contractor Written Agreements,          This guidebook has adapted the HUD
          when a contractor administers program                                     monitoring checklists for key HOME
                                                                                    Program requirements for use by the
        — Exhibit 7-16, Guide for Review of Owner, Developer, Sponsor Written
                                                                                    PJ when it monitors itself and its
          Agreements, when providing HOME funds for project development
                                                                                    funded entities. For review of these
          activities
                                                                                    HOME requirements, the PJ monitor
        — Exhibit 7-17, Guide for Review of State Recipient Written Agreements,     is directed to other chapters of this
          when a State recipient administers program                                guidebook. For some areas of review
        — Exhibit 7-18, Guide for Review of Subrecipient Written Agreement,         (such as other Federal requirements,
          when a subrecipient administers program.                                  procurement, and written agreements),
                                                                                    the HUD checklists have not been
        In addition, the PJ monitor should review the written agreement with        adapted for PJ use. For these areas
        the assisted homebuyer, using:                                              of review, the PJ monitor is directed to
        — Exhibit 7-14, Guide for Review of Beneficiary Written Agreements.         the HUD checklists in the CPD Grantee
                                                                                    Monitoring Handbook. The PJ monitor
      • Other Federal Requirements. There are several cross-cutting Federal         should be able to use these HUD
        requirements that apply to homebuyer activities, and the PJ monitor         checklists in their existing form.
        should use the following HUD checklists to monitor those aspects of
        compliance:
        — Exhibit 21-1, Guide for Environmental Review of the Community Development Block Grant, HOME Investment
          Partnerships, Emergency Shelter Grants, and Housing for Persons With AIDS Programs by the Community Planning
          and Development (CPD) Representative
        — Exhibit 22-3, Guide for Review of Civil Rights-Related Program Requirements for the HOME Investment Partnerships
          Program
        — Exhibit 23-1 Guide for Review of Labor Standards Administration, for projects with 12 or more HOME-assisted
          units
        — Exhibit 24-1, Guide for Review of Lead-based Paint Compliance in Properties Receiving Federal Rehabilitation
          Assistance
        — Chapter 24 and related exhibits, for review of relocation and real property acquisition policies and procedures, if
          applicable
        — Exhibit 27-1, Guide for Review of Flood Insurance Protection.




142                                                                                                          Monitoring HOME
Resources
The following attachments are provided at the end of this chapter to facilitate the monitoring review:
     • Attachment 5-A: Client File Form – Homebuyer Program
     • Attachment 5-B: Summary of Lead-based Paint Requirements for Homebuyer Programs
     • Attachment 5-C: Summary of Key HOME Homebuyer Rules and How to Document
     • Attachment 5-D: Summary of Other Federal Requirements for HOME Homebuyer Programs.

Section 1: Pre-monitoring: Design and Operation of the Homebuyer Program
 Overview of the Pre-monitoring Review
Pre-monitoring helps the PJ:
     • Gather background information about how the program administrator has designed its homebuyer program
     • Prepare for an onsite monitoring visit
     • Assess whether the program administrator has the necessary policies and procedures in place to administer the home-
       buyer program in compliance with the HOME requirements.
Pre-monitoring is not required before every onsite monitoring visit. It is recommended when:
     • The program administrator is new
     • The PJ monitor is reviewing the program administrator for the first time
     • The subject under review appears to pose a high risk.
 Organization of this Section
This section reviews key program design and operational requirements including:
     A. Participant selection and marketing
     B. Program design
     C. Program administrator
     D. Income definition
     E. Maximum property value limit
     F. Property type
     G. Property standards
     H. Loan and/or grant terms
     I. Resale and recapture provisions
     J. Contractor listings
     K. Client complaints and dispute resolution.
 Instructions
The PJ monitor should copy and use the checklists in this section of the chapter to facilitate its pre-monitoring review. For
each area of review, the PJ monitor should review relevant documents and answer each checklist question.
The first column, “HUD Checklist Exhibit 7-0 Selected Excerpts,” provides the HUD checklist question. It may be adapted
somewhat for use by PJs. Changes to the original HUD checklist questions are denoted with [brackets].


Chapter 5: Homebuyer Programs                                                                                              143
The second column, “What to Analyze,” provides guidance to help the PJ monitor assess compliance.
The third column, “Follow-up Needed at Site Visit,” provides space for the PJ monitor to make notes that will facilitate the
onsite review. This might be a record of items where a determination of compliance could not be made during pre-monitor­
ing, or a list of questions the PJ monitor will want to ask of the program administrator when on site.
 Documentation
The following documents are needed for a pre-monitoring review:
                                                                                                The PJ monitor should
      • Copy of the HOME regulations found at 24 CFR Part 92                                    request any documents that
      • HOME income limits in effect for the year(s) under review                               it does not have from the PJ
                                                                                                staff or the State recipient,
      • Desk review monitoring file and results of previous monitoring visit(s), if available   subrecipient, or contractor
      • Written agreement(s) with subrecipient, State recipient, or contractor administering    (as applicable), prior to
        the program, if applicable                                                              conducting the pre-monitoring
                                                                                                review.
      • Policies and procedures for the homebuyer program
      • Application form and/or package of information for homebuyer applicants
      • Application form and/or package of information for developer applicants
      • Participant selection policy
      • Marketing procedures/plan and materials (e.g., advertisements and flyers)
      • Guidance on how to make income determinations (provided by the PJ)

A. Participant Selection and Marketing
Background: The HOME Program requires that homebuyer programs be administered in an equitable manner and the pro­
gram must comply with fair housing requirements.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.350
 Documentation:
      • Participant selection policy
      • Marketing procedures/plan
      • Marketing advertisements and flyers
      • Application form/package
      • PJ affirmative marketing plan




144                                                                                                          Monitoring HOME
       HUD Checklist Exhibit 7-0
                                                       What to Analyze                  Follow-up Needed at Site Visit
          Selected Excerpts

 1. Are there written informational       Advertisements and marketing materials
    materials about the program such      should:
    as:                                   • Use fair housing and affirmative
     (a) Marketing materials for            marketing language and logos
         prospective applicants,          • Be clearly written and understandable
         including a program                to clients
         description
                                          • Be available in other languages.
     (b) Marketing/informational
         materials for lenders and real   If there are five or more HOME-assisted
         estate agents, including a       units in project:
         program description              • Marketing plan must specify how
     (c) Informational materials            project will be marketed to the full
         regarding homebuyer                range of potential clients, including
         responsibilities                   those least likely to apply
     (d) Other?                           • Affirmative marketing steps must
                                            be consistent with PJ’s affirmative
     If "yes" obtain copies.                marketing policy.
     Yes      No

 2. If applicable, has the program        Participant selection policy should clearly
    administrator provided the            explain:
    entity undertaking marketing          • What documentation the applicant
    with guidance conveying                 must submit to demonstrate his/her
    HOME requirements related               qualifications
    to the application, screening,
                                          • The income limits of the program
    and selection of homebuyer
    participants?                        • The specific criteria on which
                                            participant selection will be based
     Yes      No
                                          • That applicants that are not selected
                                            are notified in writing.
                                          Selection criteria should be equitable.
                                          For instance:
                                          • First-come, first-served: Date and time
                                            must be stamped on each application
                                            upon receipt.
                                          • For lottery: File must contain list of
                                            applicants, date of lottery draw, and
                                            letters to accepted and rejected
                                            applicants indicating the outcome.
                                          Selection criteria must:
                                          • State criteria (qualifications and
                                             preferences)
                                          • Prohibit conflict of interest or bias
                                             (discrimination or favoritism towards
                                             friends or relatives)
                                          • Be applied in a manner that is
                                             consistent with fair housing laws.
                                          Monitors must verify that there is a
                                          system in place for written notification
                                          to ineligible applicants or those who
                                          could not be served due to lack of funds.
                                          Monitors may want to review a few files
                                          where applicants were denied assistance
                                          to ensure that these procedures are
                                          followed.



Chapter 5: Homebuyer Programs                                                                                            145
B. Program Design
Background: The PJ monitor should become familiar with the type of homebuyer program under review and how it is
designed to operate before conducting a site visit.
Regulatory Basis: Recommended
 Documentation:
      • Consolidated Plan program description and annual action plan
      • Program policies and procedures that explain how the program operates (such as policies related to resale/recapture,
        lease-purchase program policies, or counseling requirements for homebuyers, as applicable)
      • Description of Request for Proposals (RFP) process for owner, developer, and sponsor participation (for development
        activities)
      • ADDI program policies and/or procedures, if applicable

        HUD Checklist Exhibit 7-0
                                                       What to Analyze                    Follow-up Needed at Site Visit
           Selected Excerpts

 3. Does the program have                  Policies and procedures should explain
    “significant” design features (e.g.,   how the program operates, who is
    a construction component, lease-       eligible to participate, and key program
    purchase, affordability periods        requirements.
    or [resale/recapture] provisions       Written policies and procedures should
    that exceed HOME requirements?         be consistent with those adopted in the
    Obtain relevant program design         Consolidated Plan or annual action plan.
    documents (e.g., resale or
    recapture provisions from annual       Homebuyer programs must adopt a
    action plan, program descriptions).    resale or recapture provision in order to
                                           secure long-term affordability.
       Yes      No

 4. What can HOME assistance be
    used for (check all that apply):
       Downpayment/closing costs?
       Reduction of first mortgage/
         gap financing?
       Other purchase assistance?
       Construction?


 5. Does the [program administrator]       If ADDI funds are administered
    receive American Dream                 separately, learn about the program
    Downpayment Initiative (ADDI)          design of both the HOME and ADDI
    funds? If yes, are the funds           homebuyer programs and identify how
    administered as part of its HOME       the program requirements differ for the
    homebuyer program or separately?       two programs.
    Obtain any materials describing
    the ADDI program, if separate from
    HOME.
       Yes      No




146                                                                                                          Monitoring HOME
C. Program Administrator
Background: Before monitoring, the PJ monitor should have a clear understanding of the roles and responsibilities of each
of the entities involved in the program, including: (1) who administers the program, and (2) who enters into agreements
with participating developers (development assistance) or homebuyers (direct assistance). When a State recipient or subrecipi­
ent administers the homebuyer program, the PJ can retain the responsibility to enter into the written agreement with the
developer(s) and/or homebuyer(s), or it can permit the State recipient or subrecipient to execute these agreements. If the State
recipient or subrecipient executes these written agreements, the agreements must be assignable to the PJ, in the event the PJ
needs to enforce the agreement directly. It is also permissible to use a three-party agreement between the PJ, State recipient/
subrecipient, and the developer or homebuyer.
Regardless of the administrative structure the PJ chooses, the PJ is responsible for HOME compliance and must monitor its
program partners.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.2 (definitions of subrecipient, State recipient) and 92.504
 Documentation:
     • Written agreement(s) between the PJ and the State recipient, subrecipient, or contractor, as applicable
     • Written agreement(s) between the program administrator and owners, sponsors, or developers

       HUD Checklist Exhibit 7-0
                                                       What to Analyze                     Follow-up Needed at Site Visit
          Selected Excerpts

 6. Does the program have                  Policies and procedures should explain
    “significant” design features (e.g.,   how the program operates, who is
    a construction component, lease-       eligible to participate, and key program
    purchase, affordability periods        requirements.
    or [resale/recapture] provisions       Written policies and procedures should
    that exceed HOME requirements?         be consistent with those adopted in the
    Obtain relevant program design         Consolidated Plan or annual action plan.
    documents (e.g., resale or
    recapture provisions from annual       Homebuyer programs must adopt a
    action plan, program descriptions).    resale or recapture provision in order to
                                           secure long-term affordability.
      Yes      No




Chapter 5: Homebuyer Programs                                                                                               147
 7. Does the PJ directly administer        Some acceptable models of program
    the homebuyer program or use           administration include:
    subrecipient(s) [State recipient, or   • PJ administers the program and has
    contractor] for this purpose? If a       agreement directly with either (1)
    subrecipient, [State recipient, or       owners, developers, and sponsors
    contractor] is used, obtain a copy       of affordable housing, and/or (2)
    of the HOME written agreement for        homebuyers.
    this activity.
                                           • PJ contracts with a subrecipient, State
       Yes      No                         recipient, or contractor for program:
                                               1.   PJ executes agreements with
          Written Agreement Is Needed               owners, developers, sponsors,
           Before Funds Distribution                and/or homebuyers, or
                                               2.   The State recipient,
  TIP




         Whenever the PJ provides
                                                    subrecipient, or contractor
         HOME funds to another entity               executes agreements with
         to administer all or part of               owners, developers, sponsors,
         the program, or to carry out a             and/or homebuyers, and the
         specific activity, it must have            agreement is assignable to the
         a written agreement with that              PJ, or
         entity.                               3.   The PJ and the State recipient,
                                                    subrecipient or contractor and
                                                    the homebuyer enter into three-
                                                    party agreement.
                                           • PJ administers the program overall and
                                             uses subrecipient(s) or contractor(s)
                                             to perform a limited number of tasks
                                             related to the program’s administration
                                             (e.g., marketing activities).
                                           • Other: ___________________________


 8. Does the program administrator
    work with owners, sponsors, or
    developers to construct and/or
    rehabilitate affordable homebuyer
    housing?
       Yes      No




D. Income Definition
Background: All HOME and ADDI funds must benefit low-income households. A low-income household is defined as
a household with an annual gross income at or below 80 percent of the area median income, as determined by HUD and
adjusted for household size.
In order to meet this requirement, the program administrator must determine the income-eligibility of potential homebuy­
ers prior to their receipt of HOME assistance. Income-eligibility is based on the anticipated annual gross income of all family
members in the household using one of the following definitions:
      • Part 5 (Section 8) definition of annual income
      • Internal Revenue Service (IRS) definition of adjusted gross income from IRS Form 1040 Long Form
      • U.S. Census Bureau Long Form definition of annual income.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.203




148                                                                                                          Monitoring HOME
 Documentation:
     • Written agreement between the PJ and State recipient, subrecipient, or contractor, if applicable
     • Policies and/or procedures related to determining income-eligibility of homebuyers
     • Copies of the HUD income limits for the years being monitored

       HUD Checklist Exhibit 7-0
                                                      What to Analyze                       Follow-up Needed at Site Visit
          Selected Excerpts

 9. What definition of income is          The PJ must instruct the State recipient,
    being used for the homebuyer          subrecipient, or contractor (and
    program? Obtain the HUD income        developer, as applicable) about which
    limits for years being monitored      income definition must be used; ideally,
    from the HOME webpage. [24 CFR        this is specified in the written agreement.
    92.203(b)]                            The same definition of income must be
      Yes      No                       used consistently for all applicants in the
                                          homebuyer program.
             HUD Income Limits
                                          The program administrator should
         The HUD income limits are        provide the developer with guidance on
         available online at http://      how to use the income definition.
         www.hud.gov/offices/cpd/
         affordablehousing/programs/      The program administrator’s policies and
  TIP




         home/limits/income/.             procedures should require staff to use
                                          the PJ-adopted definition of income when
         For guidance on how to           making income-eligibility determinations.
         make income-eligibility
         determinations, see Technical
         Guide for Determining Income
         and Allowances for the HOME
         Program (HUD 1780-CPD,
         January 2005), available from
         Community Connections,
         1-800-998-9999.



E. Maximum Property Value Limit
Background: For acquisition or new construction activities, the purchase price of a HOME-assisted property cannot exceed
95 percent of the median purchase price limits for the area. For rehabilitation activities, the after-rehabilitation value cannot
exceed 95 percent of the median purchase price limits for the area.
At this writing, the Section 203(b) mortgage limits exceed the 95 percent of the median purchase price limits imposed by the
HOME Program statute. HUD authorizes PJs to determine their own limits in accordance with procedures described in the
HOME regulations at 24 CFR 92.254, or to use the greater of either:
     • Section 203(b) mortgage limits established as of February, 2008; or
     • Actual 95 percent of median sales price limits for their areas. HUD has published and periodically updates a Value
       Limits Spreadsheet with current limits for each county in the U.S. This is found at http://www.hud.gov/offices/cpd/
       affordablehousing/programs/home/limits/maxprice.cfm.
For more information on the property value/sales price limits, see HUD’s HOMEfires, Vol. 10 No. 1, issued January, 2009,
available online at http://www.hud.gov/offices/cpd/affordablehousing/library/homefires/index.cfm#2009.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.254(a)(2)(iii)
 Documentation:
     • Policy that identifies what 95 percent of median purchase price limits are to be used


Chapter 5: Homebuyer Programs                                                                                                 149
      • If using a PJ-determined value, market survey and evidence it was submitted to and approved by HUD
      • Policies/procedures that identify the method the program administrator uses to estimate the after-rehabilitation value
        of property
      • Written agreement between the PJ and the State recipient, subrecipient, or contractor, if applicable

        HUD Checklist Exhibit 7-0
                                                      What to Analyze                      Follow-up Needed at Site Visit
           Selected Excerpts

 10. What does the program                The PJ must use one of the approved
     administrator use as the 95 of       limits—FHA 203(b), HUD-determined
     median purchase price limit?        95% of median purchase price, or
       FHA 203(b) limit                  PJ-determined.

       HUD-determined 95% of             If the PJ determines the median
         median purchase price limit      purchase price limits, the PJ must have
         from Value Limits Spreadsheet    HUD approval of market survey.

       PJ-determined limit
       Yes      No


 11. What is the 95% of area median
     purchase price applicable to the
     PJ’s program for the time period
     being reviewed? Obtain the
     figure if FHA 203(b)-determined
     or HUD-determined, or review PJ
     submission if PJ-determined. [24
     CFR 92.254(a)(2)(iii)]

      ________________________
      ________________________
      ________________________




150                                                                                                            Monitoring HOME
 12. For rehabilitation programs, how     These three methods of determining the
     does the program administrator       after-rehabilitation value of the property
     determine the after-rehabilitation   are the only methods approved by HUD.
     value of the property?              • If using an estimate of value, it must
      Estimate of value                    be conducted by a qualified person for
      Appraisal                            the PJ, State recipient, independent
                                            contractor, or subrecipient. Project files
      Tax assessment                       must contain the estimates of value
                                            and document the basis for the value
                                            estimates.
                                          • An appraisal can be prepared by a
                                            licensed fee appraiser or by a PJ's
                                            staff appraiser. Project files must
                                            document the appraised value and the
                                            appraisal approach used.
                                          • If using tax assessment, a
                                            comparable property located in the
                                            same neighborhood may be used to
                                            establish the after-rehabilitation value
                                            if the assessment is current and
                                            accurately reflects market value after-
                                            rehabilitation. Assessments based
                                            on a percentage of market value may
                                            be used, if adjusted to reflect actual
                                            market value.

 13. Does the program administrator       The program administrator must have
     have procedures in place to          procedures in place that ensure that
     ensure that the sales price or       it determines that the proposed sales
     after-rehabilitation value of a      price or after-rehabilitation value is equal
     property does not exceed 95% of      to or less than the HUD limits prior to
     area median purchase price?         committing any HOME funds.
      Yes      No




F. Property Type
Background: HOME funds can be used to rehabilitate a wide variety of single family structures, with one to four units.
Ownership interest must be in fee simple title or 99-year leasehold interest, or as cooperative or mutual housing if State law
recognizes these as forms of homeownership.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.254(a)(1) and 92.2 (definition of homeownership)
 Documentation:
     • Program policies/procedures and/or application materials that outline the eligible property types for the program




Chapter 5: Homebuyer Programs                                                                                               151
        HUD Checklist Exhibit 7-0
                                                          What to Analyze                  Follow-up Needed at Site Visit
           Selected Excerpts

 14. What property types are                The listed property types are all
     permitted in the program               HOME-eligible.
     application materials and policy/
     procedures:
       Traditional single family
         housing (one to four units)
       Condominium unit
       Cooperative unit
       Unit in a mutual housing
         project
       Manufactured home, including
         a mobile home

 15. Does program administrator             The PJ must notify the State recipient,
     have policies and procedures in        subrecipient, or contractor in writing of
     place to ensure that only eligible     the eligible property types; ideally this is
     property types are assisted?          specified in the written agreement).
       Yes       No                       The program administrator must
                                            have procedures in place to verify the
           Verifying Property Eligibility   eligibility of the property (type and form
  TIP




          The program administrator         of ownership) prior to committing HOME
          can verify the eligible           funds to the project.
          property type with a site
          visit or inspection, photo,
          or homebuyer certification.
          Documentation should be
          retained in the project file.


 16. Does program administrator have        Program administrator should verify
     policies and procedures in place       ownership interest with a deed and title
     to ensure that the ownership           search.
     interest is eligible? 
       Yes       No




G. Property Standards
Background: HOME-funded properties must meet certain minimum property standards.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.251(a)(1)
 Documentation:
      • Policies/procedures that identify the local code or national code used for the homebuyer program
      • Written agreement between the PJ and the State recipient, subrecipient, or contractor and/or developer
      • Written rehabilitation standards, if applicable




152                                                                                                           Monitoring HOME
          HUD Checklist Exhibit 7-0
                                                              What to Analyze                           Follow-up Needed at Site Visit
             Selected Excerpts

    17. If the homebuyer program                The PJ must communicate (ideally, in
        provides downpayment assistance         the written agreement) what property
        only (i.e., no construction or          standards apply, either: (1) State or local
        rehabilitation is involved), what       codes, or (2) absent State or local codes,
        property standards apply? Obtain        the Federal Housing Quality Standards
        copy if monitoring property             (HQS), apply to the project.
        condition. [24 CFR 92.251(a)]           The program administrator’s procedures
                                                should reflect use of the requisite codes
        ________________________                and standards.
                                                The program administrator’s policies
                                                and procedures must ensure that
                                                properties are inspected for compliance
                                                with applicable codes prior to making
                                                a funding commitment to a particular
                                                property.

    18. If the homebuyer program has a          The PJ must communicate to the State
        construction component, what            recipient, subrecipient, contractor, and/or
        property standards apply? Obtain        developer (in the written agreement) what
        copy if monitoring construction         property standards apply:
        work. [24 CFR 92.251(a)]                • Either (1) State or local codes, or (2)
                                                  one of three national model codes
        ________________________                  (ICBO, BOCA, or SBCCI) or CABO, or
                                                  Minimum Property Standards1
                                                • For new construction, the International
                                                  Energy Conservation Code (IECC)
                                                • For rehabilitation, the PJ’s written
                                                  rehabilitation standard.
                                                The program administrator’s procedures
                                                should reflect use of the applicable
                                                codes and standards.
                                                The program administrator’s policies
                                                and procedures must ensure that work
                                                write-ups or plans and specifications
                                                are reviewed for compliance with
                                                applicable codes and standards prior to
                                                construction start.




1
    Since the promulgation of the HOME Program regulations, these code issuing agencies have merged to form the International Code Council (ICC).
    The model codes used for the HOME Program are no longer being updated. In their stead, the ICC has issued the International Building Code. HUD
    will consider whether changes to the HOME regulations incorporating the International Building Code are appropriate. The HOME Program web
    page provides updated information on all HOME requirements. (See http://www.hud.gov/offices/cpd/affordablehousing/programs/home/index.
    cfm.) For more information about the International Building Code, see http://www.iccsafe.org.



Chapter 5: Homebuyer Programs                                                                                                                153
 19. If the homebuyer program involves     The PJ must adopt a written rehabilitation
     rehabilitation, does the PJ have      standard and must communicate
     written rehabilitation standards,     its standard to the State recipient,
     as required by HOME regulations?      subrecipient, or contractor (in written
     Obtain copy if monitoring             agreement).
     rehabilitation projects. [24 CFR      The program administrator’s procedures
     92.251(a)(1)]                         should reflect use of the requisite
       Yes      No                       rehabilitation standards.
                                           The program administrator’s policies
                                           and procedures must ensure that work
                                           write-ups or plans and specifications
                                           are reviewed for compliance with
                                           the rehabilitation standard prior to
                                           rehabilitation start.




H. Loan and/or Grant Terms
Background: Typically, the PJ determines what form of assistance is provided to developers and/or homebuyers and conveys
this decision to the State recipient, subrecipient, or contractor. HOME allows virtually any form of financial assistance to be
provided for eligible projects and to eligible beneficiaries, including:
      • Interest bearing loans or advances. These are amortizing loans, for which repayment is expected on a regular basis
        (usually monthly). Over a fixed period of time, all of the principal and interest is repaid.
      • Non-interest bearing loans or advances. The principal amount of such loans is paid back on a regular basis over time,
        but no interest is charged.
      • Deferred loans (forgivable or repayable). These loans are not fully amortized. Instead, some, or even all, principal
        and interest payments are deferred to some point in the future.
      • Grants. Grants are provided with no requirement or expectation of repayment. Grants cannot be used under a recap­
        ture provision (see next section, I. Resale and Recapture).
      • Interest subsidies. These are usually an up-front discounted payment to a private lender in exchange for a lower
        interest rate on a loan. An interest subsidy may also be a deposit in an interest-bearing account from which monthly
        subsidies are drawn and paid to a lender along with the homebuyer’s monthly payment.
      • Equity investments. An equity investment is an investment made in return for a share of ownership. Under this form
        of subsidy, the PJ acquires a financial stake in the assisted property and is paid a monetary return on the investment if
        money is left after expenses and loans are paid.
      • Loan guarantees and loan guarantee accounts. HOME funds may be pledged to guarantee loans or to capitalize a
        loan guarantee account. A loan guarantee or a loan guarantee account ensures payment of a loan in case of default.
      • Other forms approved by HUD. Other forms of assistance require HUD approval. If the PJ intends to use a form
        of assistance not listed above, the PJ’s Consolidated Plan or annual action plan should describe the proposed form of
        assistance. Once the Consolidated Plan is approved by HUD, no other HUD approval is required.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.205(b)
 Documentation:
      • Policies/procedures that identify the form of assistance provided to homebuyers
      • If the PJ provides assistance in a form other than those specified above, documentation of HUD approval of the Con­
        solidated Plan
      • Written agreement between the PJ and State recipient, subrecipient, or contractor, if applicable


154                                                                                                            Monitoring HOME
    • Sample written agreements between the PJ/program administrator/developer and homebuyer

       HUD Checklist Exhibit 7-0
                                                     What to Analyze                   Follow-up Needed at Site Visit
          Selected Excerpts

 20. What form of assistance is          These forms of assistance are allowed
     provided?                          by HUD.
      Interest bearing loans or         If “other form of assistance” is used, the
        advances                         PJ must have documentation of this form
      Non-interest bearing loans or     of assistance in the PJ’s Consolidated
        advances                         Plan or annual action plan and must have
                                         evidence of HUD approval.
      Deferred payment loans
      Grant
      Interest subsidies
      Loan guarantee
      Other form of
        assistance (Specify:
        __________________________)



 21. What are the procedures for         If the amount of assistance is based
     determining the amount and          on project underwriting and varies from
     terms of assistance provided?       homebuyer to homebuyer (or developer
     (These may be located in a          to developer), the PJ should have written
     policies/procedures manual,         underwriting guidelines that are followed
     desk policies/procedures, or        for all projects to ensure consistency.
     underwriting standards).

 22. Does the program administrator
     grant or loan the funds to
     homebuyers? 
      Grant
      Loan
      N/A

 23. If funds are loaned, what are the
     loan terms or, if loan terms vary
     project-by-project, how are the
     loan terms determined? 

     ________________________

     ________________________



I. Resale and Recapture Provisions
Background: HOME and ADDI Program regulations require the use of either recapture or resale provisions for assisted
homebuyer projects.
    • Recapture. This is a mechanism to recapture all or a portion of the direct HOME subsidy if the property is transferred
      or sold during the affordability period. Recaptured funds must be used for HOME-eligible activities. The affordability
      period and the maximum amount subject to recapture is based upon the amount of direct assistance to the homebuyer
      (e.g., downpayment and/or closing cost assistance, principal reduction, etc.). The regulations describe four different


Chapter 5: Homebuyer Programs                                                                                           155
        options for recapture; the PJ must describe its recapture guidelines in its Consolidated Plan.
      • Resale. This option ensures that the HOME-assisted unit remains affordable over the entire affordability period. Using
        this option, if a HOME-assisted unit is sold during the affordability period, it must be sold to another low-income
        homebuyer at an affordable sales price while providing for a “fair return” to the original homebuyer. The period of
        affordability is based upon the total HOME assistance in the project which includes any direct assistance and any
        development assistance to an owner, developer, or sponsor. With resale, the PJ has the option to develop a marketing
        study, called a presumption of affordability, to demonstrate that an area is likely to remain affordable in the future.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.254
 Documentation:
      • Consolidated Plan or annual action plan with description of resale or recapture guidelines adopted by the PJ
      • Policies/procedures that describe the recapture/resale provisions
      • Written agreement between the PJ and State recipient, subrecipient, or contractor
      • Sample written agreement between the program administrator and developer and/or homebuyer
      • Policies/procedures that describe presumption of affordability, if applicable (for resale provisions only)


        HUD Checklist Exhibit 7-0
                                                       What to Analyze                       Follow-up Needed at Site Visit
           Selected Excerpts

 24. Are the terms of the loans,           Program materials should clearly state
     including recapture or resale         the terms of the HOME assistance.
     provisions, described in              Written agreement with developer and/or
     information provided to, and          homebuyer must clearly state the terms
     written agreements executed by,       of HOME assistance.
     homebuyers? Obtain a copy of the
     written agreement and any written     Program materials should describe the
     guidance provided to homebuyers.      resale or recapture provisions in user­
                                           friendly language.
       Yes      No
                                           Written agreement must clearly describe
                                           the resale or recapture provisions.




156                                                                                                              Monitoring HOME
 25. What provisions does the PJ use       Upon transfer of the HOME-assisted
     to ensure ongoing affordability       property during the affordability period:
     (recapture, resale, or both)?         A. Resale provisions must state:
     If resale provisions are used,
     is there a HUD-approved               • Subsequent owner must be low-income
     presumption of affordability?         • Sales price must be affordable, as
     Review the recapture or resale          defined by PJ
     provisions in the annual action
                                           • Initial buyer must get fair return on
     plan for compliance with
                                             investment, as defined by PJ.
     the resale and/or recapture
     provisions of 24 CFR 92.254(a)(5)     In certain neighborhoods, a PJ can use
     (i) and/or (ii), as applicable. [24   a presumption of affordability to satisfy
     CFR 92.254]                           these requirements.

            Presumption of                 B. Recapture provisions must specify
               Affordability               amount of HOME funds the PJ chooses to
                                           recapture:
        In certain neighborhoods,
                                           • Recapture entire amount
        the PJ may be able to use a
        presumption of affordability,      • Reduce amount, based on length of
                                             occupancy during affordability period
        based on a market analysis
        that documents that it is          • Share net proceeds
        likely that housing in the         • Return owner investment first.
        neighborhood will remain           Recapture provisions must state that PJ
  TIP




        affordable to a reasonable         cannot recapture an amount greater than
        range of low-income                the net proceeds.
        homebuyers, without any
        additional enforcement
        measures imposed by the
        PJ. The market study must
        include an evaluation of the
        location and characteristics
        of the housing and residents.
        The specific required elements
        of the market analysis
        are described in 24 CFR
        92.254(a)(b)(i)(B).




J. Contractor Listing
Background: Construction contractors working under HOME-funded homebuyer programs may be selected by any of the
following entities, depending upon the program design: a subrecipient or State recipient, owner/developer/sponsor, the home-
buyer, or the PJ. Depending on who hires the contractor, different procurement rules apply.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.505 and 92.350, and 24 CFR 85.36
 Documentation:
    • Policies/procedures (and/or written agreement) that explain how contractors are chosen
    • Policies/procedures that outline how contractors qualify for a pre-qualified list, if applicable
    • List of participating contractors and documentation of qualifications




Chapter 5: Homebuyer Programs                                                                                          157
       HUD Checklist Exhibit 7-0
                                                    What to Analyze                  Follow-up Needed at Site Visit
          Selected Excerpts

 26. Who selects the contractor?      If the PJ, State recipient, or subrecipient
                                       selects the contractor, then the selection
       PJ
                                       process must comply with Federal
       Owner/developer/sponsor        procurement rules regarding competitive
       Homebuyer                      bidding. Policies should reflect these
                                       requirements:
                                       • Must issue public invitation for bids
                                       • Must make efforts to solicit more than
                                         one bid
                                       • Must retain list of who was solicited
                                       • Must retain copies and dates of
                                         advertising
                                       • Must use clear and consistent criteria
                                         to review bids

 27. Is there a written procurement    • Must adopt written guidelines for
     process?                           processing and reviewing bids

       Yes      No                   • Must provide written notice to
                                         contractors that are not selected and
                                         cite reason(s).
              Determine Contractor     If homebuyer or owner/developer/
                   Eligibility         sponsor selects contractor, competitive
                                       bidding procedures are not required.
         To verify that a contractor   Policies should state:
         is eligible to work on a      • That the selected bid must be reviewed
  TIP




         federally-funded project,       by the program administrator for cost
         the program administrator       reasonableness prior to commitment
         must document that the          of funds
         contractor is not on the      • What criteria will be used to review for
         excluded parties list at        cost reasonableness.
         http://www.epls.gov/          Regardless of who selects the contractor,
         index.html. A print-out of    the program administrator must verify
         the search must be retained   that the contractor is eligible to work on
                                       federally-funded projects (i.e., is not on
         in the file.
                                       the excluded parties list).

 28. Does the program administrator    If the program administrator maintains a
     maintain a list of qualified      list of qualified contractors, the program
     contractors?                     administrator should have:
       Yes      No                   • Fair and open process to identify
                                         potential contractors (such as Request
                                         for Qualifications)
                                       • Specific criteria to select what
                                         contractors are on the list
                                       • Ongoing opportunities for new
                                         contractors to be added to the list.




158                                                                                                     Monitoring HOME
K. Client Complaints and Dispute Resolution
Background: PJs should have complaint/conflict resolution policies and procedures in case of disputes between parties
involved in homebuyer projects. In addition, PJs should have policies and procedures in place that establish what happens
when a contractor does not demonstrate satisfactory performance and meet contractual obligations.
Regulatory Basis: Recommended
 Documentation:
    • Log of complaints received by the PJ, if any
    • Complaint/conflict resolution policies and procedures
    • Documentation that any complaints were handled in accordance with such policies/procedures

       HUD Checklist Exhibit 7-0
                                                      What to Analyze                   Follow-up Needed at Site Visit
          Selected Excerpts

 29. Has [the PJ, program
     administrator, or HUD] received
     an unusually high number of
     complaints regarding the PJ’s
     homebuyer program during the
     past 12-24 months?
      Yes      No



 30. Does the PJ or program               Complaint procedures and policies
     administrator have policies          should:
     and procedures for resolving         • Define who is responsible for referring
     disputes between contractors and       disputes, how notifications will be
     homebuyers?                            handled, and who will monitor through
      Yes      No                         to resolution
                                          • Advise staff to monitor relations
                                            between the various parties, and to
                                            intervene early in disagreements to
                                            provide for informal resolution
                                          • Codify that when disputes cannot be
                                            handled informally by staff, they should
                                            be resolved in a manner that is prompt
                                            and includes an equitable investigation
                                            and resolution.



 31. Does program administrator have      Policies and/or procedures should:
     policies and procedures for taking   • Define poor performance and
     action against poor performing         determine the process by which poor
     contractors?                          performance will be identified and
      Yes      No                         communicated to involved parties
                                          • Identify who will determine whether,
                                            and when, to take disciplinary action
                                          • Identify actions that would be cause
                                            for referral to the PJ or HUD for
                                            suspension or debarment.




Chapter 5: Homebuyer Programs                                                                                            159
                                    Summary of Pre-monitoring Review
                                                 Homebuyer Program
Instructions: Using the completed checklists from the pre-monitoring review, complete the following chart to summarize the
pre-monitoring results. The written documentation that should have been examined includes: written agreement between PJ
and State recipient, subrecipient, or contractor, if applicable; written agreement with homebuyer; and program policies and
procedures.

                                 No Apparent
                                  Problems
                                                                              Follow-Up Needed
                                 with written
                                documentation

 A. Participant selection and
    marketing

 B. Program design


 C. Program administrator


 D. Income definition

 E. Maximum property value
    limit

 F. Property type


 G. Property standards


 H. Loan and/or grant terms

 I. Resale and recapture
    provisions

 J. Contractor listings

 K. Client complaints and
    dispute resolution




160                                                                                                      Monitoring HOME
Section 2. Project (Case File) Monitoring
 Overview of the Project Monitoring Review
During project monitoring, the PJ monitor:
     • Reviews individual project files for the homebuyer program
     • Determines whether the program administrator complies with the HOME requirements in the implementation of the
       program.
The program administrator should have a project file (also known as a “case file”) for each homebuyer and/or developer that
receives HOME assistance. The PJ monitor must review a sufficient sample of project files to determine that the program
administrator is complying with all applicable HOME requirements. Generally, the PJ monitor should randomly select at
least ten percent of the files, or a minimum three project files if the program is small. In addition, it should select the files of
any project that it has concerns may be at risk for noncompliance or performance difficulties.
When the PJ uncovers instances of noncompliance in the project review, it must take steps to see that the noncompliance is
corrected in each instance.
Note, the results of project monitoring can be aggregated and looked at in their entirety, in order to draw conclusions about
the overall performance of the program administrator. This process can be done at the conclusion of the project monitoring
review, or it can be done as part of the PJ’s program monitoring, which is discussed in Section 3 of this chapter.
 Organization of this Section
This section is organized into the following sections, to correspond generally to the organization of HUD Check­
list Exhibit 7-5:
     A. Participant eligibility
     B. Property eligibility
     C. Resale and recapture provisions
     D. Eligible and reasonable costs
     E. Property standards
     F. Onsite inspection
     G. Contractor selection
     H. Construction management
     I. Loan processing and servicing
     J. Long-term monitoring for occupancy
 Instructions
The PJ monitor should copy and use the checklists in this section of this chapter to conduct its project monitoring review.
For each project being reviewed, the PJ monitor should review relevant documents and answer each checklist question. A
separate checklist should be completed for each project file reviewed.
The first column, “HUD Checklist Exhibit 7-5 Selected Excerpts,” provides the HUD checklist questions, as adapted (indi­
cated by the use of [brackets]) for use by PJs.
The second column, “Identified Problems,” lists potential compliance issues. The PJ monitor should check off any of the
“Identified Problems” that he or she encounters while reviewing project files.
At the end of each subsection is a “Notes” form for the PJ to make notes on findings and recommended actions.




Chapter 5: Homebuyer Programs                                                                                                    161
 Documentation to Bring
The PJ monitor should bring, or have access to, the following documents at the onsite project monitoring review:
      • Pre-monitoring review results, if available
      • Copy of the HOME regulations found at 24 CFR Part 92
      • HOME income limits in effect for the years under review
      • Applicable property standards, if project will be inspected

A. Participant Eligibility
The requirements related to participant eligibility describe who is eligible to receive homebuyer assistance. Participant eligi­
bility covers the following topics:
      1. Income-eligibility
      2. Occupancy
      3. Ownership
      4. Written agreement with homebuyer

1. Income-eligibility
Background: Income-eligibility refers to the requirement that every homebuyer that is assisted with HOME funds must be
low-income. A low-income household has an annual gross income that is at or below 80 percent of the area median income.
Regulatory Basis: HOME: 24 CFR 92.203(b), 92.203(a)(2), 92.254(b), and 92.508(a)(3)(v); ADDI: 24 CFR 92.610(c)
 Documentation:
      • Policies/procedures that specify which definition of income should be used for the homebuyer program (collected dur­
        ing pre-monitoring review)
      • Source documentation of income for all household members—pay stubs, bank statements, and documents from third
        parties (e.g., Social Security Administration, verification of employment)
      • Copy of HUD’s income limits that were in effect on the date the income verification was determined
      • Worksheet or form that shows how the household's income was determined, and compares it to the HUD income
        limit for the applicable household size

               HUD Checklist 7-5 Selected Excerpts                                          Identified Problems

 1. Was the applicable definition of income used (e.g., the            PJ’s definition of income not used to make income-eligibility
    definition selected for this homebuyer program)?                    determination
       Yes      No




162                                                                                                                 Monitoring HOME
 2. Did the PJ correctly apply income inclusions and exclusions     Household size not verified through application and personal
    for the chosen income definition and was the calculation         interview
    performed correctly? [24 CFR 92.203(b)]                         All applicable income not “counted” per the definition in use
     Yes      No                                                  Income “counted” that should have been excluded
              Resources for Calculating Household Income            Household’s income not based on anticipated income
                                                                     (expected in the next twelve months)
        HUD provides two key resources to assist with making
        income-eligibility determinations:                          Household’s income did not include income for all family
  TIP



                                                                     members
        1. Online income calculator at http://www.hud.gov/
                                                                    Documentation for household’s income determination was
           offices/cpd/affordablehousing/training/web/               not in file or was insufficient
           calculator/calculator.cfm
        2. Technical Guide for Determining Income and
           Allowances for the HOME Program (HUD 1780­
           CPD, January 2005), available from Community
           Connections, 1-800-998-9999.

 3. Was household income supported with source                      Reported income not verified with source documentation
    documentation? [HOME: 24 CFR 92.203(a)(2); ADDI: 24 CFR
                                                                    No or insufficient source documentation
    92.610(c)]
     Yes      No                                   Acceptable Source Documentation
                             TIP




                                    • Letters of verification of employment and salary
                                    • Wage statements
                                    • Letters from providers of other sources of income (such as the
                                      Social Security Administration or other governmental agencies)


 4. Was the household’s annual income less than or equal to         No worksheet comparing HUD income limits in effect at the
    80% of the area median income? [HOME: 24 CFR 92.254(b);          time of application to the household’s determined income
    ADDI: 24 CFR 92.612(c)]                                         Wrong income limits used (e.g., wrong year)
     Yes      No                                                  Household was over-income, but program administrator
                                                                     provided HOME funds

 5. Was the household’s income determined not more than 6           Homebuyer income-eligibility not determined prior to
    months before the HOME or ADDI funds were committed to           providing HOME assistance
    this homebuyer? [HOME: 24 CFR 92.203(d)(2); ADDI: 24            HOME assistance was not provided within six months of the
    CFR 92.610(c)]                                                   income-eligibility determination
    Or, for lease-purchase, not more than 6 months before the
    lease-purchase agreement was signed? [24 CFR 92.254(a)
    (7)]
    Or, for housing that will be constructed, not more than 6
    months before the contract was signed?
     Yes      No



2. Occupancy
Background: There are two key requirements related to occupancy:
    1. The homebuyer must occupy the home as its principal residence; properties used as second homes or temporary
       residences cannot be assisted.
    2. For ADDI funds, applicants must meet the definition of first-time homebuyer.
Monitoring for principal residence during the period of affordability is a HOME and ADDI recommended practice.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.254(b)(2) and 92.508(a)(3)(xi)



Chapter 5: Homebuyer Programs                                                                                                   163
 Documentation:
      • Self-certification (signed) from participant or alternative documentation of first-time homebuyer status (see Tip Box
        below)
      • Written agreement with the homebuyer
      • Self-certification (signed) from participant stating that the HOME-assisted unit will be the buyer’s principal residence

               HUD Checklist 7-5 Selected Excerpts                                          Identified Problems

 6. If the household is assisted with ADDI funds, does the             Homebuyer did not meet one of these three criteria for a
    household meet the first-time homebuyer definition in 24            first-time homebuyer:
    CFR 92.2? [24 CFR 92.602(a)(1)]                                        Ownership. Applicant has not owned a house in the last
       Yes     No
              Documentation of First-time Homebuyer Status                  three years.

          Sufficient documentation includes:                               Displaced Homemaker. Applicant (adult) has not worked
                                                                            full-time or for a full-year in the labor force for a number
          • For ownership: Self-certification by applicant, current         of years, but has, during such years, worked primarily
            bank application, or copies of prior year’s tax                 without remuneration to care for the home or family,
 TIP




            returns                                                         is unemployed or underemployed, and is experiencing
          • For displaced homemaker: Self-certification, resume             difficulty in obtaining or upgrading employment.
            and/or other employment record, or copies of prior             Single Parent. Applicant is a single parent, which means
            year tax returns/W-2’s showing employment or                    unmarried or legally separated from a spouse and has
            unemployment                                                    one or more minor children of whom the individual has
                                                                            custody or joint custody, or is pregnant.
          • For single parent: Self-certification, divorce decree
            or separation agreement, and the household                 No or insufficient documentation to show that first-time
                                                                        homebuyer status was verified
            application.



 7. Does the written agreement with the homebuyer specify that         Written agreement with homebuyer does not include
    the buyer must use the property as a principal residence            principal residency requirement
    throughout the period of affordability? [HOME: 24 CFR              Written agreement between PJ and State recipient,
    92.254(a)(3) and 92.504(c)(5)(i); ADDI: 24 CFR 92.612(c)            subrecipient, or contractor does not specify that it is the
    and 92.616(e)]                                                      the funded entity’s obligation to convey principal residency
       Yes      No                                                    requirement to the homebuyer

 8. Was the written agreement executed by the PJ and the               Project was funded prior to execution of a written agreement
    homebuyer before the project was funded in IDIS? (Compare
    the dated signatures on the written agreement to the Initial
    Funding Date on the View Activity Screen in IDIS). [24 CFR
    92.502(b)]
       Yes      No

 9. Does the written agreement specify remedies or actions the        The written agreement does not (check all that apply):
    PJ must take if the principal residence requirement is not         Specify that the PJ will monitor principal residency
    met for the affordability period? [HOME: 24 CFR 92.254(a)           throughout the affordability period
    (5) and 24 CFR 92.254(c)(5)(i); ADDI: 24CFR 92.612(c) and
    616(e)]                                                            Include any terms of enforcement for the PJ, in the event
                                                                        that the principal residency requirement is not met
       Yes      No




164                                                                                                                   Monitoring HOME
 10. Based upon a review of the project file, is the                  No evidence that principal residency is periodically verified
     documentation being maintained sufficient to demonstrate
                                                                      Insufficient documentation for principal residence verification
     compliance with the following HOME requirements:
     Principal residence? [HOME: 24 CFR 254(a)(3); ADDI: 24                              Principal Residency Verification




                                                                     TIP
     CFR 92.612(c)]
                                                                            It is recommended that the program administrator
      Yes        No
                                                                            verify principal residency on an annual basis. Principal
                                                                            residency can be verified with an onsite inspection, a
                                                                            review of utility bills, or insurance documentation that
                                                                            shows the applicant is listed as owner.


3. Ownership
Background: A homebuyer must have one of these forms of ownership in the HOME-assisted property: fee simple title,
99-year leasehold, 50-year leasehold on Indian lands, condominium, cooperative, or other form with HUD approval.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.254(c) and 92.508(a)(3)(xi)
 Documentation:
    • Fee simple title, deed, or other documentation of ownership
    • Long-term lease

              HUD Checklist 7-5 Selected Excerpts                                          Identified Problems

 11. Check the form of ownership:                                    Applicant’s ownership interest is not free and clear
      Fee simple title                                               Unable to determine ownership interest because no title
                                                                       report in file
      A 99-year leasehold interest
      50-year leasehold on trust or restricted Indian lands
      Ownership or membership in a cooperative or mutual
        housing project (where this is an ownership interest
        under State law)
      Another form of ownership approved by HUD
        Specify:______________________________________
         Does file contain HUD approval letter?
          Yes      No

 12. Was the form of ownership eligible under the HOME or             No verification of form of ownership
     ADDI programs (i.e., fee simple title; 99-year lease; 50-year
                                                                      Homebuyer has a form of ownership that is not acceptable
     lease on Indian lands; condominium or cooperative; or
     other equivalent form of homeownership approved by
     HUD? [HOME: 24 CFR 92.2 and 92.254(c); ADDI: 24 CFR
     92.612(c)]
      Yes        No



4. Written Agreement with Homebuyer
Background: The PJ must enter into a written agreement with any other entity that administers its HOME program activi­
ties in whole or in part before disbursing HOME funds. In turn, that funded entity must also execute a written agreement
with the developer and/or homebuyer prior to disbursing HOME funds.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.504(c)(5), 92.504(b)(5), and 92.508(a)(3)(ii)
 Documentation:
    • All written agreements that convey HOME funds and requirements, including the following, as applicable:


Chapter 5: Homebuyer Programs                                                                                                          165
        — Written agreement between program administrator and developer
        — Written agreement between PJ and homebuyer, or three-party agreement between PJ, State recipient/subrecipient/
          contractor, and homebuyer
        — Written agreement between the State recipient/subrecipient/contractor and the homebuyer (must be assignable to
          the PJ)
      • Documentation of IDIS initial draw down

               HUD Checklist 7-5 Selected Excerpts                                         Identified Problems

 13. Based upon a review of the project file, is the                  No written agreement between each entity that conveys
     documentation being maintained sufficient to demonstrate          funds to another entity, such as:
     compliance with the following HOME requirements: Written
                                                                       • Between PJ and developer
     agreement? [HOME: 24 CFR 92.504; ADDI: 24 CFR
     92.616(e)]                                                        • Between PJ and homebuyer
        Yes     No                                                   • Between developer and homebuyer
                                                                       • Between PJ, developer, and homebuyer

 14. Does the written agreement with the homebuyer include            Missing provisions:____________________________________
     all of the following required provisions [specified at 24 CFR
     92.254(c)(5)(i)]?                                              _______________________________________________________
       The estimated value of the property
                                                                     _______________________________________________________
       Requirement that principal residence must be
         maintained throughout the period of affordability           _______________________________________________________
       Resale or recapture provision
                                                                     _______________________________________________________
       Amount and form of HOME/ADDI assistance
       Use of funds                                                 _______________________________________________________
       Time by which housing must be acquired
                                                                     _______________________________________________________
        Yes     No

 15. Has the PJ retained the legal right to enforce the written       The PJ does not have the means to enforce the agreement
     agreement with the homebuyer?                                    with the homebuyer directly
        Yes     No                                 PJ's Right to Enforce Written Agreements with Homebuyers
                                 When a State recipient, subrecipient, or contractor administers the homebuyer program, the PJ
                                 can retain its legal right to enforce the homebuyer agreement in one of these ways:
                          TIP




                                 • Enter into an agreement with the homebuyer directly
                                 • Ensure that the agreement with the homebuyer is assignable to the PJ
                                 • Using a three-party agreement between the State recipient/subrecipient/contractor, the PJ,
                                   and the homebuyer.
                                 If HOME funds are provided to the developer for new construction or rehabilitation, the PJ
                                 must either enter into the written agreement with the homebuyer directly, or use a three-party
                                 agreement.




166                                                                                                                 Monitoring HOME
 16. Does the written agreement with the owner, developer, or    Missing provisions:____________________________________
     sponsor include all of the following required provisions
     [specified at 24 CFR 92.254(c)(3)]?                       _______________________________________________________
      Use of funds
                                                                _______________________________________________________
      Affordability
      Project requirements (under Subpart F)                   _______________________________________________________
      Property standards (24 CFR 92.251)
                                                                _______________________________________________________
      Other program requirements (e.g., affirmative
        marketing, lead-based paint, etc.)                      _______________________________________________________
      Records and reports
                                                                _______________________________________________________
      Requests for disbursement of funds
      Enforcement                                              _______________________________________________________
      CHDO requirements (24 CFR 92.300 and 92.301, as
        applicable)                                             _______________________________________________________

      Duration of the agreement.

 17. Was the written agreement executed before HOME funds        Agreement executed after the initial drawdown date
     were disbursed? (Compare the initial draw down date with
     the written agreement date.) 
      Yes       No

 18. Was the written agreement properly executed?               Agreement not signed by authorized personnel of both
                                                                  parties
      Yes       No

 19. Is the written agreement in effect for the applicable       Affordability period not specified in the agreement
     affordability period? 
                                                                 Affordability period is specified, but written agreement
      Yes       No                                              expires prior to its completion

NOTES on Participant Eligibility




Chapter 5: Homebuyer Programs                                                                                                167
B. Property Eligibility
A number of HOME requirements pertain to the eligibility of the property or site selection, including:
      1. Property types
      2. Minimum and maximum HOME investment
      3. Maximum property value
      4. Environmental review
      5. Uniform Relocation Act and Section 104(d) requirements
1. Property Types
Background: A number of types of property are eligible for homebuyer housing under the HOME Program, including:
      • Single family properties of one to four units
      • Manufactured or mobile homes
      • Condominiums
      • Cooperative units or units in a mutual housing project (if State law recognizes these as forms of homeownership).
Note: HOME rental requirements apply if HOME funds are used to assist the rental units in a structure of two to four units,
including HOME provisions regarding tenant occupancy, initial rent levels, and long-term affordability. See Chapter 6 for
guidance on monitoring these rental units.
Regulatory Basis: HOME: 24 CFR 92.254(a); ADDI: 24 CFR 92.602
 Documentation:
      • Inspection report, tax assessment, photo, or other document that provides identification of property type
      • Map, inspection report, or tax information that indicates location of property

               HUD Checklist 7-5 Selected Excerpts                                         Identified Problems

 20. Check property type (eligible types):                           No evidence of property type in the file
       Single family property of one to four units
       Manufactured or mobile homes
       Condominium
       A cooperative unit or unit in a mutual housing project (if
        State law recognizes these as forms of homeownership)

 21. Does the file list the property as a single family home          Property assisted is not eligible property type
     (1-4 units)? [HOME: 24 CFR 92.254(a)(1); ADDI: 24 CFR
                                                                      No verification of property type (inspection report, photo, or
     92.602(a)(1)]                                                     tax assessment information)
        Yes     No

 22. Was the property within the PJ’s boundaries?                     Property not within the PJ boundaries
        Yes     No                                                  No documentation that property is within PJ boundaries



2. Minimum and Maximum HOME Investment
Background: HOME and ADDI impose maximum and minimum investment amounts, as follows:
      • The minimum amount of HOME and ADDI funds in combination that can be invested in a project is $1,000 per
        unit.


168                                                                                                                  Monitoring HOME
    • The maximum per unit subsidy amount (HOME and ADDI funds combined) is based on the PJ’s Section 221(d)(3)
      program limits for the metropolitan area in effect at time of funding commitment.
    • The maximum amount of ADDI funds that can be provided to any family is not more than either: (1) Six percent of
      the purchase price of the single family housing, or (2) $10,000, whichever is greater. This limitation does not apply to
      FY2003 ADDI funds.
Note: The total HOME and/or ADDI investment includes direct assistance to the buyer (downpayment, closing cost, and/or
mortgage assistance) as well as funds used for construction and/or acquisition and rehabilitation. (ADDI FY2004-2007 funds
can be used for rehabilitation.)
Regulatory Basis: HOME: 24 CFR 92. 205(c) and 92.250; ADDI: 24 CFR 92.612(a) and 92.602(e)
 Documentation:
    • Written agreement between PJ and State recipient, subrecipient, or contractor, and/or developer, and/or homebuyer;
      or grant/loan document that shows amount of HOME/ADDI assistance provided
    • Worksheet or form that shows the subsidy amount, and how it was determined, and HUD or other settlement
      statement
    • Copy of the 221(d)(3) limits for the year the project was funded
    • Worksheet or form that compares the HOME subsidy amount and the applicable 221(d)(3) limit

             HUD Checklist 7-5 Selected Excerpts                                         Identified Problems

 23. Did the HOME and/or ADDI investment total at least             HOME and/or ADDI assistance is less than $1,000 per unit
     $1,000 per HOME-assisted unit? [HOME: 24 CFR
                                                                    No worksheet that shows how the HOME and/or ADDI per
     92.205(c); ADDI: 24 CFR 92.602(c)]                              unit subsidy was calculated
      Yes      No                                                 Per unit subsidy calculated incorrectly; however, the
                                                                     minimum investment is $1,000 or more

 24. Was the amount of HOME and/or ADDI investment                  Assistance in the project is greater than the maximum
     no greater than the maximum per unit subsidy limit              221(d)(3) limit
     established by HUD? [HOME: 24 CFR 92.250(a); ADDI: 24          No worksheet or form that shows that the HOME/ADDI
     CFR 92.612(a)]                                                  subsidy was within the 221(d)(3) limits
      Yes      No                                                 Wrong subsidy limit used (e.g., wrong year)
                                                                    Per unit subsidy calculated incorrectly; however, the project
                                                                     meets the per unit subsidy limit requirement
                                            Maximum Per Unit Subsidy [221(d)(3) Limits]
         The HOME maximum per unit subsidy limits are updated annually and are available from the local HUD Field Office or
         online at http://www.hud.gov/offices/cpd/affordablehousing/programs/home/limits/subsidylimits.cfm.
   TIP




         • The limits are 100% of the dollar limits for a Section 221(d)(3) nonprofit sponsor, elevator-type development, indexed
           for base city high cost areas, and adjusted for the number of bedrooms.
         • For some PJs, the 221(d)(3) limit has already been increased to 210% of the base limit. For these PJs, HUD will
           allow, upon request, an increase in the per unit subsidy amount on a program-wide basis. However, the maximum
           subsidy limit allowable under the HOME statute is 240% of the base 221(d)(3) limits. For more information on the
           221(d)(3) limits, see HOMEfires, Vol. 9, No. 4, issued August 2008.

 25. If ADDI funds were used in the project, was the ADDI           Assistance in project is greater than both $10,000 and 6%
     investment less than the greater of either: a) $10,000;         of the sales prices of the property
     or b) 6% of the sales price of the property? (Note: This       No worksheet or form that shows that the ADDI subsidy was
     requirement does not apply to FY 2003 ADDI funds.) [24          within the ADDI limits
     CFR 92.602(e)]
                                                                    Per unit subsidy determined incorrectly; however, the ADDI
      Yes      No                                                  investment was less than either $10,000 or 6% of the sales
                                                                     price of the property




Chapter 5: Homebuyer Programs                                                                                                    169
3. Maximum Property Value
Background: For acquisition or new construction activities, the purchase price of a HOME-assisted property cannot exceed
95 percent of the median purchase price limits for the area. For rehabilitation activities, the after-rehabilitation value cannot
exceed 95 percent of the median purchase price limits for the area.
At this writing, the Section 203(b) mortgage limits exceed the 95 percent of the median purchase price limits imposed by the
HOME Program statute. HUD authorizes PJs to determine their own limits in accordance with procedures described in the
HOME regulations at 24 CFR 92.254, or to use the greater of either:
      • Section 203(b) mortgage limits established as of February, 2008; or
      • Actual 95 percent of median sales price limits for their areas. HUD has published and periodically updates a Value
        Limits Spreadsheet with current limits for each county in the U.S. This is found at http://www.hud.gov/offices/cpd/
        affordablehousing/programs/home/limits/maxprice.cfm.
For more information on the property value/sales price limits, see HUD’s HOMEfires, Vol. 10 No. 1, issued January, 2009,
available online at http://www.hud.gov/offices/cpd/affordablehousing/library/homefires/index.cfm#2009.
Regulatory Basis: HOME: 24 CFR 92.254(a)(2); ADDI: 24 CFR 92.612(c)
 Documentation:
      • 203(b) limits or 95 percent of area median purchase price for the area, for the year project was funded
      • For acquisition or new construction projects: Sales contract and/or settlement statement
      • For projects involving rehabilitation: Appraisal, tax assessment, or in-house estimate by qualified staff documenting
        after-rehabilitation value

               HUD Checklist 7-3 Selected Excerpts                                            Identified Problems

 26. What does the program administrator use to represent the           Program administrator not using a HUD-approved limit
     95% of median purchase price limit? 
                                                                        PJ determines the median purchase price limits through a
       FHA 203(b) limit in effect in February 2008                      market survey; however there is no documentation in the file
       HUD/HOME-determined 95% of median purchase price                 that HUD has approved it
        limit from Value Limits Spreadsheet                             PJ’s market survey not updated in the annual action plan
       PJ-determined limit                                              every year

       None of the above
                                  TIP




                                                      Using PJ-Determined Median Purchase Price
                                         If the homebuyer program uses a PJ-determined limit, the PJ monitor
                                         should verify that the market study that forms the basis of that limit
                                         is updated annually in the PJ’s annual action plan, and that it has
                                         been approved by HUD.

 27. Applicable limit in effect at time of property value or sales
     price determination: [24 CFR 92.254(a)(2)(iii)]

       __________________________________________________

 28. Was the sales price or, if applicable, the after-rehabilitation    Sales price or after-rehabilitation value greater than the
     property value less than 95% of the median single family            sales price/property value limit
     purchase price? [HOME: 24 CFR 92.254(a)(2); ADDI: 24               No or insufficient documentation of sales price or after-
     CFR 92.612(c)]                                                      rehabilitation value
        Yes     No                                                    Wrong limits used to determine 95% of median purchase
                                                                         price for the area (e.g., wrong year)
                                                                        No worksheet/form to show comparison of sales price/
                                                                         after-rehabilitation value to the applicable limit; however, the
                                                                         property’s sales price/value met the limit




170                                                                                                                    Monitoring HOME
 29. For projects involving rehabilitation, was the after­            After-rehabilitation value established with a method that is
     rehabilitation value of the property determined using             not HUD-approved
     appropriate methods (e.g., appraisal, tax assessments or         No evidence that program administrator established
     assessments by qualified staff)? [HOME: 24 CFR 92.254(a)          the after-rehabilitation value prior to making the HOME
     (2); ADDI: 24 CFR 92.612(c)]                                      investment
       Yes     No                                                   Documentation of value is insufficient
                                                  Documenting After-Rehabilitation Value

        The following documentation is required to substantiate the determination of value:
        • For an in-house estimate of value, project files must contain the estimate of value and a justification for the value
  TIP




          estimates.
        • For an appraised value, the appraisal must be prepared by a licensed fee appraiser or by a PJ's staff appraiser; the
          appraisal must include the statement of value and the appraisal approach used.
        • For value based on the tax assessment, the file must contain documentation of an assessment for a comparable
          property located in the same neighborhood. The assessment must be current and must accurately reflect market value
          after rehabilitation. Assessments based on a percentage of market value may be used, if adjusted to reflect actual
          market value.



4. Environmental Review
Background: HOME- and ADDI-funded activities are subject to the environmental review requirements at 24 CFR Part
58. This review requires the PJ, before making any action-limiting decisions, to assess the environmental impact of a proposed
project.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR Part 58 and HOME: 24 CFR 92.352; ADDI: 24 CFR 92.614(a)(2)
 Documentation:
    • Environmental Review Record (ERR)

              HUD Checklist 7-5 Selected Excerpts                                          Identified Problems

 30. Does the project file include: Environmental review (if          No environmental review record on file
     applicable)? (If determining compliance with environmental
     review requirements, the reviewer should use HUD                            For More Information on Environmental Review
     Checklist Exhibit 21-1 to answer this question. Otherwise,                                 Requirements
     verify the presence of documentation indicating that a                   For more information on the environmental review
     review was performed.) [HOME: 24 CFR 92.352; ADDI: 24                    requirements for HOME and ADDI, see:
     CFR 92.614(a)(2)]
                                                                       TIP




                                                                              • HUD Notice CPD 01-11, Environmental Review
       Yes     No
                                                                                and the HOME Investment Partnerships Program,
                                                                                issued July 17, 2001 and available online at
                                                                                http://www.hud.gov/offices/cpd/lawsregs/
                                                                                notices/2001/01-11.pdf
                                                                              • HOMEfires Vol. 4, No. 2, available online
                                                                                at http://www.hud.gov/offices/cpd/
                                                                                affordablehousing/library/homefires/volumes/
                                                                                vol4no2.cfm




5. Uniform Relocation Act and Section 104(d) Requirements
Background: The Uniform Relocation Assistance and Real Property Acquisition Policies Act (URA) applies to HOME-
funded projects and projects funded with ADDI 2003 funds. The URA requires that the seller in a voluntary, for-sale trans­
action funded with HOME and ADDI 2003 monies be provided a Guideform Notice—Disclosures to Seller with Voluntary,
Arm's Length Purchase Offer.


Chapter 5: Homebuyer Programs                                                                                                         171
Tenants living in for-sale housing that may be purchased with HOME funds (and ADDI 2003 funds) are covered by the
Uniform Relocation Act (URA) and may also be covered by the relocation requirements of Section 104(d) of the Housing
and Community Development Act of 1974, as amended. Both laws require certain notices be provided to tenants along with
relocation assistance.
Regulatory Basis: HOME and ADDI 2003 funds: 49 CFR Part 24, and HOME: 24 CFR 92.353; ADDI: 24 CFR
92.614(b)(2)
 Documentation:
      • Guideform Notice – Disclosures to Seller with Voluntary, Arm's Length Purchase Offer
      • General Information Notice
      • Other relocation notices, as applicable

               HUD Checklist 7-5 Selected Excerpts                                           Identified Problems

 31. Does the project file include: Relocation notice to seller (if     No documentation of required relocation notice to the seller
     applicable)? (Note: For ADDI, the Uniform Relocation Act
     requirements apply only to FY 2003 funds.) [HOME: 24 CFR
     92.353; ADDI: 24 CFR 92.614(b)(2)]
        Yes     No

 32. Does the project file include: Notice to tenant (if                No documentation of required relocation notice to the seller
     applicable)? (Note: For ADDI, the Uniform Relocation Act
     requirements apply only to FY 2003 funds.) [HOME: 24 CFR
     92.353; ADDI: 24 CFR 92.614(b)(2)]
                                                                      Monitoring Tenant Relocation
                                                  TIP




        Yes     No
                                                         See HUD Checklist Exhibits 25-1 through 25­
                                                         13 and Chapter 6, Rental Housing Programs for
                                                         more detailed guidance on monitoring relocation
                                                         requirements for tenants.


NOTES on Property Eligibility




172                                                                                                                  Monitoring HOME
C. Resale and Recapture Provisions
Background: HOME requires that the PJ ensure long-term affordability in homebuyer housing in one of two ways:
   1. Restrict the resale of the HOME-assisted unit to low-income households during the affordability period. In the
      event of transfer of property during the period of affordability, a resale provision restricts occupancy in the HOME-
      assisted unit to another low-income buyer at an affordable price, and ensures a fair return on the original homebuyer’s
      investment.
   2. Recapture HOME funds to create affordability in another unit. In the event of transfer of property during the afford-
      ability period, the PJ recaptures the HOME investment. These recaptured funds must then be used for HOME-eligi­
      ble housing. Recapture provisions in the written agreement between the PJ and the homebuyer specify the amount of
      HOME funds that are subject to recapture.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.254 and 92.504
 Documentation:
    • PJ’s Consolidated Plan and/or annual action plan
    • Written agreement between the PJ and the State recipient, subrecipient, or contractor, or developer, as applicable
    • Written agreement with the homebuyer
    • Deed restriction or covenant running with the land
    • Note or mortgage (for property with recapture provision)
    • Worksheet or form that shows how the affordability period was determined
    • For resale, worksheet or form with calculation of total HOME assistance in the unit
    • For resale, if property was transferred during affordability period, documentation that home was re-sold to a low-
      income homebuyer at an affordable sales price (e.g., income verification, sales price calculation, etc.) and provided
      a fair return to the original purchaser (as defined in the PJ’s Consolidated Plan or annual action plan and policies/
      procedures)
    • For recapture, worksheet or form that shows how the direct assistance to the buyer and recapture amounts were
      determined
    • For recapture, if property was transferred during affordability period, documentation that recapture provisions were
      followed, including the receipt of recaptured funds in the PJ’s/subrecipient’s/State recipient's HOME account and
      information entered into IDIS

             HUD Checklist 7-5 Selected Excerpts                                        Identified Problems

 33. Does the written agreement with the homebuyer include          Agreement does not specify if recapture or resale provision
     required recapture or resale provisions? (Complete Exhibit      is used
     7-14, Guide for Review of Beneficiary Written Agreements,      Guidance on resale or recapture provision in the written
     if the PJ’s standard agreement has not already been             agreement is insufficient
     reviewed.) [HOME: 24 CFR 92.504(c)(5); ADDI: 24 CFR
     92.616(e)]
      Yes      No

 34. Is the resale or recapture provision applied to the project    Resale/recapture provisions not described in annual action
     consistent with the approved resale or recapture provision      plan
     in the PJ’s annual action plan for the year in which the       Resale/recapture provisions not described in written
     assistance was provided? [HOME: 24 CFR 92.254(a)(5)(i)          agreement
     or (ii); ADDI: 24 CFR 92.612(c)]
                                                                    Resale/recapture provisions in use differ from those
      Yes      No                                                  described in annual action plan




Chapter 5: Homebuyer Programs                                                                                                   173
 35. Does the resale or recapture provision comply with the           No resale/recapture provision
     requirements established for such provisions in the HOME
                                                                      Resale or recapture provision not described in adequate
     regulations? [HOME: 24 CFR 92.254(a)(5)(i) or (ii); ADDI:         detail to comply with HOME
     24 CFR 92.612(c)]
                                                                      Resale or recapture provision does not comply with
       Yes      No                                                   requirements

 36. If the property is under resale provisions, was a deed           No deed restriction or covenant executed
     restriction or covenant running with the land recorded?
                                                                      Deed restriction/covenant not recorded
     [HOME: 24 CFR 92.254(a)(5)(i)(A); ADDI: 24 CFR
     92.612(c)]
       Yes      No

 37. If the property is under recapture provisions, how are the       No deed restriction or covenant running with the land
     provisions conveyed and enforced?                                executed (recommended, but not required)
       Deed restriction                                              No legal enforcement instrument
       Covenant running with the land
       Note or mortgage
         Other (Specify: __________________________________)
       Yes      No

 38. If the property was sold before the end of the affordability     Property sold, but PJ not notified or involved in transaction
     period, were the recapture or resale requirements met?
                                                                     For recapture:
     [HOME: 24 CFR 92.254(a)(4); ADDI: 24 CFR 92.612(c)]
                                                                          Funds were not recaptured in accordance with provisions
       Yes      No
                                                                          Recapture amount not determined correctly
                                                                     For resale, resale conditions not met because:
                                                                          Subsequent buyer not low-income
                                                                          Initial homebuyer did not receive fair return on
                                                                            investment, as defined by PJ
                                                                          Home not sold at affordable price

 39. Was the correct period of affordability established for the      No documentation to show how the period of affordability
     project, based upon the total amount of HOME and ADDI             was determined
     assistance [used for the project] if under a resale provision    Period of affordability not specified in written agreement
     or the [total HOME or ADDI assistance to the homebuyer], if
     under a recapture provision? [HOME: 24 CFR 92.254(a)(4);         Period of affordability not determined correctly
     ADDI: 24 CFR 92.612(c)]                                          Affordability period is correct; however, there is no worksheet
       Yes      No                                                   or other documentation to show how the affordability period
                                                                       was determined
                                                       Determining Affordability Period
          TIP




                 For resale, the affordability period is based on the total amount of HOME/ADDI funds drawn down from
                 IDIS or expended from program income for the project, including funds for development and direct
                 assistance to the homebuyer (downpayment, closing cost and/or mortgage assistance).

                 For recapture, the affordability period is based on the direct subsidy to the homebuyer (downpayment,
                 closing cost and/or mortgage assistance) and any write down in the purchase price below fair market
                 value that is attributable to a HOME development subsidy.


NOTES on Resale and Recapture Provisions




174                                                                                                                   Monitoring HOME
D. Eligible and Reasonable Costs
The PJ monitor’s review of costs should include a review of:
    1.HOME eligible costs
    2.Cost reasonableness and subsidy layering
    3.Form of assistance

1. Eligible HOME Costs
Background: When HOME and ADDI funds are used for development activities, they can be used to pay acquisition or
rehabilitation of income-eligible housing, and related eligible hard and soft costs. In addition, HOME funds can be used for
new construction costs; ADDI funds cannot. The eligible costs are summarized in Figure 5-1. Note, ADDI 2003 funds may
not be used for rehabilitation.




Chapter 5: Homebuyer Programs                                                                                           175
                                     Figure 5-1. Eligible Homebuyer Project Costs
             Hard Costs                                  Soft Costs                              Relocation Costs
• Acquisition of land and existing          • Financing fees                           • Replacement housing, moving
  structures                                                                             costs, and out-of-pocket expenses
                                            • Credit reports
• Site preparation or improvement,                                                     • Advisory services
                                            • Title binders and insurance
  including demolition                                                                 • Staff and overhead related to
                                            • Surety fees
• Securing buildings                                                                     relocation assistance and services
                                            • Recordation fees, transactions
• Construction materials and labor            taxes
                                            • Legal and accounting fees,
                                              including cost certification
                                            • Appraisals
                                            • Architectural/engineering fees,
                                              including specifications and job
                                              progress inspections
                                            • Environmental investigations
                                            • Builders’ or developers’ fees
                                            • Affirmative marketing and
                                              marketing costs attributable to a
                                              specific HOME-assisted project
                                            • Homebuyer counseling provided
                                              to purchasers of HOME-assisted
                                              housing
                                            • Management fees
                                            • Project costs incurred by the
                                              PJ that are directly related to a
                                              specific project

Regulatory Basis: HOME: 24 CFR 92.206; ADDI: 24 CFR 92.602(b)
 Documentation:
      • Owner, developer, or sponsor application for funding, including any development budgets
      • HUD or other settlement sheet that shows all costs
      • Project budget, cost estimates, work write-ups, draw requests, or written agreement that specifies anticipated costs
      • IDIS Activity Set-up sheet and draw record
      • Cost allocation worksheet, if applicable

               HUD Checklist 7-5 Selected Excerpts                                     Identified Problems

 40. Based upon a review of the project file, is the               No or insufficient documentation of costs
     documentation being maintained sufficient to demonstrate
                                                                   No evidence that program administrator evaluated cost
     compliance with the following HOME requirement: Eligible       eligibility
     costs? [HOME: 24 CFR 92.206; ADDI: 24 CFR 92.602(b)]
        Yes     No




176                                                                                                             Monitoring HOME
 41. Are all costs detailed on the cost estimate and in the           Ineligible costs paid with HOME funds
     construction contract eligible under the HOME or ADDI
                                                                      Ineligible costs included in cost estimate or construction
     Program? [HOME: 24 CFR 92.206; ADDI: 92.602(b)]                  contract
      Yes       No




                                      TIP
                                               When Ineligible Costs Are Paid with HOME Funds

                                             If HOME funds have been used to pay ineligible
                                             costs, these funds must be repaid.



 42. In projects with a mix of assisted and non-assisted units,       No documentation of what costs were paid by HOME
     did HOME funds pay only for costs associated with the
                                                                      Costs associated with HOME units were calculated wrong
     assisted units?                                                  and HOME paid for non-assisted units
      Yes       No                                                  Proration used for projects with non-comparable units
                                                                      Ineligible costs not subtracted before costs or common
                                                                       costs were prorated
                                   Cost Allocation in Projects with a Mix of Assisted and Non-assisted Units
             HOME funds can only be invested in HOME-assisted units. When a project includes a mix of assisted and non-
     TIP




             assisted units and all the units are comparable, costs can be pro-rated to determine the HOME share. If the units
             are not comparable, the actual costs of the HOME-assisted units must be tracked, unit-by-unit. HUD Notice CPD
             98-02, Allocating Costs and Identifying HOME-Assisted Units in Multifamily Projects, issued March 18, 1998, provides
             detailed guidance on how to allocate HOME costs in projects that have a mix of assisted and non-assisted
             units. This Notice is available online at http://www.hud.gov/offices/cpd/affordablehousing/lawsandregs/
             notices/#1997.



2. Cost Reasonableness and Subsidy Layering
Background: All costs paid with HOME or ADDI funds must be reasonable and customary, in accordance with OMB
Circular A-87. Additionally, when HOME or ADDI funds are combined in a project with other public funds, the PJ must
conduct a subsidy layering review to ensure that the PJ does not invest any more HOME or ADDI funds than are necessary
to provide affordable housing.
Regulatory Basis: OMB Circular A-87; HOME: 24 CFR 92.505(a) and 92.250(b); ADDI: 24 CFR 92.616(a)
 Documentation:
    • HUD or other settlement sheet
    • Work write-up and draw requests
    • Subsidy layering policies/procedures
    • Worksheet or form to show the subsidy layering analysis

              HUD Checklist 7-5 Selected Excerpts                                           Identified Problems

 43. Was the amount of assistance provided to the homebuyer           No worksheet or other documentation that identifies costs
     reasonable (i.e., based upon a review of individual financial
                                                                      No worksheet to show determination that only the amount
     circumstances) [OMB A-87, Attachment A, Section C.2)]             of HOME and/or ADDI funds necessary to make a unit
      Yes       No                                                   affordable are provided




Chapter 5: Homebuyer Programs                                                                                                       177
 44. If unit was rehabilitated or newly constructed, do the          No in-house cost estimate prepared
     costs appear to be reasonable? [OMB A-87, Attachment A,
                                                                     No evidence that bids were compared to the in-house cost
     Section C.2)]                                                    estimate and determined to be within a reasonable range.
        Yes      No                                                Bid accepted was more than 10% higher than the in-house
                                                                      cost estimate, and the files did not contain an adequate
                                                                      justification

 45. If more than one source of public funds (Federal, State, and    No documentation of a subsidy layering review
     local) was provided, did the PJ perform a subsidy layering
                                                                     Subsidy layering review was not conducted in a manner
     review to ensure that excessive subsidy was not provided?        consistent with the PJ’s subsidy layering policy
     [HOME: 24 CFR 92.250(b); ADDI: 24 CFR 92.612(a)]
                                                                     Subsidy layering review reflected that the project did not
                                                                      need the amount of HOME/ADDI funds provided to the
                                                                      project



3. Form of Assistance
Background: HOME and ADDI funds may be provided in a variety of forms, including:
      • Grants
      • Deferred-payment loans
      • Non-interest-bearing loans
      • Interest-bearing loans
      • Interest subsidies
      • Loan guarantees.
If the PJ uses a different form of assistance, it must be specified in its Consolidated Plan or annual action plan and must be
approved by HUD.
See Attachment 3-D, found at the end of Chapter 3, for a description of each form of eligible assistance.
Regulatory Basis: HOME: 24 CFR 92.205(b); ADDI: 24 CFR 92.602(c)
 Documentation:
      • Written agreement and, if applicable, loan or grant documents
      • Annual action plan that specifies other forms of assistance, if applicable, and evidence of HUD approval

               HUD Checklist 7-5 Selected Excerpts                                        Identified Problems

 46. Was the subsidy provided in an eligible form of investment      Ineligible forms of assistance provided
     (i.e., equity investments, interest bearing or non-interest
     bearing loans or advances, interest subsidies, deferred
     payment loans, grants or loan guarantees)? [HOME: 24
     CFR 92.205(b)(1); ADDI: 24 CFR 92.602(c)]
        Yes      No

 47. If the subsidy was provided in a form not listed above, was     “Other” form of assistance not in annual action plan or not
     that form approved by HUD? [HOME: 24 CFR 92.205(b)(1);           approved by HUD
     ADDI: 24 CFR 92.602(b)]
        Yes      No




178                                                                                                                Monitoring HOME
NOTES on Eligible and Reasonable Costs




E. Property Standards
The program administrator must have a system in place to ensure that HOME property-related requirements are met,
including:
       1. Property standards
       2. Work write-ups
       3. Inspections
       4. Lead-based paint requirements
       5. Onsite inspections for rehabilitation or construction quality

1. Property Standards
Background: Properties that are acquired, rehabilitated, or newly constructed with HOME funds must meet certain prop­
erty standards; if ADDI funds are used for acquisition and rehabilitation, these properties must also meet certain standards.
Requirements for lead-based paint are covered later in this chapter.
Properties that are rehabilitated (HOME and ADDI) or newly constructed (HOME) must meet:
       • State and local codes; or, in their absence, one of three national model codes (ICBO, BOCA, SBCCI) or the CABO
         one- or two-family code, or the Minimum Property Standards (MPS) at 24 CFR 200.925 or 200.9261
       • PJ’s written rehabilitation standard, for rehabilitation only


1
    Since the promulgation of the HOME Program regulations, these code issuing agencies have merged to form the International Code Council (ICC).
    The model codes used for the HOME Program are no longer being updated. In their stead, the ICC has issued the International Building Code. HUD
    will consider whether changes to the HOME regulations incorporating the International Building Code are appropriate. The HOME Program web
    page provides updated information on all HOME requirements. (See http://www.hud.gov/offices/cpd/affordablehousing/programs/home/index.
    cfm.) For more information about the International Building Code, see http://www.iccsafe.org.



Chapter 5: Homebuyer Programs                                                                                                                179
      • International Energy Conservation Code (formerly known as the Model Energy Code), for new construction only
      • Accessibility requirements of 24 CFR Part 8 (also known as “Section 504”) and 24 CFR 100.205 (Fair Housing Act
        accessibility standards).
Properties that are acquired without construction or rehabilitation (HOME and ADDI) must meet:
      • Applicable State and local housing quality standards and codes; or, in their absence, the Housing Quality Standards
        (HQS) in 24 CFR 982.401.
Manufactured housing must meet:
      • Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards established in 24 CFR Part 3280
      • State or local laws or codes; or, in their absence, the manufactured housing unit must be installed in accordance with
        the manufacturer’s written instructions.
Regulatory Basis: HOME: 24 CFR 92.251; ADDI: 24 CFR 92.612(b)
 Documentation:
      • Inspection forms
      • Work write-ups and/or project plans and specifications
      • Program policies and procedures that describe: (1) The applicable PJ property standards and codes for acquisition,
        new construction, rehabilitation; (2) The written rehabilitation standard (for rehabilitation); and (3) The standards for
        health and safety violations
      • Written agreement with homebuyer, if homebuyer conducts rehabilitation work on property

               HUD Checklist 7-5 Selected Excerpts                                        Identified Problems

 48. If direct homebuyer assistance only was provided (no            No inspection report or other evidence that the property
     construction), did the property meet applicable property         was inspected for compliance with applicable codes and
     standards at time of transfer to the homebuyer? [HOME:           standards (or HQS) prior to transfer to the homebuyer
     24 CFR 92.251(a)(2); ADDI: 24 CFR 92.612(b)]                    Applicable standard not met
        Yes     No        N/A                                     Property inspected for compliance with the wrong codes and
                                                                      standards

 49. If the project involved rehabilitation, was the work            PJ’s written rehabilitation standard not met
     performed in accordance with the PJ’s written rehabilitation
                                                                     No work write-ups or specifications
     standards? [HOME: 24 CFR 92.251(a)(1); ADDI: 24 CFR
     92.612(b)]                                                      No evidence that work write-up/specifications were
                                                                      reviewed and approved for compliance with the PJ’s written
        Yes     No        N/A                                      rehabilitation standard
                                                                     No inspection to verify that completed work complies with
                                                                      PJ’s written rehabilitation standard

 50. If only direct homebuyer assistance was provided and the        Property failed health and safety inspection but was
     homebuyer was to perform necessary rehabilitation: Was           transferred to the homebuyer
     the property free of health and safety violations before        No inspection form to show that property was free of health
     occupancy? [HOME: 24 CFR 92.251(b)(3); ADDI: 24 CFR              and safety violations prior to transfer to the homebuyer
     92.612(b)]
                                                                     Property was not free of health and safety violations within
        Yes     No        N/A                                      six months of transfer




180                                                                                                                  Monitoring HOME
 51. If only direct homebuyer assistance was provided and the        No agreement with the homebuyer
     homebuyer was to perform necessary rehabilitation: Does
                                                                     No deadline for work to be completed in agreement with the
     the agreement require completion of rehabilitation within        homebuyer
     24 months or, if ADDI funds are used for rehabilitation,
     within one year? [HOME: 24 CFR 92.251(b)(3); ADDI: 24
     CFR 92.612(b)]
      Yes       No        N/A

 52. If direct homebuyer assistance was provided and the             Property rehabilitation not completed within 24 months
     homebuyer was to perform necessary rehabilitation: Was           (HOME) or 12 months (ADDI)
     the required rehabilitation work completed within 24            No inspection report to show the property complies with
     months, or if ADDI funds are used for rehabilitation, within     applicable standards upon completion, and within 24
     one year? [HOME: 24 CFR 92.251(b)(3); ADDI: 24 CFR               months of transfer
     92.612(b)] 
      Yes       No        N/A

 53. If the homebuyer project involved rehabilitation or new         Property did not meet the applicable codes and standards
     construction, did the unit meet the applicable property          upon completion
     standards upon completion?                                     No work write-ups or specifications
      Yes       No        N/A                                     No review and approval of work write-ups and specifications
                                                                      to show compliance with applicable codes and standards
                                                                     No inspection forms to show that completed work complied
                                                                      with applicable codes and standards upon completion




2. Work Write-ups
Background: All projects that involve construction activities must have work write-ups or cost estimates. A good work write­
up/cost estimate should include:
    • A detailed description of the work to be performed and of construction items necessary to: (1) Bring a unit up to code
      (rehabilitation), or (2) Build to specifications (new construction)
    • Specifications of the type of repairs, their location and scope, the method and quality of materials to be used, and any
      special requirements
    • Accurate cost estimates that can be used to evaluate bids from contractors and determine whether the bids are
      reasonable.
Regulatory Basis: Recommended
 Documentation:
    • Work write-up or cost estimate
    • Initial inspection
    • PJ written property standards

              HUD Checklist 7-5 Selected Excerpts                                        Identified Problems

 54. If the project involved rehabilitation [and/or new              No work write-up or cost estimate
     construction], does the project file include the following:
     Work write-up/cost estimate?
      Yes       No




Chapter 5: Homebuyer Programs                                                                                                    181
 55. If the project involved rehabilitation [and/or new                No work write-up or an initial inspection report
     construction], does the work write-up: Include all work
                                                                       Work write-up or cost estimate does not include all the work
     noted on the initial inspection report?                            noted on the initial inspection report
        Yes      No

 56. If the project involved rehabilitation, does the work write-up    No work write-up or cost estimate
     reflect the PJ’s written rehabilitation standards? [24 CFR
                                                                       Work write-up or cost estimate does not reflect the PJ’s
     92.251(a)(1)]                                                      written rehabilitation standard
        Yes      No

 57. If the project involved rehabilitation, was the work write-up     Work write-up or cost estimate not sufficiently detailed to
     written with enough detail to enable a contractor to provide       enable a contractor to provide a reliable bid. Evidence of
     a reliable bid? [24 CFR 92.505(a) and 24 CFR 85.36(c)(3)           this deficiency in the work write up includes:
     (i) and 85.36(d)(2)(i)(A)]                                            Too many change orders on the project
        Yes      No                                                      Submitted bids varied widely, with more than 10%
                                                                            variance from the PJ’s cost estimate
                                                                           Other (Specify: _________________________________)



3. Inspections
Background: For acquisition only projects, there should be at least one inspection form that demonstrates that the unit
meets the PJ’s written property standards. However, if the inspection identifies items that need to be addressed, there should
be a follow-up inspection that confirms the work was completed and the unit meets property standards.
For projects that involve construction (rehabilitation or new construction), three types of inspections are necessary:
      • Initial inspections to identify conditions within the unit that do not meet applicable property standards or codes and
        must be addressed in rehabilitation.
      • Payment/Progress inspections to verify that work requested for payment is completed according to the PJ’s property
        standards. It is a good business practice to retain a small amount (typically 10 percent) with each progress payment
        until all work is completed and all contract close-out documentation has been received.
      • Final inspections to verify that all work specified in the write-up and/or construction contract is performed properly
        and that the applicable property standards and codes are met. If an inspection reveals that additional work is required,
        a detailed list of the remaining work (a “punch list") must be prepared. The PJ must conduct a final re-inspection to
        verify that punch list items are completed. Where building code inspections are required, the building code inspectors’
        reports or other documentation from the jurisdiction indicating that the work meets codes/standards should also be
        included in the project file.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.505(a) and 24 CFR 85.36
 Documentation:
      • Initial inspection report
      • Progress inspection report(s)
      • Final inspection report
      • Work write-up and/or construction contract with final approved bid

               HUD Checklist 7-5 Selected Excerpts                                          Identified Problems

 58. If the project involved rehabilitation, does the project file     No initial inspection report
     include the following: Documentation of initial inspection?
                                                                       Unsatisfactory initial inspection report —fails to identify
     [24 CFR 92.505(a) and 24 CFR 85.36(f)]                             work that must be done to bring unit up to applicable
        Yes      No      N/A                                         property standards and codes



182                                                                                                                   Monitoring HOME
 59. If the project involved rehabilitation [or new construction],    No progress inspection report(s) that corresponds to each
     does the project file include the following: Documentation        payment request
     of progress inspections? [24 CFR 92.505(a) and 24 CFR            No retainage held (recommended)
     85.36(b)(2)]
                                                                      Unsatisfactory progress inspection report(s)—unable to
       Yes      No       N/A                                        verify that billed work complies with applicable codes and
                                                                       standards

 60. If the project included rehabilitation [or new construction],    No final inspection report
     does the final inspection confirm that: All contracted work
                                                                      Unsatisfactory final inspection report(s)-- unable to verify
     was completed? [24 CFR 92.205(a) and 24 CFR 85.36(b)              that all contracted work was completed satisfactorily
     (2)]
                                                                      No evidence of a re-inspection to verify completion of punch
       Yes      No       N/A                                        list
                                                                      Punch list items not completed and final payment was made
                                                                       to contractor

 61. If the project included rehabilitation [or new construction],    No final inspection report
     does the final inspection confirm that: The property met all
                                                                      Unsatisfactory final inspection report(s)—fails to confirm
     applicable property standards at completion? [HOME: 24            that work was completed up to the PJ’s property codes and
     CFR 92.251(a); ADDI: 24 CFR 92.612(b)]                            standards
       Yes      No

 62. Were inspections conducted by trained inspection staff that      Unqualified staff conducted inspections
     is familiar with applicable codes and property standards?
      
       Yes      No



4. Lead-based Paint Requirements
Background: Projects involving acquisition and/or acquisition and rehabilitation of units built prior to 1978 are subject to
certain requirements related to lead-based paint.
For rehabilitation, the “level of assistance” dictates the required type of lead hazard evaluation and reduction. This number
is determined by calculating the lesser of the Federal funds per unit or the rehabilitation hard costs per unit (exclusive of the
lead hazard evaluation and reduction costs). Depending on the level of assistance, the monitor needs to ensure the correct
level of lead hazard evaluation and reduction was conducted.
The monitor should ensure the following is in the file:
     • If the level of assistance was under $5,000, documentation of a paint test of disturbed surfaces, notice of lead hazard
       evaluation, evidence of paint repaired by qualified workers who followed safe work practices, clearance, and notice of
       lead hazard reduction activities before reoccupancy.
     • If the level of assistance was between $5,000–$25,000, documentation of a risk assessment or an inspection that
       presumed there was lead-based paint in the home, notice of lead hazard evaluation or presumption, evidence of
       interim controls or standard treatments by qualified workers who followed safe work practices, clearance, and notice of
       lead hazard reduction activities before reoccupancy.
     • If the level of assistance over $25,000, documentation of a risk assessment or an inspection that presumed there was
       lead-based paint in the home, notice of lead hazard evaluation or presumption, evidence of abatement activities by
       qualified workers who followed abatement practices, clearance, and notice of lead hazard reduction activities before
       reoccupancy.
If lead hazard reduction activities occurred, the file must contain the results of a clearance test as well as a lead hazard reduc­
tion notice.
     • The clearance examination report must indicate that the home passed clearance. If not, the unit should have been
       cleaned and clearance performed again until the unit passed.


Chapter 5: Homebuyer Programs                                                                                                         183
      • The PJ monitor should check the date of the notice to ensure it was distributed to the homebuyer within 15 days of
        the PJ receiving the clearance results.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR Part 35 and HOME: 24 CFR 92.355; ADDI: 24 CFR 92.614(a)(4)


 If the project is a new construction project, or if the property being rehabilitated was constructed in 1978 or after, the
 PJ monitor can skip this section and proceed to Subsection 5, Onsite Inspections for Rehabilitation and Construction
 Quality.
 For properties constructed before 1978, this checklist identifies the key lead-based paint requirements and
 documentation required. For a complete review of compliance with the lead-based paint requirements, monitors must
 complete the Lead Hazards Monitoring Guidance for Rehabilitation (HUD Checklist Exhibits 24-1, 24-2, or 24-3).


 Documentation:
      • Guideform Notice – Disclosures to Seller with Voluntary, Arm's Length Purchase Offer
      • Signed Lead-based Paint Pamphlet and/or lead-based paint notice
      • Signed Notice of Lead Hazard Evaluation or Notice of Presumption
      • Risk assessment, if applicable
      • Evidence of contractor qualifications
      • Clearance test, if applicable
      • Documentation that Notice of Lead Hazard Reduction Activities has been provided (if applicable)
      • Abatement report, if applicable

               HUD Checklist 7-5 Selected Excerpts                                     Identified Problems

 63. If the project was constructed before 1978, did the PJ
     comply with lead-safe housing requirements at 24 CFR
     Part 35? (Complete Lead Hazards Monitoring Guidance for
     Rehabilitation HUD Checklist Exhibits 24-1, 24-2 or 24-3 to
     answer this question.) [HOME: 24 CFR 92.355; ADDI: 24
     CFR 92.614(a)(4)]
        Yes      No      N/A

 64. Does the project file include: Lead-based Paint notice (if     No documentation that notices were provided
     pre-1978 property)? [24 CFR 92.508.(a)(3)(iv)]
        Yes      No      N/A



5. Onsite Inspections for Rehabilitation and Construction Quality
Background: Inspecting construction work for quality and for compliance with property standards requires skills in those
areas, but the PJ monitor can use a common sense approach to make some basic determinations:
      • Are the work items mentioned in the file present on the job? Do they appear to have been completed in a way the
        monitor would accept in her or his own home?
      • Do costs seem reasonable? Are they allowable under HOME?
      • What is the homebuyer’s evaluation of the work? (Expect that some homebuyers will have continuing expectations
        that are not realistic.)
When PJ monitors encounter work or costs about which they have questions, they should seek the advice of an experienced


184                                                                                                           Monitoring HOME
construction inspector. When visiting homes, PJ monitors should be careful not to create or add to problems between home-
buyers, owners/sponsors/developers (if applicable), or contractors.
Regulatory Basis: HOME: 24 CFR 92.251; ADDI: 24 CFR 92.612(b)
 Documentation:
    • Homebuyer satisfaction survey
    • Inspection forms that evidence that the unit meets the PJ’s property and written rehabilitation standards

              HUD Checklist 7-5 Selected Excerpts                                     Identified Problems

 65. If the project has been selected for an onsite inspection
     to examine the quality of the rehabilitation [and/or new
     construction work, the PJ monitor or inspector] should
     perform a walk-through of the property with the initial
     inspection, the work write-up, and the final inspection
     report.

 66. Based upon the observable conditions, have the               No deficiencies corrected
     deficiencies identified in the initial inspection report
                                                                  Some, but not all, deficiencies corrected
     been corrected? [HOME: 24 CFR 92.251; ADDI: 24 CFR
     92.612(b)]                                                   Deficiencies corrected, but new deficiencies noted
      Yes       No

 67. Is the homebuyer satisfied with the rehabilitation?
      Yes       No

 68. Is the property free of all obvious property standards       These violations remain: ______________________________
     violations? [HOME: 24 CFR 92.251; ADDI: 24 CFR
     92.612(b)]                                                  _______________________________________________________
      Yes       No
                                                                 _______________________________________________________

                                                                 _______________________________________________________

NOTES on Property Standards




Chapter 5: Homebuyer Programs                                                                                            185
F. Contractor Selection
Background: HOME-funded construction work should be performed by qualified contractors at a reasonable cost. Depend­
ing on the program design, the contractor that carries out HOME-funded construction or rehabilitation work may be
selected by either: (1) the program administrator (PJ, subrecipient, State recipient, or contractor); (2) the developer; or (3) the
homebuyer.
When a PJ, State recipient, or subrecipient selects the contractor, then that entity must comply with Federal procurement
rules regarding competitive bidding:
      • For bids estimated at over $100,000, it must follow requirements for solicitation by sealed bid, including the issuance
        of a public invitation for bids and making an effort to solicit more than one bid.
      • For bids estimated below $100,000, it must follow informal procurement for small purchase procedures with solicita­
        tion of several price quotes, if possible.
      • It must document the reasons each contractor is not selected and retain the documentation in the files.
When a contractor, developer, or homebuyer selects the contractor, the Federal competitive bidding requirements do not
apply. However, a cost reasonableness test must be applied. A staff member of the program administrator who is familiar with
the property and with local construction costs and methods should review the prospective bids before a contractor is selected.
Some PJs maintain a list of “pre-qualified” contractors. The PJ should have written standards that specify the minimum quali­
fications and experience a contractor needs in order to be included on the list. Opportunities for contractors to be added to
the list should be available on an ongoing basis.
The requirements for State PJs may vary, as the State procurement rules apply.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.505 and 24 CFR 85.36
 Documentation:
      • Evidence the contractor is not on the excluded parties list at time of project commitment
      • Bidding policies and procedures
      • Documentation that selected contractor(s) has met eligibility requirements of the program administrator
      • Documentation of the contractor selection process, including copies of bids collected and reviewed and worksheets/
        notes of bid review
      • Worksheet or notes showing that costs were determined to be reasonable and eligible

               HUD Checklist 7-5 Selected Excerpts                                        Identified Problems

 69. Does the project file include verification of contractor       No documentation that excluded parties list was checked
     eligibility, e.g. that awards were not made to any party
                                                                    Excluded parties list checked after issuance/approval of
     excluded, disqualified or otherwise ineligible (i.e.,           contract
     suspension, debarment or limited denial of participation)
     for Federal procurement or nonprocurement programs?            Contractor is excluded but selected anyway
     [HOME: 24 CFR 92.350(a); ADDI: 24 CFR 92.614(a)(1)]
                                                                                     Verifying Contractor Eligibility
                                                                 TIP




        Yes     No
                                                                       The program administrator must verify that contractors
                                                                       are eligible to participate in Federal contracts by
                                                                       checking the excluded parties listing at the website
                                                                       http://www.epls.gov/index.html. A copy of the
                                                                       printout from this website should be retained in the file.




186                                                                                                                     Monitoring HOME
 70. Was the rationale for the selection of the contractor             No justification of contractor selection
     documented? [24 CFR 92.505(a) and 24 CFR 85.36(c)(9)]
                                                                       Winning and rejected bids not in file
      Yes      No

 71. If the PJ [or State recipient or subrecipient] selected the       No documentation of the contractor selection process
     contractor, was a competitive bid process used? [24 CFR
                                                                       Competitive bidding not used
     85.36(c) and (d); HOME: 24 CFR 92.505(a); ADDI: 24 CFR
     92.616(f)]
      Yes      No

 72. If the homebuyer solicited bids, was more than one bid            No documentation of other bids retained
     solicited?
                                                                       Only one bid solicited
      Yes      No
                                                              Assessing Contractor Participation
                             TIP

                                    The PJ monitor should informally assess whether the program involves an
                                    appropriate number of contractors given its volume. A disproportionately small
                                    number of contractors involved in the program can impact program performance
                                    and should be raised as a concern for further investigation.

 73. Was the accepted bid within 10% of the program                    No or insufficient justification for selecting a bid far above or
     administrator’s cost estimate?                                    below cost estimate
      Yes      No                                                    No cost estimate done
                                                                       No comparison of the bid amount to the cost estimate

 74. Does the file contain evidence the program admin-istrator         No evidence that contractor qualifications were reviewed
     verified the quality of work, references, licenses, and
                                                                       Review of contractor qualifications was cursory and
     insurance coverage of the selected contractor?                    insufficient
      Yes      No                                                    Insufficient justification for contractor selection
                                                      Reviewing Contractor Qualifications
                   Prior to selection, the PJ should review contractor qualifications:
             TIP




                   • Proof of bonding and insurance (typically required by PJ)
                   • Applicable certifications, licenses, and other documentation of qualifications (e.g., Lead-safe Work
                     Practices, Lead-based Paint Abatement Supervisor, etc.)
                   • Photos of past jobs
                   • Names and contact information of references and past customers, and notes about reference
                     checks
                   • Documentation or notes about past experience with PJ.


NOTES on Contractor Selection




Chapter 5: Homebuyer Programs                                                                                                         187
G. Construction Management
The program administrator must monitor and document its oversight of the construction process to ensure that the following
construction management requirements are met:
      1.Pre-construction conference
      2.Construction contract
      3.Progress inspections
      4.Appropriate approvals
      5.Change orders
      6.Lien releases and warranty information

1. Pre-construction Conference
Background: The pre-construction conference is a recommended step to ensure that the owner and the contractor have
shared expectations about the work to be completed, roles and responsibilities, and the rehabilitation or construction pro­
cess. The conference should be conducted onsite with the owner and the contractor before the execution of any construction
contract.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.505(a), and 24 CFR 85.36(b)(2)
 Documentation:
      • Pre-construction attendance sheet and notes/minutes

               HUD Checklist 7-5 Selected Excerpts                                  Identified Problems

 75. Was a pre-construction conference conducted and             No pre-construction conference held
     documented in the file? [24 CFR 92.505(a) and 24 CFR
                                                                 No minutes/notes from conference
     85.36(b)(2)] 
        Yes     No



2. Construction Contract
Background: Prior to the start of construction, the owner and contractor must execute a construction or rehabilitation con­
tract and the program administrator should subsequently issue a notice to proceed.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.505(a), 92.508(a)(3)(ii) and 24 CFR 85.20(b)(6)
 Documentation:
      • Construction contract
      • Notice to proceed


188                                                                                                        Monitoring HOME
              HUD Checklist 7-5 Selected Excerpts                                         Identified Problems

 76. Did the homebuyer and contractor execute a construction       No contract on file
     or rehabilitation contract? [24 CFR 92.505(a) and 24 CFR
                                                                   Contract not properly executed
     85.20(b)(6)]
       Yes      No

 77. Did the program administrator issue a notice to proceed       No notice to proceed issued
     prior to construction start? 
                                                                   No evidence of review that project is ready to go prior to
       Yes      No                                                issuance of notice to proceed
                                                                   Notice to proceed was issued before construction or
                                                                    rehabilitation contract was executed and before project was
                                                                    ready-to-go



3. Progress Inspections
Background: Progress inspections document that the work being done adheres to the construction or rehabilitation contract
and all applicable codes and standards are met prior to contractor payment.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.505(a) and 24 CFR 85.36(b)(2)
 Documentation:
    • Progress/payment inspection reports (log or notes)

              HUD Checklist 7-5 Selected Excerpts                                         Identified Problems

 78. Were progress inspections of the project performed prior      Inspections not conducted prior to payment
     to approving the contractor’s request for payment? [24 CFR
                                                                   Approval for payments not signed by all involved parties
     92.505(a) and 24 CFR 85.36(b)(2)]                              (contractor, PJ, and/or developer and homebuyer)
       Yes      No

 79. Were inspection reports on file for these project             No inspection reports on file
     milestones? 
                                                                   Insufficient number of inspection reports
      Payment requests                                            Inspection reports missing for these areas:
      Change orders
      Client complaints                                            _____________________________________________________

      Indications of project delays
      Critical milestones in the rehabilitation/construction
       process (e.g., before drywall covers the electrical,
       plumbing, framing rough-in; or before concrete covers
       the foundation trench and reinforcing bar)



4. Appropriate Approvals
Background: Prior to the final payment to the contractor and the release of liens, the program administrator should verify
that the owner found that the work was completed satisfactorily, if applicable.
Regulatory Basis: Recommended
 Documentation:
    • Documentation of owner approval (signature) on final payment request/draw or similar documentation




Chapter 5: Homebuyer Programs                                                                                                    189
               HUD Checklist 7-5 Selected Excerpts                                           Identified Problems

 80. Did the owner approve final payment to the contractor?              Final payment was made, but owner did not sign final
        Yes      No                                                     payment request



5. Change Orders
Background: Any change in the scope of work or budget for a project must be documented and approved by the PJ or
program administrator as a change order before the work is initiated. When the program is administered by a State recipient
or subrecipient, it is recommended that the PJ retain the right to approve change orders that have a budgetary impact on the
project.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.505(a), 92.508(a)(3)(ii), and 24 CFR 85.20(b)(6) and 85.36(f )(1)
 Documentation:
      • Change order policies and procedures
      • Change orders with backup documentation
      • Documentation that costs were reviewed for eligibility and reasonableness prior to approval of change order

               HUD Checklist 7-5 Selected Excerpts                                           Identified Problems

 81. Did the program administrator and the applicable parties            No change order on file for each change in scope of work
     review and approve change orders for any changes in the              that occurred
     scope of work? [24 CFR 92.505(a) and 24 CFR 85.20(b)(6)             Insufficient backup documentation or justification for change
     and 85.36(f)(1)]                                                    orders
        Yes      No                                                    Revised scope of work does not meet applicable codes
                          Justifying Change Orders                       Program administrator did not review and approve change
          Prior to approval, the program administrator should             order(s) prior to work being done
  TIP




          review change order requests to determine that:
          (1) The costs are reasonable and eligible
          (2) The work is needed to meet property codes and
              standards
          (3) With the additional costs the project is still within
              HOME’s per unit subsidy limits [221(d)(3) limits].

 82. Is there a change order on file for any work that was (1)           Contractor paid more than the original contract amount, but
     Completed but not in the original contract, or (2) Paid for          no change orders or justification on file
     (to the contractor) above the original contract amount?            No change order for work elements completed by contractor
        Yes      No       N/A                                          that were not in original contract
                                       TIP




                                                             Unauthorized Expenditures
                                              For any costs above the amount of the construction
                                              contract, if the expenditures were unauthorized
                                              and paid for with HOME or ADDI funds, HUD may
                                              determine that the PJ must repay those funds.



6. Lien Releases and Warranty Information
Background: A release of liens signed by all parties must be executed upon completion of the construction/rehabilitation
work. The contractor should provide all warranties or affidavits to the property owner/homebuyer. Original warranty docu­
ments should be provided to the homebuyer and the program administrator should maintain copies in the project files.



190                                                                                                                   Monitoring HOME
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.505(a) and 24 CFR 85.36(b)(2)
 Documentation:
    • Lien release form signed by the PJ and/or property owner/homebuyer
    • Copies of warranty information and documentation that warranties were provided to the homebuyer (e.g., signature
      on form indicating receipt)

             HUD Checklist 7-5 Selected Excerpts                                       Identified Problems

 83. Does the file contain: Final lien release? [24 CFR         No release of liens
     92.505(a) and 24 CFR 85.36(b)(2)]
                                                                Release of liens not signed by PJ and owner/homebuyer
      Yes      No

 84. Does the file contain: Contractor warranty or equipment    No documentation about the contractor warranty and/or
     warranty? [24 CFR 92.505(a) and 24 CFR 85.36(b)(2)]         equipment warranty(ies)
      Yes      No                                             Warranties not provided to the homebuyer


NOTES on Construction Management




H. Loan Processing and Servicing
Program administrators have a great deal of flexibility in the loan processing and servicing functions of homebuyer pro­
grams. However, there are several HOME requirements concerning loan documentation, repayment, and use of loan funds,
including:
    1.Underwriting procedures
    2.Loan approval

Chapter 5: Homebuyer Programs                                                                                            191
      3.Loan documentation

 If the HOME funds were not provided in the form of a loan, then the PJ monitor can skip this section and proceed to
 Subsection I, Long-Term Monitoring for Occupancy.


1. Underwriting Procedures
Background: The HOME Program does not establish specific underwriting practices or criteria. However, the HOME Pro­
gram requires the PJ to ensure that all costs are necessary and reasonable.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.505 and OMB Circular A-87
 Documentation:
      • PJ’s or program administrator’s program policies/procedures regarding loan underwriting
      • Worksheet or form that shows how the loan amount was calculated
      • Letters of acceptance/rejection of loan request

               HUD Checklist 7-5 Selected Excerpts                                    Identified Problems

 85. Does the PJ/State recipient/subrecipient/contractor         No underwriting procedures
     have program policies and procedures in regards to
                                                                 Underwriting procedures are not comprehensive or do
     underwriting?                                               not ensure that all projects are evaluated in a consistent
        Yes     No                                              manner

 86. Has program administrator followed the program’s            PJ did not give State recipient, subrecipient, or contractor
     underwriting policies and procedures?                       underwriting guidance
        Yes     No                                             Program administrator did not follow underwriting guidance

 87. Does the file contain a worksheet or form that shows how    No documentation on how loan amount was determined
     the loan amount was calculated? 
                                                                 Errors made in loan amount calculations
        Yes     No                                             Underwriting policy not followed



2. Loan Approval
Background: The PJ monitor should review the program administrator’s loan approval process to determine if it provides
adequate information to the homebuyer. When a loan is approved or rejected, homebuyers should receive full information
about their status (i.e., approved or not approved) and, if applicable, the terms of the assistance and their payment obliga­
tions. At the time the loan documents are executed, the PJ must provide truth-in-lending materials to the borrower and fully
explain the borrower’s rights to cancel the assistance. Loan documents signed by the homebuyer should also be in project/case
files.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.205(b)(1), 92.505(a), 92.508(a)(3)(ii), and 24 CFR 85.20(b)
 Documentation:
      • Approval determination (and date)
      • Truth-in-lending notice
      • Letter of acceptance or rejection of loan




192                                                                                                             Monitoring HOME
              HUD Checklist 7-5 Selected Excerpts                                           Identified Problems

 88. Is there a date on the approval determination?                  No approval determination letter
       Yes      No                                                  No date on approval determination


 89. Was assistance provided within six months of the income          Income-eligibility determination was not current
     determination (or, for lease-purchase, when the lease-
     purchase agreement was signed; or, for assistance to
     purchase a home that will be constructed, when the
     contract was signed)? [HOME: 24 CFR 92.203(d)(2),
     92.254(a)(7), 92.254(a)(8); ADDI: 24 CFR 92.610(c)] 
       Yes      No

 90. Are there acceptance and rejection letters in regards to the     No acceptance and/or rejection letters on file
     loan in the file? 
                                                                      Acceptance letters not clear about terms of loan
       Yes      No                                                  Rejection letters do not state reason for rejection

 91. Is there a copy of the loan agreement on file and are the        No loan agreement on file
     terms clear? 
                                                                      Loan agreement not satisfactory [does not contain required
       Yes      No                                                   provisions per 24 CRF 92.504(c)(5)]
                                                                      Loan terms unclear

 92. Is there a copy of the truth-in-lending notice in the file?     Truth-in-lending notice not on file
       Yes      No




3. Loan Documentation
Background: Loan documents must be consistent, complete, properly executed, properly recorded, and reflect all applicable
HOME and other Federal requirements. In addition, HOME Program rules require that the homebuyer signs a written
agreement with the PJ, State recipient, or subrecipient that includes the required provisions. The written agreement must be
executed before any HOME funds may be dispersed.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.205(b)(1), 92.505(a), 92.508(a)(3)(ii), and 24 CFR 85.20(b)
 Documentation:
    • Signed loan agreement
    • Deed of trust or note and mortgage and evidence documents were recorded with the local government
    • Documentation of additional funding sources (such copy of application, budget documents, financial records indicat­
      ing the HOME portion of payments)
    • Executed written agreement
    • Deed restriction (required when using resale provisions; recommended when using recapture provisions)
    • Truth-in-Lending Disclosure Statement
    • Notice of right to cancel or right of rescission

              HUD Checklist 7-5 Selected Excerpts                                           Identified Problems

 93. Did the homebuyer sign the loan agreement? [24 CFR               No loan agreement on file
     92.205(b)(1); 92.505(a); and 24 CFR 85.20(b)(2) and
                                                                      Homebuyer did not sign loan agreement
     85.20(b)(6)] 
       Yes      No



Chapter 5: Homebuyer Programs                                                                                                  193
 94. Were loan documents recorded? [24 CFR 92.505(a) and 24      No evidence that documents were recorded
     CFR 85.20(b)(3)] 
        Yes    No

 95. If funding sources in addition to HOME and/or ADDI were     No documentation about other sources
     used, do project records include documentation of the
     source and application of funds for the project? [24 CFR
     92.508(a)(3)(ii); 92.505(a); and 24 CFR 85.20(b)] 
        Yes    No      N/A

 96. Regarding legal documents, are closing documents in the    Missing documents:
     file? [24 CFR 92.508(a)(3)(ii)]                               Written agreement
        Yes    No                                                 Deed of trust or promissory note
                                                                    Signed and notarized mortgage
                                                                    Truth-in-Lending Disclosure Statement
                                                                    Right to cancel (right to rescission)



NOTES on Loan Processing and Servicing




I. Monitoring for Long-term Occupancy
Background: The PJ is required to ensure that the resale or recapture provisions are met, if the housing is sold during the
period of affordability. Long-term or ongoing monitoring for principal residency is recommended for homebuyer programs.
Regulatory Basis: Recommended
 Documentation:
      • Written agreement with the homebuyer


194                                                                                                          Monitoring HOME
    • Documentation of residency status (e.g., utility bills, copy of annual insurance policy statement, or other)

             HUD Checklist 7-5 Selected Excerpts                                            Identified Problems

 97. To monitor long-term occupancy, is there evidence in the          No documentation
     file that the program administrator verified the homebuyer’s
                                                                       Initial buyer no longer resides at property
     principal residency? 
      Yes      No                                                 Monitoring Principal Residency
                                   A PJ monitor can verify the homebuyer’s principal residency by reviewing:
                                   • Utility bills. Verify name and address of record for certain utilities.
                            TIP    • Insurance policies. PJs can be listed on an insurance policy as a “loss payee” or
                                     additional parties. This way, the PJ will be notified every time a claim is made or the
                                     policy is renewed or expired. Most insurance declaration pages state whether the
                                     property is the principal residence of the owner, rental property, or not otherwise
                                     occupied by the owner.
                                   • Mail service. Ascertain from the post office whether mail is delivered to the address or
                                     if a forwarding address has been filed.
                                   • Tax records. Check the address to which the bill for the property taxes is mailed.
                                   • Inspection. Perform an inspection to ensure the homebuyer resides at the property.



NOTES on Monitoring for Long-term Occupancy




Chapter 5: Homebuyer Programs                                                                                                   195
                                  Summary of Results: Project Monitoring
                                                 Homebuyer Programs
Instructions: Using the completed checklists, complete the following chart to assist with summarizing the monitoring
results.

                              No Apparent Problems          Problems Identified                  Follow-Up Needed

 A. Participant Eligibility
      1. Income-eligibility

      2. Occupancy

      3. Ownership

      4. Written agreement
         with homebuyer

 B. Property Eligibility
      1. Property types

      2. Minimum and
         maximum per unit
         investment

      3. Maximum property
         value

      4. Environmental
         review

      5. Uniform Relocation
         Act requirements

 C. Resale and
 Recapture Provisions

 D. Eligible and
 Reasonable Costs
      1. HOME eligible
         costs

      2. Cost
         reasonableness
         and subsidy
         layering

      3. Form of
         assistance

 E. Property Standards
      1. Property standards

      2. Work write-ups

      3. Inspections

      4. Lead-based paint
         requirements




196                                                                                                      Monitoring HOME
   5. Onsite inspections
      for rehabilitation/
      construction
      quality

 F. Contractor Selection

 G. Construction
 Management
   1. Pre-construction
      conference

   2. Construction
      contract

   3. Progress
      inspections

   4. Appropriate
      approvals

   5. Change orders

   6. Lien releases
      and warranty
      information

 H. Loan Processing and
 Servicing
   1. Underwriting
      procedures

   2. Loan approval

   3. Loan
      documentation

 I. Long-term Monitoring
 for Occupancy




Chapter 5: Homebuyer Programs   197
Section 3. Review of the Homebuyer Program
 Purpose of the Program Review
The program review helps the PJ assess how well the homebuyer program is operating. Ideally, it is done in conjunction with
the pre-monitoring review of policies and procedures (Section 1 of this chapter) and the project file review (Section 2 of this
chapter). It helps the PJ answer:
      • Does the program administrator comply with HOME requirements in all cases? By looking at the results of the
        project file review, the PJ monitor can identify areas where the program administrator performs consistently and where
        there are recurring problems.
      • Does the program administrator have effective written documentation to support the program? This includes
        the written agreement with the PJ; and policies, procedures, and other program materials that clearly states HOME
        requirements and expectations. By evaluating the program’s written documentation, the PJ monitor can determine if
        the program administrator has adequate systems in place to promote compliance and performance.
 How this Section Is Organized
The checklist in this section summarizes the HOME requirements that are reviewed in detail in Section 1 (pre-monitoring
review) and Section 2 (project review). This section does not use HUD Checklist questions verbatim, as do the other sections
of this chapter. However, this section covers the same HOME requirements and is organized in the same manner as HUD
Checklist Exhibit 7-6, Guide for Review of Homebuyer Programs. It includes following sections:
      A. Participant eligibility
      B. Property eligibility
      C. Property standards
      D. Eligible and reasonable costs
      E. Other requirements
      F. Contractor selection
      G. Construction management                                      How to Use the Program Review
      H. Resale and recapture options                                 The PJ monitor can use the program review in a few
                                                                      different ways:
      I. Written agreements
                                                                      • To consolidate the results of a pre-monitoring
      J. Recordkeeping                                                  and project monitoring review. To do this,
                                                                        complete the questions in Column 2. For any
 Instructions                                                          area where there is a potential problem, also
The PJ monitor should use one copy of the Section 3 checklist to        complete Column 3.
conduct a program review of the homebuyer program administra­         • To conduct a cursory review of the program’s
tor (funded entity or PJ).                                              operations. To do this, complete the questions
                                                                        in Column 3 only. This results in a review of the
Column 1, “HOME Requirement,” identifies the HOME require­
                                                                        written documentation and program policies and
ment under review.
                                                                        procedures that constitute the foundation of the
In columns 2a, 2b, and 2c, “Program Implementation,” the PJ             program’s operation.
monitor summarizes its findings of the project monitoring review      • To interview staff. To do this, ask the interviewee
and indicates how often the program administrator effectively met       how the requirement specified in Column 1 is
the requirement (always, sometimes, or never).                          implemented. Take notes in Column 3(c), to
In columns 3a, 3b, and 3c, “Effectiveness of Documentation,” the        the extent possible and on additional paper as
PJ monitor documents the findings of the pre-monitoring review,         needed. Use interview results in conjunction with
if it was done, or reviews the program’s written documentation.         desk and project file reviews to draw conclusions
The PJ monitor checks whether the requirement was: (1) Stated           about the program’s operations.



198                                                                                                          Monitoring HOME
in the written agreement between the PJ and the State recipient, subrecipient, or contractor (as applicable) in column 3a; (2)
Adequately reflected in the program administrator’s policies and procedures in column 3b, or (3) Documented in other writ­
ten documentation (such as program application or materials) in column 3c.
A "Notes" section is provided at the end of each area of review for the PJ monitor to elaborate on any of its findings, as
needed.
 Documentation
The following documents are needed for a program review:
     • Copy of the HOME regulations found at 24 CFR Part 92
     • Written agreement between the PJ and the State recipient, subrecipient, or contractor, as applicable
     • Written agreement with the homebuyer
     • Pre-monitoring file(s) or checklist results, if available
     • Project case file monitoring file(s) or checklist results, if available


            1. HOME Requirement                   2. Effectiveness of Implementation         3. Effectiveness of Documentation

                                                 Project monitoring shows that program
                                                    administrator complied with this       This requirement is clearly stated in….
                                                            requirement…
      Does the program administrator or
                 developer…                          (a)          (b)             (c)         (a)               (b)            (c)
                                                   Always      Sometimes         Never       Written      Administrator’s     Other
                                                                                         Agreement with     Policies &      (Specify)
                                                                                               PJ          Procedures
 PARTICIPANT ELIGIBILITY – Income
 1. Comply with all participant eligibility
    requirements – income, ownership, and
    principal residence?
    [24 CFR 92.203 and 24 CFR 92.254 (a)]
 2. Use the appropriate HOME income limits
    for all applicants
    [HOME: 24 CFR 92.254(b)(3); ADDI: 24
    CFR 92.602(a)(1)]
 3. Correctly determine income-eligibility
    [24 CFR 92.203(B)]
 4. Use the same definition of income for all
    applicants
    [24 CFR 92.203(d)]
 5. Project income consistently for all
    applicants
 6. Use source documentation to verify
    income
    [24 CFR 92.203(a)(2)]




Chapter 5: Homebuyer Programs                                                                                                    199
             1. HOME Requirement                   2. Effectiveness of Implementation         3. Effectiveness of Documentation

                                                  Project monitoring shows that program
                                                     administrator complied with this       This requirement is clearly stated in….
                                                             requirement…
       Does the program administrator or
                  developer…                         (a)          (b)           (c)            (a)               (b)            (c)
                                                   Always      Sometimes       Never          Written      Administrator’s     Other
                                                                                          Agreement with     Policies &      (Specify)
                                                                                                PJ          Procedures
7. Make income determinations within six
   months of funds commitment
      [24 CFR 92.203(d)(2)]
      Or, within six months of signing lease-
      purchase agreement
      [24 CFR 92.254(a)(7)]
      Or, within six months of signing contract
      when assistance is provided for a home
      that is to be constructed
      [24 CFR 92.254(a)(8)]
Notes:




PARTICIPANT ELIGIBILITY – Ownership and Occupancy Status
1. Determine that homebuyers have
   acceptable forms of ownership (fee
   simple title, 99-year lease or 50-year
   lease on Indian lands, or other HUD-
   approved form)
      [24 CFR 92.2, “homeownership”; HOME:
      92.203(a)(2); ADDI: 24 CFR 92.612(c)]
2. Verify that assisted homebuyers occupy
   their properties as a principal residence
      [24 CFR 92.254(a)(3)]
3. Take appropriate actions when a
   homebuyer is found in noncompliance
   with the principal residency requirements
      [HOME: 24 CFR 92.504(a)(5); ADDI: 24
      CFR 92.612(c)]
Notes:




PROPERTY ELIGIBILITY
1. Confirm that assisted units qualify as
   HOME-eligible single family properties
      [24 CFR 92.254(a)(1)]




200                                                                                                                Monitoring HOME
           1. HOME Requirement                      2. Effectiveness of Implementation         3. Effectiveness of Documentation

                                                   Project monitoring shows that program
                                                      administrator complied with this       This requirement is clearly stated in….
                                                              requirement…
     Does the program administrator or
                developer…                            (a)          (b)           (c)            (a)               (b)            (c)
                                                    Always      Sometimes       Never          Written      Administrator’s     Other
                                                                                           Agreement with     Policies &      (Specify)
                                                                                                 PJ          Procedures
2. Invest at least $1,000 of funds per unit,
   but not more than the maximum HOME
   per unit subsidy amount [221(d)(3)
   limits]
    [24 CFR 92.205(c) and 24 CFR
    92.250(a) and HOMEfires, Vol. 9, No. 4,
    issued August 2008]
3. For properties involving acquisition or
   new construction, verify that the value of
   assisted properties assisted does not
   exceed 95% of area median purchase
   price for single family housing
    [24 CFR 92.254(a)(2) and
    92.612(c)]
4. For projects involving rehabilitation, verify
   that the after-rehabilitation value does
   not exceed 95% of area median purchase
   price for single family housing
    [24 CFR 92.254(a)(2) and
    92.612(c)]
5. Determine 95% of area median purchase
   price by using one of the following:
   • HUD-determined value limits
   • 203(b) limits in effect in February 2008
   • PJ-determined and HUD-approved limits
    [24 CFR 92.254(b)(1) and HOMEFires
    Vol. 10, No.1, issued January 2009]
6. For projects involving rehabilitation, use
   appropriate methods (appraisal, tax
   records, estimate by qualified staff) to
   determine after-rehabilitation value
    [HOME: 24 CFR 92.254(b); ADDI: 24 CFR
    92.612(c)]
7. For projects involving rehabilitation, base
   value estimates on after-rehabilitation
   value
    [HOME: 24 CFR 92.254(a)(2)(ii); ADDI:
    24 CFR 92.612(c)]




Chapter 5: Homebuyer Programs                                                                                                      201
             1. HOME Requirement                    2. Effectiveness of Implementation         3. Effectiveness of Documentation

                                                   Project monitoring shows that program
                                                      administrator complied with this       This requirement is clearly stated in….
                                                              requirement…
       Does the program administrator or
                  developer…                          (a)          (b)           (c)            (a)               (b)            (c)
                                                    Always      Sometimes       Never          Written      Administrator’s     Other
                                                                                           Agreement with     Policies &      (Specify)
                                                                                                 PJ          Procedures
8. If the program administrator is the PJ,
   secure an environmental review for
   the program and specific sites prior to
   committing HOME funds
      If program administrator is not the PJ,
      secure environmental clearance from the
      PJ prior to committing funds to a specific
      site.
      [HOME: 24 CFR 92.352; ADDI: 24 CFR
      92.614(a)(2)]
      *Environmental review is the PJ’s
      responsibility.
9. Follow the PJ-adopted affirmative
   marketing procedures for projects with
   five or more HOME-assisted units
      [HOME: 24 CFR 92.351(a); This
      requirement does not apply to ADDI
      funds pursuant to 24 CFR 92.614(b)(2)]
Notes:




PROPERTY STANDARDS
1. Inspect all properties to ensure that
   applicable property standards are met
      [24 CFR 92.251]
2. Comply with PJ’s written rehabilitation
   standards for rehabilitation work
      [HOME: 24 CFR 92.251(a)(1); ADDI: 24
      CFR 92.612(b)]
      *PJ responsibility to adopt written
      rehabilitation standard
3. When HOME funds are used for
   acquisition and rehabilitation, develop
   work write-ups or plans with sufficient
   detail to enable contractors to provide a
   reliable bid, if applicable
      [24 CFR 85.36(c)(3)(i) and 85.26(d)(2)(i)
      (A); HOME: 24 CFR 92.505(a); ADDI: 24
      CFR 92.616(f)]




202                                                                                                                 Monitoring HOME
            1. HOME Requirement                    2. Effectiveness of Implementation         3. Effectiveness of Documentation

                                                  Project monitoring shows that program
                                                     administrator complied with this       This requirement is clearly stated in….
                                                             requirement…
     Does the program administrator or
                developer…                           (a)          (b)           (c)            (a)               (b)            (c)
                                                   Always      Sometimes       Never          Written      Administrator’s     Other
                                                                                          Agreement with     Policies &      (Specify)
                                                                                                PJ          Procedures
4. When HOME funds are used for
   acquisition and rehabilitation, perform
   routine inspections
    [24 CFR 85.36(c)(3)(i) and 85.26(d)(2)(i)
    (A); HOME: 24 CFR 92.505(a); ADDI: 24
    CFR 92.616(f)]
5. When HOME funds are used for
   acquisition and rehabilitation, conduct
   final inspections to confirm that all
   contract work was completed
    [24 CFR 85.36(c)(3)(i) and 85.26(d)(2)(i)
    (A); HOME: 24 CFR 92.505(a); ADDI: 24
    CFR 92.616(f)]
6. When HOME funds are used for
   acquisition and rehabilitation, conduct
   onsite visits to show that properties
   meet applicable property standards
    [24 CFR 85.36(c)(3)(i) and 85.26(d)(2)(i)
    (A); HOME: 24 CFR 92.505(a); ADDI: 24
    CFR 92.616(f)]
7. If projects involve rehabilitation that will
   occur after purchase, determine that
   the property is free of health and safety
   defects before occupancy
    [24 CFR 92.254(b)(1) and (2)]
8. If projects involve rehabilitation that
   will occur after purchase, verify that all
   property standards are met within 24
   months of occupancy
    [24 CFR 92.254(b)(1) and (2)]
9. Meet labor standards requirements for
   projects involving construction of 12 or
   more HOME-assisted units
    Complete HUD Checklist Exhibit 23-1
    Guide for Review of Labor Standards
    Administration
    [24 CFR 92.354]
10. Meet the lead safety regulations of
    Part 35 (See Lead Hazard Monitoring
    Guidance, HUD Checklist Exhibits 24-1,
    24-2, 24-3, or 24-4)
    [24 CFR 92.355]
Notes:




Chapter 5: Homebuyer Programs                                                                                                     203
             1. HOME Requirement                   2. Effectiveness of Implementation         3. Effectiveness of Documentation

                                                  Project monitoring shows that program
                                                     administrator complied with this       This requirement is clearly stated in….
                                                             requirement…
       Does the program administrator or
                  developer…                         (a)          (b)           (c)            (a)               (b)            (c)
                                                   Always      Sometimes       Never          Written      Administrator’s     Other
                                                                                          Agreement with     Policies &      (Specify)
                                                                                                PJ          Procedures
ELIGIBLE AND REASONABLE COSTS
1. Use HOME/[ADDI] funds only for eligible
   costs
      [24 CFR 92.205]
2. Conduct a subsidy layering review when
   HOME [or ADDI] are combined with other
   public subsidies
      [HOME: 24 CFR 92.250(b); ADDI: 24 CFR
      92.612(b)]
3. If the program involves construction,
   review cost estimates and evaluate
   whether they are cost reasonable
      [24 CFR 85.36(f); HOME: 24
      CFR 92.505(a); ADDI: 24 CFR
      92.616(f)]
4. Ensure that cost estimates are reviewed
   by a party other than the originator of
   the estimate (e.g., another PJ staff
   person)
5. Document the actual cost of the work
      [24 CFR 85.20(b)(6); HOME: 24 CFR
      92.505(a) and 92.508(a)(3); ADDI: 24
      CFR 92.616(f) and 92.616(i)]
6. Provide subsidy only in the eligible forms
   of investment (i.e., interest bearing or
   non-interest bearing loans or advances,
   interest subsidies, deferred payment
   loans, grants, or loan guarantees)
      [24 CFR 92.205(b)]
7. If subsidy is provided in a form not
   listed above, describe other forms used
   in Consolidated Plan and secure HUD
   approval
      [24 CFR 92.205(b)(1)]
Notes:




CONTRACTOR SELECTION
1. If the PJ, State recipient, or subrecipient
   selects contractors, use a competitive
   bidding process (i.e., public invitation for
   bids; solicitation of multiple bids, apply a
   cost reasonableness test)
      [24 CFR 85.36(c); HOME: 24 CFR
      92.505(a); ADDI: 24 CFR 92.616(f)]



204                                                                                                                Monitoring HOME
           1. HOME Requirement                    2. Effectiveness of Implementation         3. Effectiveness of Documentation

                                                 Project monitoring shows that program
                                                    administrator complied with this       This requirement is clearly stated in….
                                                            requirement…
     Does the program administrator or
                developer…                          (a)          (b)           (c)            (a)               (b)            (c)
                                                  Always      Sometimes       Never          Written      Administrator’s     Other
                                                                                         Agreement with     Policies &      (Specify)
                                                                                               PJ          Procedures
2. Verify that contractors are not excluded,
   disqualified or otherwise ineligible (i.e.,
   suspension, debarment or limited denial
   of participation) for Federal procurement
   and nonprocurement programs at the
   time of contract execution or during the
   period of project work
   [24 CFR 85.35; HOME: 24 CFR
   92.350(a) and 92.505(a); ADDI: 24 CFR
   92.614(a) and 92.616(f)]
3. If a list of pre-qualified contractors is
   maintained, allow for regular reviews
   of the firms to check that these firms
   are licensed, perform quality work, and
   maintain insurance coverage
   [24 CFR 92.505(a) and 24 CFR 85.36(c)
   (4)]
4. Verify that contractors on a pre-qualified
   list are not suspended or debarred from
   work on projects receiving Federal funds,
   if applicable
   [24 CFR 92.350(a)]
Notes:




CONSTRUCTION MANAGEMENT
1. Inspect projects regularly to assess
   rehabilitation progress
   [24 CFR 85.36(b)(2); HOME: 24 CFR
   92.505(a); ADDI: 24 CFR 92.616(f)]
2. Prior to processing a payment request,
   inspect projects to confirm that the
   contractor has performed all the work
   specified in the request
   [24 CFR 85.36(b)(2); HOME: 24 CFR
   92.505(a); ADDI: 24 CFR 92.616(f)]
3. Review and approve requests for change
   orders
   [24 CFR 85.36(b)(2); HOME: 24 CFR
   92.505(a); ADDI: 24 CFR 92.616(f)]
4. Follow policies/procedures to resolve
   disputes between the contractor and the
   homebuyers
   [24 CFR 85.36(b)(2); HOME: 24 CFR
   92.505(a); ADDI: 24 CFR 92.616(f)]



Chapter 5: Homebuyer Programs                                                                                                    205
             1. HOME Requirement                 2. Effectiveness of Implementation         3. Effectiveness of Documentation

                                                Project monitoring shows that program
                                                   administrator complied with this       This requirement is clearly stated in….
                                                           requirement…
       Does the program administrator or
                  developer…                       (a)          (b)           (c)            (a)               (b)            (c)
                                                 Always      Sometimes       Never          Written      Administrator’s     Other
                                                                                        Agreement with     Policies &      (Specify)
                                                                                              PJ          Procedures
5. Ensure that contractors comply with the
   terms of their contracts
      [24 CFR 85.36(b)(2); HOME: 24 CFR
      92.505(a); ADDI: 24 CFR 92.616(f) ]
Notes:




RESALE/RECAPTURE OPTIONS
1. Impose recapture or resale options on all
   assisted properties
      [HOME: 24 CFR 92.254(a)(5); ADDI 24
      CFR 92.612(c)]
2. If recapture provisions are used,
   incorporate requirements into a deed
   (and record) or trust and/or promissory
      [HOME: 24 CFR 92.254(a)(5)(ii); ADDI 24
      CFR 92.612(c)]
3. If resale options have been imposed,
   record deed restrictions or covenants
   running with the land on each property
   for the period of affordability
      [HOME: 24 CFR 92.254(a)(5)(i); ADDI 24
      CFR 92.612(c)]
4. Impose adequate procedures and
   controls to ensure that PJ or program
   administrator is made aware when a
   homebuyer is reselling the property
   during the period of affordability
      [24 CFR 85.20(b)(3); HOME: 24 CFR
      92.505(a); ADDI: 24 CFR 92.616(f)]
Notes:




WRITTEN AGREEMENT
1. Execute written agreements with the
   homebuyer
      [HOME: 24 CFR 92.504(c)(5); ADDI: 24
      CFR 92.616(e)]




206                                                                                                              Monitoring HOME
           1. HOME Requirement                    2. Effectiveness of Implementation         3. Effectiveness of Documentation

                                                 Project monitoring shows that program
                                                    administrator complied with this       This requirement is clearly stated in….
                                                            requirement…
     Does the program administrator or
                developer…                          (a)          (b)           (c)            (a)               (b)            (c)
                                                  Always      Sometimes       Never          Written      Administrator’s     Other
                                                                                         Agreement with     Policies &      (Specify)
                                                                                               PJ          Procedures
2. If State recipient, subrecipient, or
   contractor enters into written agreements
   with homebuyers, ensure that the written
   agreement is assignable to the PJ
3. Include all required provisions in written
   agreement (See HUD Checklist Exhibit
   7-14, Guide for Review of Beneficiary
   Written Agreements.
   [HOME: 24 CFR 92.504(c)(5); ADDI: 24
   CFR 92.616(e)]
   *PJ responsibility
4. Execute and record all loan instruments
   [24 CFR 92.505(a) and 24 CFR 85.20(b)
   (3)]
   *This may be PJ responsibility, depending
   on program design
Notes:




RECORDKEEPING
1. Document compliance with applicable
   HOME requirements
   [24 CFR 92.508(a)(3)]
2. Maintain records for five years after
   project completion
   [HOME: 24 CFR 92.508(c)(2); ADDI: 24
   CFR 92.616(1)]
3. Maintain documents that impose resale/
   recapture provisions for five years after
   the termination of the affordability period
   [HOME: 24 CFR 92.508(c)(2); ADDI: 24
   CFR 92.616(i)]
Notes:




Chapter 5: Homebuyer Programs                                                                                                    207
                                                   Attachment 5-A
                                 Client File Form – Homebuyer Programs
                               Are Items in Project Case File?                             Answer
      Underwriting and Applicant Processing
      1. Application form; authorization to release information                          Yes        No
      2. Source documentation and calculation of income                                  Yes        No
      3. Documentation of principal residence                                            Yes        No
      4. Designation of property type and location                                       Yes        No
      5. Applicant file checklist                                                        Yes        No
      Legal and Financial Documents
      6. Documentation of all costs and compliance with subsidy limits                   Yes        No
      7. Documentation of how assistance amount was determined                           Yes        No
      8. Mortgage agreement, note, lien, or deed of trust with recapture provisions      Yes        No
      9. Deed restriction or covenant enforcing resale provisions                        Yes        No
      10. Implementation of provisions upon subsequent sale                              Yes        No
      11. Sales prices (or for rehabilitation, after-rehabilitation property value)      Yes        No
      12. Title search and other closing documents                                       Yes        No
      13. Lead-based paint disclosure notice from seller (if pre-1978 home)              Yes        No
      14. Flood insurance (if required)                                                  Yes        No
      15. Property hazard insurance                                                      Yes        No
      16. Evidence of ongoing monitoring of affordability requirements (i.e., resale/
                                                                                         Yes        No
          recapture provisions)
      17. Program income records                                                         Yes        No
      Construction Management
      18. Lead-based paint notification pamphlet receipt                                 Yes        No
      19. Lead-based paint visual assessment (if acquisition only)                       Yes        No
      20. Lead hazard risk assessment or other lead hazard evaluation to occupant
                                                                                         Yes        No
          and owner within 15 days of evaluation, if applicable
      21. Property inspection checklists or reports to determine compliance with
                                                                                         Yes        No
          local codes and written rehabilitation standards
      22. Environmental review documentation                                             Yes        No
      23. Tenant relocation notices; documentation of financial assistance               Yes        No
      24. Disclosure to Seller with Voluntary, Arm’s Length Purchase Offer forms
          (Acquisition notice/ info provided to existing homeowner that voluntarily      Yes        No
          selling home and not eligible for relocation funds)
      25. Work specifications and program-generated cost estimate                        Yes        No
      26. Documentation that after-rehabilitation property value is within 95% of
                                                                                         Yes        No
          area median purchase price limits
      27. Bid documents; bid analysis                                                    Yes        No
      28. Verification of contractor eligibility                                         Yes        No
      29. Pre-construction conference report                                             Yes        No
      30. Contract for construction work                                                 Yes        No
      31. Notice to proceed                                                              Yes        No
      32. Change orders                                                                  Yes        No
      33. Verification of proper lead hazard reduction work performed (safe work
          practices performed for paint stabilization, or interim controls, standard     Yes        No
          treatments, if applicable)




208                                                                                                    Monitoring HOME
             34. Ongoing and final inspection reports; building code compliance
                                                                                                Yes    No
                 inspections
             35. Verification that unit passed lead-based paint clearance test before
                                                                                                Yes    No
                 occupancy
             36. Verification that owner received notice of lead hazard reduction activities
                                                                                                Yes    No
                 within 15 days of clearance test results, if applicable
             37. Payment records and lien releases                                              Yes    No
             38. Warranties and guarantee                                                       Yes    No




Chapter 5: Homebuyer Programs                                                                                 209
                                                 Attachment 5-B
                  Summary of Lead-based Paint Requirements for Homebuyer Programs
                                                       Rehabilitation                                           A,L,SS,O
                                                        (Subpart J)                                            (Subpart K)
                                                                                                               Homebuyer
                                 <$5,000              $5,000 – $25,000              >$25,000
                                                                                                             Acquisition Only
Approach to Lead Hazard Do no harm               Identify and control lead   Identify and abate lead    Identify and stabilize
Evaluation and Reduction                         hazards                     hazards                    deteriorated paint
Notification             Notice of Lead Hazard   Notice of Lead Hazard       Notice of Lead Hazard      Notice of Lead Hazard
                         Reduction               Evaluation and Notice of    Evaluation and Notice of   Reduction
                                                 Lead Hazard Reduction       Lead Hazard Reduction
Lead Hazard Evaluation   Paint Testing (of       Paint Testing and Risk      Paint Testing and Risk     Visual Assessment
                         surfaces to be          Assessment                  Assessment
                         disturbed)
Lead Hazard Reduction    Repair surfaces         Interim Controls            Abatement (Interim         Paint Stabilization
                         disturbed during                                    Controls on exterior
                         rehabilitation                                      surfaces not disturbed
                                                                             by rehabilitation)
                         • Safe work practices   • Safe work practices       • Safe work practices      • Safe work practices
                         • Clearance             • Clearance                 • Clearance                • Clearance
Ongoing Maintenance      For HOME rental only    For HOME rental only        For HOME rental only       Yes (if ongoing
                                                                                                        relationship)
EIBLL Requirements       No                      No                          No                         No
Options                  • Presume lead-based    • Presume lead-based        • Presume lead-based       • Test deteriorated paint
                           paint                   paint and/or hazards        paint and/or hazards     • Use safe work
                         • Use safe work         • Use standard              • Abate all applicable       practices only on lead-
                           practices on all        treatments                  surfaces                   based paint surfaces
                           surfaces




210                                                                                                             Monitoring HOME
                                               Attachment 5-C
                        Summary of Key HOME Homebuyer Rules and How to Document
                                                                                                 Documentation
                                               Key HOME Requirement
                                                                                            (See checklists for details)
Eligible Participants
Owner Income                          • Gross income <80% of area median            • Completed application
                                        income based on the upcoming 12             • Source documentation (wage
                                        months                                        statements, interest statements)
                                      • Income is defined by one of three
                                        options: Part 5 (Section 8) annual
                                        income; annual income under U.S.
                                        Census long form; or adjusted gross
                                        income under IRS Form 1040
Owner Occupancy                       • Applicant must purchase property            • Client must sign and certify that the
                                        and maintain it as his/her principal          property is principal residence
                                        residence
Ownership of Property                 • Applicant must obtain ownership of the      • Title search documentation
                                        property through:                           • Copy of deed or other ownership
                                        —    Fee simple title                         document
                                        —    99-year leasehold interest (50 year
                                             leasehold on trust or restricted
                                             Indian land)
                                        —    Ownership/membership in a
                                             cooperative or mutual housing
                                             project (if recognized by State law)
Eligible Properties
Property Type                         • Eligible property types include:            • If 2-4 units, indicate status of non­
                                        —    One-to-four-unit property                owner-occupied units in the application.

                                        —    Condominium unit                       • If non-owner units are assisted with
                                                                                      HOME funds, agreement with homebuyer
                                        —    Cooperative or mutual housing unit,      that specifies applicability of HOME
                                             if recognized by State law               rental requirements to the rental units
                                        —    Manufactured or mobile home
Property Location                     • Property must be located within             • Application with property address
                                        geographic area of the PJ
HOME Minimum and Maximum Thresholds   • An average of a minimum of $1,000 in        • Worksheet or form that shows that
                                        HOME funds must be invested in each           the average per unit HOME investment
                                        assisted unit                                 exceeds $1,000
                                      • The maximum HOME assistance per unit • Worksheet or form that shows that total
                                        is determined by HUD [based on 221(d)  HOME subsidy did not exceed per unit
                                        (3) limits]                            maximum provided by HUD
Property Value                        • Sales price must not exceed 95% of the      • If using local purchase price limits,
                                        area median purchase price                    documentation of data used to
                                      • If rehabilitating property, after-            determine limits and evidence of HUD
                                        rehabilitation value must not exceed          approval
                                        95% of the area median purchase price       • Documentation of method for
                                        —    Use 203(b) limits in effect              determining value
                                             Feb.2008, or                           • Copy of sales price or value estimate
                                        —    HUD-determined purchase price
                                             limits, or
                                        —    Establish local limits and obtain
                                             HUD approval




Chapter 5: Homebuyer Programs                                                                                                 211
Property Standards                      • If acquisition only, property must meet    • Documentation of which property
                                          either local codes/standards or Section      standard is used and copy of the
                                          8 Housing Quality Standards (HQS)            property standard
                                        • If rehabilitation, property must be free   • Copy of written rehabilitation standards
                                          of safety and health hazards prior         • Inspection report or certification by
                                          to occupancy or within 6 months of           inspector
                                          property transfer, whichever is sooner
                                                                                     • Inspection checklist and work write-up
                                        • If rehabilitation, property must also meet
                                          applicable codes (local codes/standards • Checklist that demonstrates compliance
                                          or one of 3 nationally accepted codes)       with International Energy Conservation
                                          within 2 years of transfer                   Code for new construction projects

                                        • New construction must meet local
                                          codes/standards or one of the nationally
                                          accepted codes and the International
                                          Energy Conservation Code (IECC)
Eligible Activities                     • Acquisition, acquisition and               • Documentation of all expenditures
                                          rehabilitation, and new construction
Long-term Affordability
Affordability Period Resale/Recapture   • Property must be subject to either         • Resale: mortgage and/or note and
                                          resale or recapture provisions for the       recorded deed restriction or covenant
                                          period of affordability                      restricting future sales; evidence that
                                          — Resale: future sale of property must       documents were recorded
                                            be affordable to low-income buyer        • Recapture: Mortgage or note showing
                                            and provide initial buyer with fair        formula by which funds will be
                                            return                                     recaptured
                                          — Recapture: portion or all of
                                            assistance to buyer must be
                                            recaptured at time of sale and used
                                            for other HOME-eligible activity(ies)




212                                                                                                            Monitoring HOME
                                                        Attachment 5-D
                         Summary of Other Federal Requirements for Homebuyer Projects
  Other Federal Requirements           Apply to Homebuyer           Special Issues/Considerations           Regulatory Citations
                                           Programs?
Nondiscrimination and Equal Access Rules
Fair Housing and Equal           Yes                                • PJs must affirmatively further • 24 CFR 92.202 and 92.250
Opportunity                                                           fair housing in the jurisdiction • Title VI of Civil Rights Act of
                                                                    • Particular attention               1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000d et.
                                                                      should be paid to signs of         seq.)
                                                                      discrimination in sale of        • Fair Housing Act (42 U.S.C.
                                                                      properties                         3601-3620) (implemented at
                                                                                                         24 CFR Part 100)
                                                                                                       • Executive Order 11063
                                                                                                         (amended by Executive Order
                                                                                                         12259)
                                                                                                       • Age Discrimination Act of
                                                                                                         1975, as amended (42
                                                                                                         U.S.C. 6101)
                                                                                                       • 24 CFR 5.105(a)
Affirmative Marketing            Yes, for all projects of five or   • PJ must adopt affirmative        • 24 CFR 92.351
                                 more HOME-assisted units             marketing requirements and
                                                                      procedures
Accessibility for Persons with   Yes                                • New construction with            • Section 504 of the
Disabilities                                                          5+ units and substantial           Rehabilitation Act of 1973
                                                                      alteration projects with 15+       (implemented at 24 CFR
                                                                      units must have accessible         Part 8)
                                                                      units (5% for mobility-          • For multifamily buildings
                                                                      impaired and 2% for sensory-       only, 24 CFR 100.205
                                                                      impaired; at least one of          (implements the Fair Housing
                                                                      each type)                         Act)
                                                                    • Other rehabilitated properties
                                                                      may require modifications
                                                                    • Program must be accessible
                                                                      to persons with disabilities
Employment and Contracting Rules
Equal Opportunity Employment     Yes                                • Contracts and subcontracts       • Executive Order 11246
                                                                      for more than $10,000 must         (implemented at 41 CFR Part
                                                                      include language prohibiting       60)
                                                                      discrimination
Section 3 Economic               Yes, if amount of assistance to    • Include Section 3 clause in      • Section 3 of the Housing and
Opportunity                      recipient exceeds $200,000           contracts and subcontracts         Urban Development Act of
                                 or contract or subcontract         • Employment and contracting         1968 (implemented at 24
                                 exceeds $100,000                     goals to hire low-income           CFR Part 135)
                                                                      business concerns and low-
                                                                      income residents
Minority/Women Employment        Yes                                • PJ must develop procedures       • Executive Orders 11625,
                                                                      and include in all contracts       12432, and 12138
                                                                      and subcontracts                 • 24 CFR 85.36(e)




Chapter 5: Homebuyer Programs                                                                                                        213
Davis Bacon                  Yes, if construction contract    • If applicable, requirements     • 24 CFR 92.354
                             includes 12 or more units that     apply to the whole project,     • Davis-Bacon Act (40 U.S.C.
                             are HOME-assisted                  not just the HOME-assisted        276a - 276a-5)
                                                                units
                                                                                                • 24 CFR Part 70 (volunteers)
                                                              • Include language in contracts
                                                                and subcontracts                • Copeland Anti-Kickback Act
                                                                                                  (40 U.S.C. 276c)
                                                              • Requirements do not apply to
                                                                volunteers or sweat equity
Conflict of Interest         Yes                              • PJs should ensure               • 24 CFR 92.356
                                                                compliance in-house and         • 24 CFR 85.36
                                                                when using subrecipients
                                                                                                • 24 CFR 84.42
Debarred Contractors         Yes                              • PJs should check HUD list of    • 24 CFR Part 5
                                                                debarred contractors
Environmental Requirements
Environmental Reviews        Yes                              • Categorically excluded not      • 24 CFR 92.352
                                                                subject to 24 CFR 58.5          • 24 CFR Part 58.35 b(5)
                                                              • Buildings to be constructed     • National Environmental Policy
                                                                in the future require a           Act (NEPA) of 1969
                                                                compliance review
Flood Insurance              Yes, if city or county and       • Must obtain flood insurance     • Section 202 of the Flood
                             No, if State program               if located in a FEMA              Disaster Protection Act of
                                                                designated 100-year flood         1973 (42 U.S.C. 4106)
                                                                plain                           • 24 CFR 893.6(b)
                                                              • Community must be
                                                                participating in FEMA’s flood
                                                                insurance program
Site and Neighborhood        No                                                                 • 24 CFR 893.6(b)
Standards
Lead-based Paint             Yes, for rehabilitation of       • Provide notices to purchasers • 24 CFR 92.355
                             pre-1978 units                     and tenants                   • Lead-based Paint Poisoning
                             EPA's Renovation, Repair, and    • Perform visual assessments      Prevention Act of 1971 (42
                             Painting Rule applies            • Complete paint stabilization,   U.S.C. 4821 et. seq.)
                                                                if applicable                   • 24 CFR Part 35
                                                              • Use safe work practices and     • 24 CFR 982.401(j) (except
                                                                clearance                         paragraph 982.401(j)(1)(i))
                                                              • Include required provisions     • 40 CFR Part 745
                                                                in all contracts and
                                                                subcontracts
Relocation                   Yes                              • Required notifications to       • 24 CFR 92.353
                                                                tenants                         • Uniform Relocation
                                                              • Required language in offers       Assistance and Real Property
                                                                and contracts for acquisition     Acquisition Policies Act
                                                                of property                       of 1970 (URA) (42 U.S.C.
                                                                                                  4201-4655)
                                                                                                • 49 CFR Part 24
                                                                                                • 24 CFR Part 42 (subpart B)
                                                                                                • Section 104(d) “Barney Frank
                                                                                                  Amendments”




214                                                                                                          Monitoring HOME
Chapter 6: Rental Housing Programs


This chapter describes how to monitor HOME-funded rental programs. It is organized into sections that correlate to the
three key stages of monitoring:
     • Section 1. Pre-monitoring (program design and operations). Pre-monitoring is a systematic way for the PJ to gather
       background information on the program’s administration. It helps the PJ assess if the program administrator has poli­
       cies and procedures in place to facilitate HOME compliance and helps the PJ prepare for a monitoring site visit.
     • Section 2. Project (or case file) monitoring. The core of the PJ’s monitoring, project monitoring is a systematic way
       to review specific projects to assess whether the program administrator follows its procedures in a consistent way while
       implementing the rental program, and whether each project is in compliance with the HOME requirements.
     • Section 3. Program monitoring. Program monitoring is a systematic way to review the overall performance and com­
       pliance of the program. It helps the PJ identify patterns and trends in the program and draw conclusions about the
       program administrator’s policies, procedures, practices, and outcomes.
A rental program can be administered by the PJ itself, or by a subrecipient, State recipient, or contractor. This chapter uses the
term “program administrator” to refer to any of these entities. In addition, rental activities are often carried out by an owner,
developer, or sponsor of the rental housing project. This guide uses the term “developer” or “owner” to refer to these entities.
Depending on the rental program design, the responsibility for compliance may lie with one or more of these entities. Where
possible, the checklist identifies the likely responsible party.


Basis of this Chapter
This chapter addresses monitoring of the key HOME Program requirements of a rental program. The checklists in this
chapter are based on HUD Checklist Exhibits 7-0 (HOME Pre-monitoring Preparation for Rental Programs), 7-7 (Guide for
Review of Rental Projects), and 7-8 (Guide for Review of Rental Programs). The checklists in this chapter can be used instead of
the referenced HUD checklists. The HUD checklist questions cited in this chapter have been revised slightly for use by the
PJ, rather than HUD. The numbering is sequential for all questions; the original HUD checklist numbering has not been
retained. Questions that are denoted with the icon  have been added to facilitate a PJ’s review; these questions are not on
the HUD checklists.
Complete copies of the HUD checklists are found in the CPD Grantee Monitoring Handbook, available online at http://www.
hud.gov/offices/cpd/library/monitoring/handbook.cfm#7. Chapter 7 of this handbook covers the HOME Program.


Framework for the Monitoring Review
In addition to the key HOME rental requirements covered in this chapter, there are a number of additional requirements that
the PJ monitor needs to review to conduct a comprehensive monitoring review of a rental program.
     • Program and Project Administration. To monitor requirements related to the administration and management of
       the program, refer to other chapters of this guidebook, depending on what entity administers the program:
       — Use Chapter 2, Section 1 of this guidebook when funding CHDOs to undertake rental projects with CHDO set-
         aside funds. This chapter helps the PJ assess whether the CHDO meets HOME eligibility criteria, and how well
         the PJ is managing its CHDOs.
       — Use Chapter 2, Section 2 of this guidebook when the PJ uses a State recipient or subrecipient to administer the



Chapter 6: Rental Housing Programs                                                                                           215
            rental program. This chapter helps the PJ monitor assess the funded entity’s compliance with applicable uniform
            administrative requirements, and the PJ’s management and oversight of these funded entities.
        — Use Chapter 3 of this guidebook to monitor the PJ’s own administrative and management systems. This should
          be done regardless of what entity administers the rental program.
      • Written Agreements. To monitor whether the HOME written agreement adequately conveys HOME requirements
        and whether it is enforceable, use one of the following HUD checklists, depending on what type of entity administers
        the program or if funds are provided directly for project development:
        — Exhibit 7-15, Guide for Review of Contractor Written Agreements, when a contractor administers the program
        — Exhibit 7-16, Guide for Review of Owner, Developer, Sponsor Written Agreements, when providing HOME funds for
          project development activities
        — Exhibit 7-17, Guide for Review of State Recipient Written Agreements, when a State recipient administers the
          program
        — Exhibit 7-18, Guide for Review of Subrecipient Written Agreements,
          when a subrecipient administers the program.                              This guidebook has adapted the HUD
      • Other Federal Requirements. There are several cross-cutting Fed-            monitoring checklists for key HOME
                                                                                    Program requirements for use by the
        eral requirements that apply to rental activities, and the PJ monitor
                                                                                    PJ when it monitors itself and its
        should use the following HUD checklists to monitor those aspects of
                                                                                    funded entities. For a review of these
        compliance:
                                                                                    HOME requirements, the PJ monitor
        — Exhibit 21-1, Guide for Environmental Review of the Community             is directed to other chapters of this
          Development Block Grant, HOME Investment Partnerships, Emergency          guidebook. For some areas of review
          Shelter Grants, and Housing for Persons With AIDS Programs by the         (such as other Federal requirements,
          Community Planning and Development (CPD) Representative                   procurement, and written agreements),
        — Exhibit 22-3, Guide for Review of Civil Rights-Related Program            the HUD checklists have not been
          Requirements for the HOME Investment Partnerships Program                 adapted for PJ use. For these areas
                                                                                    of review, the PJ monitor is directed to
        — Exhibit 23-1 Guide for Review of Labor Standards Administration, for      the HUD checklists in the CPD Grantee
          projects with 12 or more HOME-assisted units                              Monitoring Handbook. The PJ monitor
        — Exhibit 24-1, Guide for Review of Lead-based Paint Compliance in          should be able to use these HUD
          Properties Receiving Federal Rehabilitation Assistance                    checklists in their existing form.
        — Chapter 24 and related exhibits, for review of relocation and real
          property acquisition policies and procedures, if applicable
        — Exhibit 27-1, Guide for Review of Flood Insurance Protection.

Resources
The following attachments are provided at the end of this chapter to facilitate the monitoring review:
      • Attachment 6-A: Client File Form – Rental Programs
      • Attachment 6-B: Summary of Key HOME Rental Program Rules and How to Document
      • Attachment 6-C: Summary of Other Federal Requirements that Apply to Rental Programs
      • Attachment 6-D: Summary of Lead-based Paint Requirements for Rental Programs
      • Attachment 6-E: HOME Rental Compliance Form
      • Attachment 6-F: Maintaining Unit Mix Flow Chart




216                                                                                                         Monitoring HOME
Section 1. Pre-monitoring Review: Design and Operation of the Rental Program
 Overview of the Pre-monitoring Review
Pre-monitoring helps the PJ:
    • Gather background information about how the program administrator has designed its rental program
    • Prepare for an onsite monitoring visit
    • Assess whether the program administrator has the necessary policies and procedures in place to administer the program
      in compliance with the HOME requirements.
Pre-monitoring is not required before every onsite monitoring visit. It is recommended when:
    • The program administrator is new
    • The PJ monitor is reviewing the program administrator for the first time
    • The subject under review appears to pose a high risk.

 To monitor a single rental project, skip this section and proceed to Section 2 to monitor specific project files.


 Organization of this Section
This section reviews key program design and operational requirements of a rental program, including:
    A. Program procedures and marketing
    B. Project application and/or Request for Proposal (RFP) processes
    C. Program administrator
    D. Income definition
    E. Property and activity eligibility
    F. Forms of assistance
    G. Refinancing
    H. Documentation and communication of procedures
    I. Loan servicing

 Instructions
The PJ monitor should copy and use one copy of the checklists in this section of the chapter to conduct its pre-monitoring
review. For each area of review, the PJ monitor should review relevant documents and answer each checklist question.
The first column, “HUD Checklist Exhibit 7-0 Selected Excerpts,” provides the HUD checklist question which may have
been adapted somewhat (indicated by the use of [brackets]) for use by PJs.
The second column, “What to Analyze,” provides guidance to help the PJ monitor assess compliance.
The third column, “Follow-up Needed at Site Visit,” provides space for the PJ monitor to make notes that will facilitate the
onsite review. This might be a record of items where a determination of compliance could not be made during pre-monitor­
ing, or a list of questions the PJ monitor will want to ask of the program administrator when on site.
 Documentation
The following documents are needed for a pre-monitoring review:
    • Copy of the HOME regulations found at 24 CFR Part 92



Chapter 6: Rental Housing Programs                                                                                        217
      • HOME income limits in effect for the years under review
      • Desk review monitoring file and results of previous monitoring visit(s), if available
      • Written agreement between the PJ and the State recipient, subrecipient, or contractor, if applicable
      • Written agreement between the program administrator and the developer, if applicable
      • Rental program policies and procedures
      • Rental program guide, application form/package, and related materials for
        developer applicants                                                             The PJ monitor should request any
      • Criterion for making project/developer selections                                documents that it does not have from
                                                                                         the PJ staff or the State recipient,
      • Marketing procedures or plan and marketing materials (such as advertise­         subrecipient, or contractor (as
        ments and flyers)                                                                applicable) prior to conducting the
      • Guidance on how to make income determinations (established by the PJ)            pre-monitoring review.

      • State, local, or national property codes and standards used for rental
        projects
      • Written rehabilitation standards, if applicable
      • List of contractors and documentation of qualifications, if available
      • Conflict resolution procedures and documentation that any complaints were handled in accordance with such
        procedures
      • Disciplinary procedures for poor performing contractors

A. Program Procedures and Marketing
Background: The HOME Program requires that rental programs be administered in an equitable manner that ensures the
participation is available to all qualified entities.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.350
 Documentation:
      • Marketing procedures or plan
      • Marketing advertisements and flyers
      • Application form or package
      • Rental program policies and procedures

        HUD Checklist Exhibit 7-0
                                                          What to Analyze                       Follow-up Needed at Site Visit
           Selected Excerpts

 1. Are there written marketing or
    informational materials about the
    program for developers, property
    owners, or private lenders? If yes,
    obtain copies.
       Yes      No




B. Project Application and/or Request for Proposal (RFP) Process


218                                                                                                                Monitoring HOME
Background: It is recommended that the program administrator have policies and procedures for taking and screening
applications and selecting potential projects for participation in the program. Rolling (also known as “open”) applications and
Requests for Proposals (RFPs) are the two most common acceptable practices used by PJs for selecting rental projects.
Regulatory Basis: Recommended
 Documentation:
     • Description of project application process
     • Ranking criteria for RFP, if applicable
     • Scoring sheets for RFP, if applicable

       HUD Checklist Exhibit 7-0
                                                        What to Analyze                   Follow-up Needed at Site Visit
          Selected Excerpts

 2. What method does the [program          Rolling/open application. PJ monitors
    administrator] use to solicit          should confirm that a date and time were
    applications (e.g., Request for        stamped on each application package
    Proposals, open application            upon receipt.
    process)?                              Request for Proposals (RFP). Program
                                           administrator should maintain list of RFP
     ______________________________        respondents (funding applicants), records
                                           on evaluation rankings, and letters to
           Project Evaluation Criteria
     ______________________________        applicants indicating the outcome of the
         Projects should be evaluated      proposal review– both those accepted
         on objective criteria, such as:   and rejected.
  TIP




           • Development experience        Evaluation criteria. Program
           • Financial feasibility         administrators should have pre­
                                           established evaluation criteria and must
           • Location                      document application rankings and
           • Types of units                project selection justifications. Criteria
                                           must be applied in a manner that is
           • Marketability                 consistent with fair housing laws.
           • Property management.



C. Program Administrator
Background: The PJ monitor needs to identify who is primarily responsible for the administration of the rental program and
whether any other entities play a key role in the program’s administration.
Regulatory Basis: Recommended
 Documentation:
     • Written agreement(s) between the PJ and the State recipient, subrecipient, or contractor, as applicable




Chapter 6: Rental Housing Programs                                                                                         219
        HUD Checklist Exhibit 7-0
                                                       What to Analyze                     Follow-up Needed at Site Visit
           Selected Excerpts

 3. Does the PJ directly administer        The PJ must have a written agreement
    rental programs or use a               with the entity carrying out the program
    subrecipient [or other entity] for     administration.
    this purpose? If a subrecipient is
    used, obtain a copy of the HOME
    written agreement for this activity.

      ______________________________



 4. Does the program administrator         The program administrator must have a
    contract with any other entity for     written agreement with any other entity
    services related to the admin­         to which it provides HOME funding to
    istration of the rental program        administer a portion of the program, if
    (such as a nonprofit organization      applicable.
    that might carry out marketing
    and intake procedures)? 
       Who?
       _____________________________
       For what services?

       _____________________________

       _____________________________



D. Income Definition
Background: All HOME funds must benefit low-income households. A low-income household is defined as a household
with an annual gross income at or below 80 percent of the area median income, as determined by HUD and adjusted for
household size. For rental housing, HOME also mandates that for each annual HOME allocation that the PJ receives, at
least 90 percent of the households initially assisted through all the PJ’s rental housing programs combined (rental acquisi­
tion/development and tenant-based rental assistance) must have incomes at or below 60 percent of area median income (“the
program rule”). Further, for rental properties with five or more HOME-assisted units, at least 20 percent of the units must be
occupied by very low-income households (“the project rule”). A very low-income household has an annual gross income at or
below 50 percent of the area median income, as determined by HUD and adjusted for household size.
In order to meet these requirements, the PJ must specify what income targeting is required at each specific rental project and
the program administrator or developer must determine the income-eligibility of applicants and tenant households assisted
with HOME funds. Income-eligibility is based on the anticipated annual income of all family members using one of the fol­
lowing definitions:
      • Part 5 (Section 8) definition of annual income
      • Internal Revenue Service (IRS) adjusted gross income definition from IRS Form 1040 Long Form
      • U.S. Census Bureau Long Form definition of annual income.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.203
 Documentation:
      • Written agreement between the PJ and the State recipient, subrecipient, or contractor, as applicable
      • Guidance on how to make income determinations (established by the PJ)
      • Program administrator’s policies and procedures identifying the definition of income used for the activity


220                                                                                                            Monitoring HOME
    • Copies of the HUD income limits in effect for the year(s) under review

        HUD Checklist Exhibit 7-0
                                                       What to Analyze                   Follow-up Needed at Site Visit
           Selected Excerpts

 5. Has the PJ specified the income       Income targeting must ensure that the
    targeting required at the project?    PJ can meet the “program rule” and the
                                         “project rule.”
      Yes      No                       At every project, all assisted households
                                          must be low-income.
                                          At projects with five or more assisted
                                          units, at least 20% of the units must be
                                          occupied by very low-income households.
                                          At most projects, initially, most assisted
                                          units must be occupied by households
                                          with an annual gross income that is at
                                          or below 60% of area median income.
                                          Specific income targeting for a project
                                          should be specified in the written
                                          agreement.



 6. What definition of income is being    The PJ must instruct the State recipient,
    used for the tenants residing         subrecipient, contractor, or developer
    in units assisted under the           about which definition must be used
    rental program? Obtain the HUD        (ideally, in the written agreement).
    income limits for the years being     The program administrator must instruct
    monitored. [24 CFR 92.203(b)]         the developer, as applicable, about which
      Part 5 (Section 8) definition of   definition must be used (ideally in its
        annual income                     written agreement).
      Internal Revenue Service (IRS)     The PJ must provide the State recipient,
        definition of adjusted gross      subrecipient, contractor, or developer
        income from IRS Form 1040         with guidance on how to use the income
        Long Form                         definition.
      U.S. Census Bureau Long Form       The program policies and procedures
        definition of annual income       should require staff to use the
      Obtain the HUD income limits       PJ-adopted definition of income in its
        for year(s) being monitored       income-eligibility determinations for
        [24 CFR 92.203(b)]                tenants.

        Applicable years:

         _____________________

             _____________________




E. Property and Activity Eligibility
Background: There are many different eligible property types for rental housing: single family units, high-rise and garden
apartments, or condominium units. The structures may be publicly or privately owned; however, HOME funds cannot be
used for public housing projects assisted under the Federal Housing Act of 1937.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.2
 Documentation:

Chapter 6: Rental Housing Programs                                                                                        221
      • Program procedures and/or application materials that outline the eligible property types specified for the program
      • Program descriptions, procedures, and/or application materials
      • Consolidated Plan or annual action plan

        HUD Checklist Exhibit 7-0
                                                      What to Analyze                      Follow-up Needed at Site Visit
           Selected Excerpts

 7. What property types are eligible
    for, or generally funded with, HOME
    assistance (e.g., large multifamily,
    medium multifamily, 1-4 units,
    scattered site single family)?
    (This information may be obtained
    from the annual action plan, IDIS
    reports, or other sources.)



 8. Does the PJ’s rental program
    consist primarily of rehabilitation or
    new construction?
       Rehabilitation
       New construction




F. Form of Assistance
Background: Typically, the PJ determines what form of assistance is provided to the developer, and communicates this to its
State recipient, subrecipient, or contractor (as applicable). HOME allows virtually any form of financial assistance, or subsidy,
to be provided for eligible projects and to eligible beneficiaries, including:
      • Interest bearing loans or advances. These loans are amortizing loans. Repayment is expected on a regular basis, usu­
        ally monthly, so that over a fixed period of time, all of the principal and interest is repaid.
      • Non-Interest bearing loans or advances. The principal amount of such loans is paid back on a regular basis over
        time, but no interest is charged.
      • Deferred loans (forgivable or repayable). These loans are not fully amortized. Instead, some, or even all, principal
        and interest payments are deferred to some point in the future.
      • Grants. Grants are provided with no requirement or expectation of repayment.
      • Interest subsidies. This is usually an up-front discounted payment to a private lender in exchange for a lower interest
        rate on a loan. An interest subsidy may also be a deposit in an interest-bearing account from which monthly subsidies
        are drawn and paid to a lender along with the owner’s monthly payment.
      • Loan guarantees and loan guarantee accounts. HOME funds may be pledged to guarantee loans or to capitalize a
        loan guarantee account. A loan guarantee or a loan guarantee account ensures payment of a loan in case of default.
      • Other forms approved by HUD. If the PJ intends to use a form of assistance not listed above, the PJ’s Consolidated
        Plan or annual action plan should describe the proposed form of assistance. Once approved by HUD as part of the
        plan, no other HUD approval is required.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.205(b)
 Documentation:
      • Written agreement between the PJ and the State recipient, subrecipient, or contractor, as applicable


222                                                                                                            Monitoring HOME
    • Procedures that identify the type of assistance provided to owners/developers/sponsors
    • If applicable, Consolidated Plan or annual action plan that describes any other form of assistance used, and evidence of
      HUD approval

       HUD Checklist Exhibit 7-0
                                                      What to Analyze                      Follow-up Needed at Site Visit
          Selected Excerpts

 9. Is a standard HOME assistance
    package (e.g., interest rate, term
    of loan) provided to all successful
    applicants, or do the form and
    terms of assistance vary by
    project?
      Standard form of assistance
        and loan terms
      Loan terms and/or form of
        assistance vary by project


 10. Is the form of assistance            The program administrator must provide
     permitted by the HOME Program        HOME funds in the form of assistance
     (check applicable form)?            that is specified by the PJ.
      Interest bearing loans or          If “other form of assistance” is used, the
        advances                          PJ must have documentation of this form
      Non-interest bearing loans or      of assistance in the PJ’s Consolidated
        advances                          Plan or annual action plan and must have
                                          evidence of HUD approval.
      Deferred payment loans
      Grant
      Interest subsidies
      Loan guarantee
      Other form of assistance
     (Specify:
     __________________________


 11. If funds are loaned, what are the
     loan terms? 

     _____________________________

     _____________________________

     _____________________________



G. Refinancing
Background: Refinancing is an eligible HOME activity only when it is done in combination with rehabilitation and the refi­
nancing is necessary to permit or continue affordability. Rehabilitation must be the primary use of the HOME funds.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.206(b)(2)
 Documentation:
    • Written agreement between the PJ and the State recipient, subrecipient, or contractor, as applicable
    • Procedures that outline the conditions required to qualify for refinancing
    • Notes or justification of refinancing decision, and verification that the conditions for refinancing that are outlined in
      the HOME rule were met


Chapter 6: Rental Housing Programs                                                                                           223
        HUD Checklist Exhibit 7-0
                                                      What to Analyze                       Follow-up Needed at Site Visit
           Selected Excerpts

 12. Does the PJ permit HOME funds        The written agreement must specify
     to be used for refinancing of        that refinancing can only be undertaken
     existing debt? If yes, review        in conjunction with rehabilitation when
     the refinancing guidelines in        it is necessary to permit or continue
     its annual action plan. [24          affordability.
     CFR 92.206(b)(2) and 24              Application materials should clearly state
     CFR 91.220(g)(2)(iii), 24 CFR        the program administrator’s policy to
     91.320(g)(2)(iii) or 24 CFR          undertake refinancing only in conjunction
     91.420]                              with rehabilitation, when it allows
       Yes     No                       continuation of affordability.
                                          Procedures should describe the program
                                          administrator’s underwriting guidelines to
                                          determine when refinancing is eligible.

                                                       Conditions for Refinancing
         The PJ can use HOME funds for refinancing multifamily projects when loaning HOME funds, provided the conditions at 24
         CFR 92.206(b) are met. These include:
  TIP




           • Rehabilitation must be the primary activity.
           • PJ must determine that management did not practice disinvestment.
           • PJ must do financial feasibility analysis to show long-term affordability is sustainable.
           • New investment must be needed to maintain or create affordable units.
           • Affordability period must be at least 15 years, regardless of amount of HOME investment.
           • PJ must specify if HOME funds can be jurisdiction-wide or must be targeted to specific neighborhood.
           • PJ must describe refinancing guidelines in its Consolidated Plan.
           • No HOME funds can be used to refinance multifamily loans made or insured by any other Federal program.



H. Documentation and Communication of Procedures
Background: It is recommended that program administrators have policies and procedures that explain HOME requirements
and program operations for their rental program.
Regulatory Basis: Recommended
 Documentation:
      • Policies and procedures manual




224                                                                                                             Monitoring HOME
      HUD Checklist Exhibit 7-0
                                                     What to Analyze                Follow-up Needed at Site Visit
         Selected Excerpts

 13. Does the [program administrator]
     have a procedures manual that
     covers: (If the answer to any of
     the questions below is “yes,”
     obtain a copy.)



     a) Rents?                          Maximum rents that can be charged do
      Yes        No                   not exceed high or low HOME rents (for
                                        20% of units in projects with 5 or more
                                        units) minus tenant paid utilities.


     b) Income targeting?               All assisted units must be occupied by
      Yes        No                   low-income households. Households
                                        residing in low HOME units must be very
                                        low-income.


     c) Property standards?             Properties are built to, and maintained
      Yes        No                   at, applicable property standards.
                                        Standards vary for acquisition,
                                        rehabilitation, new construction. (See
                                        Attachment 3-5, found at the end of
                                        Chapter 3.)


     d) Subsidy layering?               Guidelines must ensure that no more
      Yes        No                   public funds are invested in project than
                                        are needed.

     e) Long-term affordability?        Affordability of unit(s) must be ensured
      Yes        No                   for some period of time, based on
                                        amount of HOME investment.

     f) Other Federal requirements?     Procedures should explain the
      Yes        No                   applicability of requirements related to:
                                        •   Environmental
                                        •   Labor
                                        •   Fair housing and affirmative
                                            marketing
                                        •   Displacement, relocation, and
                                            acquisition
                                        •   Lead-based paint.


 14. How does the [program
     administrator] communicate
     detailed information on HOME
     requirements to project owners?
     Obtain any information provided
     to owners, including written
     agreements.




Chapter 6: Rental Housing Programs                                                                                   225
I. Loan Servicing
Background: The PJ may choose either to service its own direct loan programs or to contract with a lender or third party
contractor to take on loan servicing responsibilities.
Regulatory Basis: Recommended
 Documentation:
      • Procedures that outline loan servicing process and responsibilities
      • Contract between the program administrator and the loan servicer, if applicable
      • Loan servicing reports, such as monthly payment and delinquency aging report

        HUD Checklist Exhibit 7-0
                                                        What to Analyze                   Follow-up Needed at Site Visit
           Selected Excerpts

 15. Who services the HOME loans? If       If servicing activities are contracted out,
     servicing is contracted out, obtain   the PJ must follow applicable Federal
     a copy of the contract.               competitive procurement requirements
                                           for contractor selection, in accordance
      _____________________________        with 24 CFR 85.36.
                                           Loan servicer should submit complete,
                                           accurate, and timely reports. At a
                                           minimum, these reports should include a
                                           monthly payment report and delinquency
                                           aging reports with borrower level data
                                           regarding the status of loans.




226                                                                                                          Monitoring HOME
                                      Summary of Pre-monitoring Review
                                                      Rental Program
Instructions: Using the completed checklists from the pre-monitoring review, complete the following chart to summarize
the monitoring results. The written documentation that should have been examined includes: written agreement between
the PJ and the State recipient, subrecipient, or contractor, if applicable; program policies and procedures; and other written
materials.

                                  No Apparent
                                   Problems
                                                                                 Follow-Up Needed
                                  with written
                                 documentation

 A. Program procedures and
    marketing

 B. Project application and/
    or RFP

 C. Program administrator


 D. Income definition

 E. Property and activity
    eligibility

 F. Form of assistance


 G. Refinancing

 H. Documentation and
    communication of
    procedures

 I. Loan servicing




Chapter 6: Rental Housing Programs                                                                                          227
Section 2: Project (Case File) Monitoring
 Overview of the Project Monitoring Review
During project monitoring, the PJ monitor:
      • Reviews individual project files for the rental program
      • Determines whether the program administrator complies with the HOME requirements in the implementation of the
        program.
The program administrator should have a project file (also known as a “case file”) for each rental project that receives HOME
assistance. The PJ monitor must review a sufficient sample of project files to determine that the program administrator is
complying with all applicable HOME requirements. Generally, the PJ monitor should randomly select at least ten percent of
the files, or a minimum three project files for small programs. In addition, it should select the files of any project that it has
concerns may be at risk for noncompliance or performance difficulties.
When the PJ uncovers instances of noncompliance in the project review, it must take steps to see that the noncompliance is
corrected in each instance.
Note, the results of project monitoring can be aggregated and looked at in their entirety, in order to draw conclusions about
the overall performance of the program administrator. This process can be done at the conclusion of the project monitoring
review, or it can be done as part of the PJ’s program monitoring, which is discussed in Section 3 of this chapter.
 Organization of this Section
This section is organized into the following sections:
      A. Project descriptions
      B. Subsidy
      C. Cost allocation
      D. Eligible and reasonable costs
      E. Property standards
      F. Other project requirements
      G. Construction management
      H. Initial and ongoing rent and occupancy requirements
 Instructions
The PJ monitor should copy and use the checklists in this chapter to conduct its project monitoring review. A separate check­
list should be completed for each project file reviewed.
The first column, “HUD Checklist Exhibit 7-7 Selected Excerpts,” provides the HUD checklist questions. It may be adapted
somewhat (indicated by the use of [brackets]) for use by PJs.
The second column, “Identified Problems,” lists potential compliance issues. The PJ monitor should check off any of the
“Identified Problems” that he or she encounters while reviewing project files.
At the end of each subsection is a "Notes" section for the PJ to make notes on observations and recommended actions.
 Documentation to Bring
The following documents are needed for an onsite project monitoring review:
      • Results of pre-monitoring review, if available
      • Copy of the HOME regulations found at 24 CFR Part 92
      • HOME income limits in effect for the years under review

228                                                                                                             Monitoring HOME
     • HOME rent limits in effect for the years under review

A. Project Descriptions
Project descriptions assist the PJ monitor when multiple projects are under review. Project descriptions cover the following
topics:
     1. Project information
     2. Financial information

1. Project Information
Background: To determine whether a rental program is in compliance with the HOME Program, a sufficient number of
individual project files must be reviewed.
Regulatory Basis: Recommended
 Documentation:
     • Project file
     • Written agreement between the PJ and the State recipient, subrecipient, contractor, and/or developer, as applicable

                                               HUD Checklist 7-7 Selected Excerpts

           1a. Project Information:
               1. Project Owner:_________________________________________________________________________
               2. Project commitment date: _______________________________________________________________
               3. Completion date: ______________________________________________________________________
               4. Total number of units: __________________________________________________________________
               5. Number of HOME-assisted units: _________________________________________________________
               6. HOME-assisted units are:  Fixed       Floating

           1b. Financial Information:
               1. Unit costs were determined by:  Proration      Actual cost

               2. List sources and amounts of funding in project: ____________________________________________

               3. Terms of HOME assistance (e.g. loan/grant; interest rate; maturity): __________________________

               4. Per Unit Cost: _________________________________________________________________________

               5. Period of Affordability: __________________________________________________________________



2. Financing
Background: It is important for the PJ to assess the project’s financial and physical health, and overall management, to
ensure that the project will be able to comply with the HOME requirements throughout the affordability period. This should
be done prior to making a funding commitment and periodically throughout the affordability period.
Regulatory Basis: Recommended
 Documentation:
     • Operating budget
     • Ledgers of rent receipts and project rent roll


Chapter 6: Rental Housing Programs                                                                                           229
      • Ledgers of expenses
      • Evidence of contributions to/expenditures from replacement and other reserve accounts
      • Annual audit
      • Balance sheet
      • Staff resumes
      • Notes from discussions concerning efforts to address high vacancy rates or other issues such as complaints or crime,
        which could affect future marketability of the units
      • Notes from interviews of key staff

              HUD Checklist 7-7 Selected Excerpts                                        Identified Problems

 2. At the time of monitoring, does the project appear to be       Lack of evidence of contributions to replacement and other
    financially viable during the affordability period?             reserve accounts
       Yes     No                                                Property not well-maintained
                                                                   High vacancy rates
                                                                   Low rent collection rate
                                                                   Low cash reserves or replacement reserves

 3. Was a project audit obtained and reviewed?                     No audit
       Yes     No                                                Audit submitted, but not reviewed
                                                                   Audit findings or recommendations not addressed

 4. Was the capacity of the management team reviewed?              Staff qualifications not available for review
       Yes     No                                                Inexperienced staff, in need of training and/or technical
                                                                    assistance
                                                                   Staff not qualified to carry out work

NOTES on Project Descriptions




B. Subsidy
A number of HOME requirements pertain to the subsidy of the project, including:
      1. Minimum and maximum HOME investment
      2. Subsidy layering
      3. Forms of assistance

230                                                                                                                 Monitoring HOME
1. Minimum and Maximum HOME Investment
Background: The HOME Program sets both a minimum and maximum amount of HOME funds that can be invested in a
project.
    • The minimum amount of HOME funds that can be invested in a project is an average of $1000, multiplied by the
      number of HOME-assisted units in the project.
    • The maximum per unit subsidy limit varies by PJ and is determined by HUD based on the PJ’s Section 221(d)(3)
      program limits.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.205(c) and 92.250(a)
 Documentation:
    • PJ’s Section 221(d)(3) program limits for the year the project was funded
    • Evidence that the program administrator determined that the per unit subsidy amount provided was less than the
      applicable 221(d)(3) limit
    • Written agreement between the PJ and the State recipient, subrecipient, contractor, and/or developer, as applicable
    • Grant/loan document between the program administrator and developer

               HUD Checklist 7-7 Selected Excerpts                                      Identified Problems

 5. Is the HOME subsidy to the project at least $1000 per unit?    No record that program administrator determined the per
    [24 CFR 92.205(c)]                                              unit subsidy
      Yes       No                                               HOME investment is less than $1000

 6. Is the HOME per unit subsidy to the project less than          No record that the program administrator determined the per
    [or equal to] the maximum per unit subsidy? [24 CFR             unit HOME investment
    92.250(a)]                                                     No record that a comparison was made of per unit HOME
      Yes       No                                                investment and the 221(d)(3) limit
                                                                   HOME investment is greater than the maximum 221(d)(3)
               Maximum Per Unit Subsidy [221(d)(3) Limits]          limit
             The maximum per unit subsidy limits are based         Wrong subsidy limit used (such as, wrong year)
             on the 221(d)(3) limits and are available from the
                                                                   Using limit in excess of actual approved limit or 240% of the
             HUD Field Office or online at http://www.hud.          base 221(d)(3) limits
             gov/offices/cpd/affordablehousing/programs/
             home/limits/subsidylimits.cfm.
    TIP




             For some PJs, the 221(d)(3) limits have been
             increased to 210% of the base limit. For these
             PJs, HUD allows an increase in the per unit
             subsidy amount on a program-wide basis, upon
             request, up to no more than 240% of the base
             221(d)(3) limits. For more information, see
             HOMEfires, Vol. 9, No. 4, issued August 2008 and
             available online at http://www.hud.gov/offices/
             cpd/affordablehousing/library/homefires/
             volumes/vol9no4.cfm.




2. Subsidy Layering
Background: When more than one public subsidy is provided to a project, the HOME Program requires the program admin­
istrator to conduct a layering analysis or underwriting review to ensure that no more than the amount necessary is invested in
the project and that the developer does not receive an excessive return on investment. The PJ must adopt a subsidy layering
policy to ensure that all projects are evaluated based on the same criteria.


Chapter 6: Rental Housing Programs                                                                                             231
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.250(b)
 Documentation:
      • CPD Notice 98-01, Layering Guidance for HOME Participating Jurisdictions When Combining HOME Funds With
        Other Government Subsidies, issued January 22, 1998 and available at http://www.hud.gov/offices/cpd/affordable­
        housing/lawsandregs/notices/index.cfm#2001.
      • PJ’s subsidy layering guidelines and procedures
      • PJ's underwriting policy and procedures
      • Project development budget
      • Project operating budget
      • Sources and uses statement
      • Evidence that a subsidy layering review was conducted and a determination that the project was not over subsidized.
        (See Figure 6-1 for subsidy layering and cost reasonable analysis questions.)

              HUD Checklist 7-7 Selected Excerpts                                      Identified Problems

 7. If HOME was combined with other public funds, did the         PJ has not adopted subsidy layering policy
    [program administrator] perform a subsidy layering review?
                                                                  PJ did not convey subsidy layering policy and guidance to the
    [24 CFR 92.250(b) and 92.508(a)(3)(iii)]                       program administrator
       Yes     No      N/A                                     Subsidy layering review did not follow PJ policy
                                                                  No record that subsidy layering review was conducted
                                                                  Project was over or under subsidized




232                                                                                                             Monitoring HOME
                Figure 6-1. Subsidy Layering and Cost Reasonableness Questions and Criteria
 Note 1: The subsidy layering analysis must be based on formal statements submitted by the developer in the form of financial
 spreadsheets, ideally in both electronic and hard copy form. These documents, once finalized during the review process, should then
 be made part of the written development agreement.
 Note 2: Cost reasonableness determinations must be supported by market information determined or verified independently by the
 PJ.
                                                      Sources and Uses Statement
 • Are all sources of funding identified? What is their funding status—committed, requested, “we can get it”?
 • How many HOME units are in the project? Are there at least a number of units that is proportional to the share of costs covered by
   HOME or that equal the actual costs of the HOME units?
 • What is the requested level of subsidy per unit? Is this amount within the program limit (based on the FHA 221(d)(3) limit for the
   community)? Are there any costs that are ineligible under the HOME Program? If so, are there other sources of funds, other than
   HOME, to cover these costs?
                                                          Development Budget
 • Are development costs reasonable? Are all line items clearly explained? Are there development items that have been neglected?
 • What are the per unit costs? Are these within the program limits? How do these costs compare to what it would cost to build/
   rehab/acquire a comparable unit on the market?
 • Have construction staff/cost estimators reviewed plans, specifications and cost estimates?
 • Does the development cash flow budget show that funds will be available when they are needed?
 • Is the developer fee reasonable and payment tied to milestones and/or completion?
                                                            Operating Budget
 • Do income and expense line items appear reasonable? Are there any items that appear to be missing?
 • What is the rent structure? Will the population that this project is designed for be able to/be willing to pay these rents? Do rents
   comply with the HOME rent limits?
 • Is income sufficient to cover expenses and debt service? Is the DCR less than 1.15 or greater than 1.3?
 • Are project expenses inflated at a higher level than project income over the life of the project?
 • Does the pro forma show project operations for at least 15 years or the HOME affordability period/term of the loan?
 • What is the annual amount (per unit) being deposited into replacement reserves?
 • How will the property be managed (in-house, property management firm)?



3. Forms of Assistance
Background: The HOME Program allows virtually any form of financial assistance, or subsidy, to be provided for eligible
projects.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.205(b)
 Documentation:
     • Procedures that identify the type of assistance provided to rental projects
     • Written agreement between the program administrator and the developer, as applicable
     • Consolidated Plan or annual action plan and evidence of HUD approval, if “other form of assistance” is used

               HUD Checklist 7-7 Selected Excerpts                                            Identified Problems

 8. Was the subsidy provided in an eligible form of investment          Not clear what form of assistance was provided
    (i.e., equity investments, interest or non-interest bearing
                                                                        Ineligible form of assistance provided
    loans or advances, interest subsidies, deferred payment
    loans, grants or loan guarantees)? [24 CFR 92.205(b)]
      Yes      No




Chapter 6: Rental Housing Programs                                                                                                    233
 9. If the subsidy was provided in a form not listed above, was    No documentation available showing prior approval by HUD
    that form approved by HUD? [24 CFR 92.205(b)(1)]
                                                                   No description identified in the Consolidated Plan
       Yes     No

NOTES on Subsidy




C. Cost Allocation
Background: If HOME does not finance 100 percent of the units, not all the units are necessarily HOME-assisted. A mini­
mum number of HOME-assisted units is based on the amount of the HOME investment. The PJ can designate a greater
number if it chooses.
See HUD Notice CPD 98-02, Allocating Costs and Identifying HOME-Assisted Units in Multifamily Projects, issued March 18,
1998 and available at http://www.hud.gov/offices/cpd/lawsregs/notices/1998/98-2.pdf for more information.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.205 and 92.208
 Documentation:
      • Project budget and cost analysis
      • Project information to document types of units (such as plans, blueprints, or bid documents)

              HUD Checklist 7-7 Selected Excerpts                                       Identified Problems

 10. If a proration method of cost allocation was used, were       Ineligible costs were not subtracted from TDC
     any HOME-ineligible costs subtracted from the total
                                                                   Luxury items paid for with HOME funds
     development cost (TDC) to determine the total HOME-
     eligible development costs? [24 CFR 92.205(d)]
       Yes     No      N/A

 11. If units are not comparable, was a unit-by-unit cost          Costs were pro-rated and not calculated unit-by-unit, even
     allocation system used? [24 CFR 92.205(d)]                     though the units are not comparable
       Yes     No      N/A

 12. Was the cost allocation calculation documented? [24 CFR       No documentation in the file
     92.508(a)(3)(ii)]
                                                                   Errors in the pro-ration calculation
       Yes     No




234                                                                                                             Monitoring HOME
 13. Did the PJ designate the correct number of HOME-assisted      Insufficient number of HOME-assisted units designated
     units, based on the proportion of HOME funds invested, or
     based on which units received HOME funds? 
      Yes     No

NOTES on Cost Allocation




D. Eligible and Reasonable Costs
The PJ monitor’s review of costs should include a review of:
     1. Eligibility of HOME costs
     2. Cost reasonableness
     3. Refinancing

1. Eligibility of HOME Costs
Background: HOME funds can be used to pay hard new construction or rehabilitation costs necessary to meet required
property standards; associated soft costs (e.g., fees, insurance, or appraisals); and general property improvements that are con­
sidered standard or customary for the area. Figure 6-2 summarizes eligible hard and soft development costs under the HOME
Program.
Within certain requirements, HOME funds may be used to cover the cost of funding an initial operating deficit reserve for
new construction and rehabilitation projects in order to meet any shortfall in project income during the project rent-up
period.
Site improvements located on the project site, such as onsite roads and sewer and water lines necessary to the development of
the project, are HOME-eligible. The project site is the property, owned by the project owner, where the project is located.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.206(a)(3)(iii)
 Documentation:
     • Sources and uses statement
     • Written agreement between the program administrator and the developer
     • Project financial statements for the period covering the initial 18-month start-up period
     • Financial records indicating use of funds



Chapter 6: Rental Housing Programs                                                                                          235
      • Map showing location of site improvements
      • List of site improvements and notes indicating a determination of eligibility

               HUD Checklist 7-7 Selected Excerpts                                        Identified Problems

 14. If HOME funds paid for site improvements were they            Costs were not eligible
     eligible improvements located on the project site? [24 CFR
                                                                   Documentation not sufficient to determine if costs were
     92.206(a)(3)(iii)]                                             eligible
        Yes     No      N/A                                     Site improvements were not located on project site


                                   Figure 6-2. HOME-Eligible Rental Housing Costs
                             Hard Costs                                                     Soft Costs
      • Acquisition of land (for a specific project) and          •   Financing fees
        existing structures                                       •   Credit reports
      • Site preparations or improvements, including              •   Title binders and insurance
        demolition                                                •   Surety fees
      • Securing of buildings                                     •   Recordation fees, transaction taxes
      • Construction materials and labor                          •   Legal and accounting fees, including cost
                                                                      certification
                                                                  •   Appraisals
                                                                  •   Architectural/engineering fees, including
                                                                      specifications and job progress inspections
                                                                  •   Environmental reviews
                                                                  •   Builders’ or developers’ fees
                                                                  •   Affirmative marketing, initial leasing, and marketing
                                                                      costs
                                                                  •   Staff and overhead costs incurred by the PJ that
                                                                      are directly related to a specific project
                                                                  •   Operating deficit reserves (up to 18 months)
                          Relocation Costs                                         Loan Guarantee Accounts
      • Payment for replacement housing, moving costs,            • Amount based upon 20% of total outstanding
        and out-of-pocket expenses                                  principal balance of guaranteed loans
      • Advisory services                                         • A loan in default can be repaid in full
      • Staff and overhead related to relocation assistance
        and services

               HUD Checklist 7-7 Selected Excerpts                                        Identified Problems

 15. Does the “Sources and Uses Statement” or other                Documentation in the file or knowledge of the project shows
     documentation indicate that there were sufficient HOME-        other sources used in project that are not identified on the
     eligible costs associated with the project to support the      “sources and uses” statement
     amount of HOME funds provided? [24 CFR 92.205(d)]             Ineligible costs identified under HOME sources and uses
        Yes     No

 16. Does the “Sources and Uses Statement” or other                Ineligible costs included on:
     documentation indicate that there were sufficient HOME-
                                                                        Project budget
     eligible costs associated with the project to support the
     amount of HOME funds provided? [24 CFR 92.205(d)]                 Construction contract
        Yes     No                                               Project costs not identified in sufficient detail in the project
                                                                    budget and/or construction contract to determine which
                                                                    costs are HOME costs




236                                                                                                                Monitoring HOME
 17. Are all IDIS draw downs supported by invoices, timesheets,    Insufficient documentation of draws
     or cost allocation plans as applicable? 
                                                                   Costs not accurately set up in IDIS
       Yes      No                                               IDIS draw downs not supported by actual expenditures

 18. Did the PJ allow an initial operating reserve to be
     established for this project? 
       Yes      No      N/A

 19. If the PJ allowed an initial operating reserve, is there      No documentation in the file showing use of operating deficit
     documentation supporting that the reserve was used             reserves
     for project operating expenses, scheduled payments to         Reserve used for ineligible purposes
     replacement reserves, and/or debt service in the first 18
     months of the project only? 
       Yes      No      N/A

 20. If yes, were reserves remaining at the end of the 18-month    Eligible use of remaining operating reserve funds not
     period (retained by the owner/developer for reserves)          specified in written agreement
     used in accordance of the written agreement between the       Retained funds not used in accordance with written
     developer/owner and the program administrator?                agreement
       Yes      No      N/A



2. Cost Reasonableness
Background: Reasonableness of costs should be based on all of the following factors:
    • Costs of comparable projects in the same geographical area
    • The qualifications of the cost estimators for the various budget line items
    • Comparable costs published by recognized industry cost index services.
This review is most often conducted by looking at the project development budget.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.505(a), 24 CFR 85.22, and OMB Circular A-87, Attachment A, Section C.2
 Documentation:
    • Project development budget
    • Determination of reasonableness and corresponding file documentation

              HUD Checklist 7-7 Selected Excerpts                                      Identified Problems

 21. Were costs reasonable (e.g., acquisition costs                Costs were not reasonable
     supported by appraisal, developer’s fees, rehabilitation,
                                                                   No evidence that program administrator made a cost
     or construction costs within local norms, etc.)? [24           reasonableness determination
     CFR 92.505(a); 24 CFR 85.22; and OMB Circular A-87,
     Attachment A, Section C.2]                                    Documentation not sufficient to determine if costs were
                                                                    reasonable
       Yes      No



3. Refinancing
Background: Refinancing existing debt on rental projects with HOME funds is eligible only when the refinancing increases
the supply of affordable units.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.206(b)
 Documentation:
    • Worksheet or documentation that illustrates the increased the supply of affordable units


Chapter 6: Rental Housing Programs                                                                                            237
      • Copy of the refinancing loan document(s)

               HUD Checklist 7-7 Selected Excerpts                                        Identified Problems

 22. If HOME funds were used for refinancing of existing debt,      No refinancing guidelines in Consolidated Plan
     did the project meet the refinancing guidelines established
                                                                    PJ’s refinancing guidelines not followed
     in the PJ’s Consolidated Plan? [24 CFR 92.206(b)]
                                                                    No documentation that refinancing maintained or increased
        Yes     No      N/A                                       the supply of affordable units
                                                                    No financial feasibility analysis to show that affordability is
                                                                     sustainable, and to show that new investment was needed
                                                                     to maintain or create affordable units
                                                                    Affordability period was not for 15 years
                                                                    HOME funds were used to refinance multifamily loan that
                                                                     was insured by another Federal program




 23. Was rehabilitation the primary activity associated with the    Refinancing was not done with rehabilitation
     refinanced project? 
        Yes     No      N/A

NOTES on Eligible and Reasonable Costs




E. Property Standards
The project must meet applicable property standards, which are summarized in Figure 6-3, upon project completion and dur­
ing the affordability period. The applicable property standards vary, depending on activity. The PJ monitor must review:
      1. Inspections
      2. Lead-based paint requirements
      3. International Energy Conservation Code (IECC)
      4. Accessibility requirements




238                                                                                                                 Monitoring HOME
                  Figure 6-3. Applicable Property Standards for HOME-assisted Rental Properties
       Acquisition only
     (no rehabilitation or         Rehabilitation                             New Construction                      Manufactured Housing
         construction)
    • State and local       • PJ’s written rehabilitation            • Replacement housing, moving              • Manufactured Home
       housing quality        standards                                costs and out-of-pocket                    Construction and Safety
       standards and code • State and local code                       expenses                                   Standards established in
       requirements; or, if                                                                                       24 CFR Part 3280
                              requirements, or if                    • Advisory services
       none apply, Section    none apply, one of the                                                    • State or local laws
       8 Housing Quality                                             • Staff and overhead related
                              following national model                                                    or codes; or, in their
       Standards (HQS).                                                to relocation assistance and
                              codes:1                                                                     absence, manufactured
                                                                       services
                                                                                                          housing must be
                                    — Uniform Building                • State and local code              installed in accordance
                                      Code (ICBO)                       requirements, or if none apply,   with the manufacturer’s
                                    — National Building                 one of the following national     written instructions.
                                      Code (BOCA)                       model codes:
                                    — Standard Building                   — Uniform Building Code
                                      Code (SBCCI)                          (ICBO)
                                    — Council of American                 — National Building Code
                                      Building Officials one-               (BOCA)
                                      or two-family code
                                                                          — Standard Building Code
                                      (CABO)
                                                                            (SBCCI)
                                    — Minimum Property
                                                                          — Council of American
                                      Standards at 24 CFR
                                                                            Building Officials one- or
                                      200.925 or 200.926
                                                                            two-family code (CABO)
                                      (FHA)
                                                                          — Minimum Property
                                 • Accessibility
                                                                            Standards at 24 CFR
                                   requirements, where
                                                                            200.925 or 200.926 (FHA)
                                   applicable.
                                                                      • Accessibility requirements,
                                                                        where applicable
                                                                      • International Energy
                                                                        Conservation Code (IECC).


1. Inspections
Background: Upon completion and during the affordability period, projects must be inspected periodically to ensure that
they meet or exceed, and continue to meet or exceed, applicable property standards. The applicable codes and standards vary
depending upon the type of project (acquisition only, rehabilitation, or new construction), as summarized in Figure 6-3.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.251(a) and (c)
 Documentation:


1
     Since the promulgation of the HOME Program regulations, these code issuing agencies have merged to form the International Code Council (ICC).
     The model codes used for the HOME Program are no longer being updated. In their stead, the ICC has issued the International Building Code. HUD
     will consider whether changes to the HOME regulations incorporating the International Building Code are appropriate. The HOME Program web
     page provides updated information on all HOME requirements. (See http://www.hud.gov/offices/cpd/affordablehousing/programs/home/index.
     cfm.) For more information about the International Building Code, see http://www.iccsafe.org.



Chapter 6: Rental Housing Programs                                                                                                            239
      • Copy of written rehabilitation standards
      • Copy of applicable property standards
      • Project plans and specifications or work write-ups
      • Inspection report(s), including final inspection report upon project completion
      • Letter(s) to property manager/owner with inspection results
      • Documentation in project files that shows that deficiencies were resolved in a timely fashion and to the applicable
        standards

               HUD Checklist 7-7 Selected Excerpts                                            Identified Problems

 24. Was work performed in accordance with written                     No written rehabilitation standards exist
     rehabilitation standards, if applicable? [24 CFR 92.251(a)]
                                                                       Work did not meet written rehabilitation standards
        Yes     No       N/A                                        Final inspection found deficiencies but no resolution
                                                                        documented in the file
                TIP




                                                       Written Rehabilitation Standards
                       Rehabilitation standards specify acceptable construction methods and materials and the
                       quality standards that the property must meet when the rehabilitation work is completed.
                       Inspectors should use rehabilitation standards when inspecting completed work.


 25. Do work write-ups and final inspection reports indicate           Work write-up is incomplete
     that the project met all applicable property standards at
                                                                       No final inspection report on file
     completion? [24 CFR 92.251(a)]
                                                                       Property met some but not all of the applicable property
        Yes     No                                                    standards
                                                                       Final inspection found deficiencies but no resolution
                                                                        documented in the file

 26. Do subsequent PJ inspection reports indicate that the             Insufficient documentation for inspections
     owner is maintaining the housing in compliance with
                                                                       Inspections not performed
     applicable State and local housing quality standards and
     code requirements or, in the absence of such standards            Inspections not performed with the frequency required
     or code requirements, with Housing Voucher Housing                Deficiencies were found during inspection but no
     Quality Standards as set out in 24 CFR 982.401? [24 CFR            documentation of resolution or follow up
     92.251(c)]
        Yes     No       N/A
                                                    Inspections During Affordability Period
                During the affordability period, projects must continue to meet or exceed applicable property standards. At a
                minimum, the PJ must inspect HOME-assisted units with the following frequency (based on the total number
                of units, not just the HOME-assisted units):
         TIP




                • One to four total units = every three years
                • Five to 25 total units = every two years
                • Over 25 total units = annually.
                A good rule of thumb is to inspect at least 15 to 20% of the HOME-assisted units in a project and a minimum
                of one unit in every building. If compliance problems are found, more units and records should be inspected.
                Remember that the HOME property standards apply to the common areas and the building’s exterior, as well
                as to the HOME-assisted units. Any deficiencies seen in these areas must also be addressed.




240                                                                                                                  Monitoring HOME
2. Lead-based Paint Requirements
Background: All occupants in units constructed before 1978 must receive a disclosure notice and pamphlet describing lead-
based paint hazards.
The “level of assistance” dictates the required type of lead hazard evaluation and reduction. This number is determined by
calculating the lesser of the Federal funds per unit or the rehabilitation hard costs per unit (exclusive of the lead hazard evalua­
tion and reduction costs). The PJ monitor should look for the following documentation for these levels of assistance:
     • Level of assistance under $5,000. Documentation of a paint test of disturbed surfaces, notice of lead hazard evalu­
       ation, evidence of paint repaired by qualified workers who followed safe work practices, clearance, and notice of lead
       hazard reduction activities before reoccupancy.
     • Level of assistance between $5,000–$25,000. Documentation of a risk assessment or an inspection that presumed
       there was lead-based paint in the home, notice of lead hazard evaluation or presumption, evidence of interim controls
       or standard treatments by qualified workers who followed safe work practices, clearance, and notice of lead hazard
       reduction activities before reoccupancy.
     • Level of assistance over $25,000. Documentation of a risk assessment or an inspection that presumed there was
       lead-based paint in the home, notice of lead hazard evaluation or presumption, evidence of abatement activities by
       qualified workers who followed abatement practices, clearance, and notice of lead hazard reduction activities before
       reoccupancy.
If lead hazard reduction activities occurred, a clearance test must be conducted and the unit must pass clearance.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.355 and 24 CFR Part 35


 If the project is a new construction project, or if the property being rehabilitated was constructed in 1978 or later, the
 PJ monitor can skip this section and proceed to Subsection 3. International Energy Conservation Code.
 For properties constructed prior to 1978, this checklist identifies the key lead-based paint requirements and
 documentation required. For a complete review of compliance with the lead-based paint requirements, PJ monitors
 must complete the Lead Hazards Monitoring Guidance for Rehabilitation (HUD Checklist Exhibits 24-1, 24-2 or 24-3).



 Documentation:
     • Inspection report(s)
     • Worksheet or form that that shows the cost allocation and determination of the level of assistance
     • Documentation that the Lead-based Paint Pamphlet was provided to tenants
     • Documentation that the Disclosure Notice was provided to tenants
     • Documentation that the Notice of Lead Hazard Evaluation or Notice of Presumption was provided to tenants
     • Risk assessment, if applicable
     • Contractor qualifications
     • Clearance test, if applicable
     • Documentation that the Notice of Lead Hazard Reduction Activities was provided to tenants, if applicable
     • Abatement report, if applicable
     • Copy of correspondence from owner to tenant requesting that the tenant inform owner of any deteriorating painted
       surfaces




Chapter 6: Rental Housing Programs                                                                                             241
               HUD Checklist 7-7 Selected Excerpts                                          Identified Problems

 27. If the project involved rehabilitation, does it comply with        Level of assistance not determined
     the lead hazard reduction requirements of Part 35, if
                                                                        No evaluation method followed
     applicable? (Complete the appropriate sections of Lead
     Hazard Monitoring Exhibit 24-1.] [24 CFR 92.355]                   Work method followed not correct
        Yes     No        N/A                                        Lead Safe Housing Rule not followed

 28. Does the file documentation for each unit contain the              No notification provided
     following: Lead-based paint notification?
                                                                        Notification not signed by tenant prior to occupancy
     [24 CFR 92.508(a)(3)(iv) and 92.508(a)(7)(vi)]
                                                                                           Disclosure Forms




                                                            TIP
        Yes     No
                                                                   Unit occupants must receive a disclosure form from the owner or
                                                                   property manager noting any known presence of lead-based paint.
                                                                   The owner or property manager must keep a copy of the disclosure
                                                                   notice in each tenant's file. The tenant must sign this notice
                                                                   before the unit is occupied.

 29. Does project file document compliance with: Lead safety            Level of assistance not determined
     requirements? [24 CFR 92.355 and 92.508(a)(3)(iv) and
                                                                        No evaluation method followed
     (a)(7)(vi)]
                                                                        Work method followed not correct
        Yes     No
                                                                        Lead Safe Housing Rule not followed



3. International Energy Conservation Code (IECC)
Background: New construction rental projects must meet the International Energy Conservation Code (IECC).
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.251(a)
 Documentation:
      • Review of plans and specifications
      • Final inspection reports

               HUD Checklist 7-7 Selected Excerpts                                          Identified Problems

 30. If the project is new construction, does it meet the IECC?         Insufficient documentation to show that plans were reviewed
     [24 CFR 92.251(a)]                                                  for IECC compliance
        Yes     No        N/A                                        No final inspection report
                                                                        Project does not meet IECC



4. Accessibility Requirements
Background: Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 prohibits discrimination in Federally-assisted programs on
the basis of disability. Section 504 imposes requirements to ensure that qualified individuals with disabilities have access to
programs and activities that receive Federal funds, and requires that certain federally–assisted properties be built to be acces­
sible to persons with mobility and sensory impairments. These accessibility standards are summarized in Figure 6-4. See CPD
Notice 00-09, Accessibility Notice: Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 and the Fair Housing Act, issued December 26,
2000 for additional guidance.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.251(a)(3)
 Documentation:
      • Review of plans and specifications
      • Final inspection

242                                                                                                                  Monitoring HOME
             HUD Checklist 7-7 Selected Excerpts                                       Identified Problems

 31. Does the project meet the applicable Section 504              Insufficient documentation to show that plans were reviewed
     accessibility requirements? [24 CFR 92.251(a)(3)]              for Section 504 compliance
      Yes      No      N/A                                      No accessible units planned or built in project that was
                                                                    required to make 5% of units accessible for mobility
                                                                    impaired persons and 2% of units accessible for sensory
                                                                    impaired persons (or at least one of each type of unit)
                                                                   Accessible units do not conform to Uniform Federal
                                                                    Accessibility Standard
                                                                   No final inspection report

                       Figure 6-4. Summary of Section 504 Accessibility Requirements
                                                   Removal of Physical Barriers

• For new construction of multifamily projects with five or more units, a minimum of 5% of the units in the project (but
  not less than one unit) must be accessible to individuals with mobility impairments, and an additional 2% of the
  units (but not less than one unit) must be accessible to individuals with sensory (hearing or vision) impairments.
• The Section 504 definition of substantial rehabilitation multifamily projects includes construction in a project
  with 15 or more units for which the rehabilitation costs will be 75% or more of the replacement cost. In such
  development, 5% of the units in the project (but not less than one unit) must be accessible to individuals with
  mobility impairments, and an additional 2% (but not less than one unit) must be accessible to individuals with
  sensory impairments.
• When rehabilitation less extensive than substantial rehabilitation is undertaken, alterations must, to the maximum
  extent feasible, make the unit accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities, until 5% of the units are
  accessible to people with mobility impairments. Alterations to common spaces must, to the maximum extent
  feasible, make the project accessible.
• Accessible units must, to the maximum extent feasible, be distributed throughout projects and sites and must be
  available in a sufficient range of sizes and amenities so as to not limit choice.
• Owners and managers of projects with accessible units must adopt suitable means to ensure that information
  regarding the availability of accessible units reaches eligible individuals with disabilities. They also must take
  reasonable nondiscriminatory steps to maximize use of such units by eligible individuals with disabilities.
• When an accessible unit becomes vacant, before offering the unit to a non-disabled individual, the owner/manager
  should offer the unit: first, to a current occupant of the project who requires the accessibility feature(s); and second,
  to an eligible qualified applicant on the waiting list who requires the accessibility feature(s).
• Under Section 504, accessible units must conform to the Uniform Federal Accessibility Standards (UFAS), although
  deviations are permitted in specific circumstances.

NOTES on Property Standards




Chapter 6: Rental Housing Programs                                                                                             243
F. Other Project Requirements
There are a number of other project requirements that apply to rental housing that the PJ must monitor, including:
      1. Deed restrictions
      2. Site and neighborhood standards
      3. Affirmative marketing
      4. Environmental review
      5. Labor and related requirements

1. Deed Restrictions
Background: The PJ must execute and record a deed restriction or covenant running with the land for every HOME-assisted
rental project. The deed or covenant must specify the HOME long-term affordability requirements. This legal tool is required
in addition to any other legal tools needed to convey HOME funds (such as a written agreement or loan documents).
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92. 252(e)
 Documentation:
      • Copy of deed restriction (or covenant running with the land)
      • Evidence that deed restriction/covenant was recorded

               HUD Checklist 7-7 Selected Excerpts                                       Identified Problems

 32. Has the PJ recorded a deed restriction on the property         No recorded deed restriction or covenant
     to ensure its continued use as affordable rental housing
                                                                    Deed restriction or covenant executed, but not recorded
     and adherence to all applicable requirements? [24 CFR
     92.252(e)]                                                     Deed restriction or covenant does not specify correct HOME
                                                                     requirements (such as incorrect period of affordability)
        Yes     No



2. Site and Neighborhood Standards
Background: Rental projects that are newly constructed are subject to a site and neighborhood standards review by the PJ to
determine that:
      • Site is adequate for proposed purpose
      • Project and location furthers compliance with fair housing laws
      • Site is not in an area of minority concentration or racially mixed area
        — If site is in an area of minority concentration, the PJ must determine that one of the following is true:
            – The project will not increase significantly the proportion of minorities
            – Sufficient comparable housing opportunities exist outside the area for minorities based on analysis of HUD-
              assisted housing
            – Proposed project is necessary to meet overriding housing need that cannot otherwise be met
            – Proposed project is integral to a neighborhood preservation strategy or integral to revitalization area strategy.


244                                                                                                             Monitoring HOME
    • Project promotes greater choice of housing opportunities and avoids undue concentration of assisted persons
    • Proposed sites not seriously detrimental to family life
    • Proposed site is comparably accessible to broad range of services and facilities
    • Travel and access to jobs from proposed site is not excessive.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.202(b) and 24 CFR 983.6(b)
 Documentation:
    • Copy of PJ’s site and neighborhood standards review

             HUD Checklist 7-7 Selected Excerpts                                         Identified Problems

 33. If the project was new construction, did the PJ perform a      No evidence of a site and neighborhood review conducted
     site and neighborhood standards review in accordance with
                                                                    Site and neighborhood review was insufficient because:
     24 CFR 983.6(b)? [24 CFR 92.202(b)]
      Yes      No                                                    ___________________________________________


3. Affirmative Marketing
Background: All HOME funded rental projects with five or more HOME-assisted units must follow an affirmative market­
ing plan adopted by the PJ to ensure the project is marketed to those persons least likely to apply. Affirmative marketing
requirements and procedures must include the following elements:
    • Methods for informing the public, owners, and potential tenants about fair housing laws and the PJ's policies (for
      example, use of the fair housing logo and equal opportunity language)
    • A description of what owners and/or the PJ will do to affirmatively market housing assisted with HOME funds, and
      maintenance of records that document the actions taken in this marketing effort
    • A description of what owners and/or the PJ will do to inform persons not likely to apply for housing without special
      outreach, and maintenance of records that document the actions taken in this marketing effort
    • A description of how efforts will be assessed and what corrective actions will be taken where requirements are not met,
      and maintenance of records that document an assessment of the effectiveness of the marketing effort.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.351
 Documentation:
    • Affirmative marketing policies or procedures, for projects with five or more HOME-assisted units
    • Documentation of affirmative marketing efforts (such as marketing materials, documentation of outreach efforts, or
      copies of advertisements and materials)

             HUD Checklist 7-7 Selected Excerpts                                         Identified Problems

 34. Has the PJ adopted affirmative marketing procedures for        PJ has not adopted affirmative marketing procedures
     projects with five or more HOME-assisted units? [24 CFR
                                                                    Affirmative marketing procedures are not sufficiently detailed
     92.351]
      Yes      No      N/A

 35. If the project has five or more HOME-assisted units, is it     PJ has not conveyed affirmative marketing plan to program
     complying with the PJ’s affirmative marketing requirements?     administrator/owner
     [24 CFR 92.351]                                                No documentation of compliance with affirmative marketing
      Yes      No      N/A                                        requirements
                                                                    No use of fair housing, equal opportunity logo in marketing
                                                                     or signage



Chapter 6: Rental Housing Programs                                                                                              245
4. Environmental Review
Background: HOME-funded activities are subject to the envi­
ronmental review requirements at 24 CFR Part 58. PJ monitors            For more information, see HUD Notice CPD 01-11,
need to complete HUD Checklist Exhibit 21-1 to determine if             Environmental Review and the HOME Investment
the environmental review requirements were met.                         Partnerships Program, issued July 17, 2001, available
                                                                        at www.hud.gov/offices/cpd/lawsregs/notices/
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR Part 58 and 24 CFR 92.352                      2001/01-11.pdf, and HOMEfires Vol. 4, No. 2
                                                                        available at http://www.hud.gov/offices/cpd/
 Documentation:                                                        affordablehousing/library/homefires/volumes/
      • Environmental Review Record (ERR)                               vol4no2.cfm.

      • Evidence of flood insurance, if applicable

               HUD Checklist 7-7 Selected Excerpts                                      Identified Problems

 36. Was an environmental review completed for the project?          No evidence of an ERR
     (Complete Exhibit 21-1 to answer this question.) [24 CFR
     92.352]
        Yes     No

 37. Has the PJ complied with flood insurance protection             No documentation of flood insurance
     when assistance was used for acquisition or construction
     (including rehabilitation) of real property located within
     the Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA)? (Use [HUD
     Checklist] Exhibit 27-1, Guide for Review of Flood Insurance
     Protection.) [24 CFR 92.352]
        Yes     No



5. Labor and Related Requirements
Background: The Davis-Bacon Act applies to HOME rental activities when the construction contract includes 12 or more
HOME-assisted units.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.354
 Documentation:
      • Completed interview forms from interviews conducted with workers
      • Receipt and review of payroll
      • Wage determinations from HUD




246                                                                                                           Monitoring HOME
             HUD Checklist 7-7 Selected Excerpts                                        Identified Problems

 38. If the project has 12 or more HOME-assisted units, does        No evidence that Davis-Bacon provisions were followed
     the file documentation indicate that the PJ applied the
                                                                    No interviews of workers were conducted, or no
     Davis-Bacon labor standards requirements to the project?        documentation of interviews retained
     [24 CFR 92.354]
                                                                    No receipt or notes from reviewing payroll
      Yes      No      N/A
                                                                    No wage determinations from HUD in file

                                                     Key Davis-Bacon Requirements
         The most important questions for the PJ monitor to address include:
         • Do files document that there are 12 or more HOME-assisted units in the construction contract (that is, that Davis-
            Bacon applies)?
   TIP




         • Were all pre-construction requirements met?
         • Did the program administrator document that it convened conferences with contractors and subcontractors
            inexperienced with labor requirements?
         • Did the program administrator obtain and use proper and current wage decision from the HUD Labor Relations Field
            Office staff, or other approved source, and include it in the project file?
         • Do all bid documents, contracts, and subcontracts include required language and wage decision?
         • Are onsite visits to interview workers and verify presence of required posters conducted periodically and documented?
         • Are payroll forms submitted and reviewed, problems noted and resolved, and issues documented in the project file?


NOTES on Other Project Requirements




G. Construction Management
The program administrator must monitor and document the construction process to ensure that the following construction
management requirements are met:
    1. Qualified contractors
    2. Inspections
    3. Change orders

1. Qualified Contractors
Background: Only qualified contractors may be used for HOME-funded projects.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.350(a) and 24 CFR 85.35



Chapter 6: Rental Housing Programs                                                                                             247
 Documentation:
      • Excluded parties list search results
      • Contractor files
      • Names and notes from references
      • Pictures or project descriptions of past work

               HUD Checklist 7-7 Selected Excerpts                                              Identified Problems

 39. Did the PJ ensure that its contractors are not excluded,           No documentation to verify that contractor eligibility was
     disqualified or otherwise ineligible (e.g., suspension,             verified on excluded parties list
     debarment, or limited denial of participation) for Federal         No evidence of verification of bonding and insurance
     procurement and non-procurement programs at the time of
     contract execution or during the period of project work? [24       Contractor not eligible to perform on Federal contracts
     CFR 92.350(a) and 24 CFR 85.35]
        Yes      No                                     Verifying Contractor Eligibility for Federal Participation
                             TIP




                                    The program administrator must verify that its prospective contractors are eligible to undertake
                                    Federal work by checking the excluded parties website: http://www.epls.gov/index.html.
                                    The program administrator should also verify that the contractor has:
                                    • Good past performance
                                    • Strong references
                                    • Proof of bonding and insurance (generally required by the PJ).

 40. Does the PJ have documentation of both good and strong             No documentation of reference or past performance check
     past performance and references for the contractor?                 for selected contractors
        Yes      No                                                   Contractors hired in spite of bad references
                                                       Reviewing Contractor Qualifications
                  Prior to selection, the PJ should review contractor qualifications:
           TIP




                  • Proof of bonding and insurance (typically required by PJ)
                  • Applicable certifications, licenses, and other documentation of qualifications (e.g., lead-safe work
                    practices, lead-based paint abatement supervisor, etc.)
                  • Photos of past jobs
                  • Names and contact information of references and past customers, and notes about reference checks
                  • Documentation or notes about past experiences with PJ.



2. Inspections
Background: Inspections of rehabilitation or construction work are one of the most critical elements of construction man­
agement. For rental projects that involve construction (rehabilitation or new construction), three types of inspections are
necessary:
      • Initial inspections identify conditions within the unit that do not meet applicable property standards or codes and
        must be addressed in rehabilitation.
      • Payment/Progress inspections verify that work requested for payment is completed according to the applicable prop­
        erty standards. It is a good business practice to retain a small amount (typically 10 percent) of each progress payment
        until all work is completed and all contract close-out documentation has been received.
      • Final inspections verify that all work specified in the write-up and/or construction contract is performed properly
        and that the applicable property standards and codes are met. If an inspection reveals that additional work is required,
        a detailed list of the remaining work (a “punch list") must be prepared. The PJ must conduct a final re-inspection to
        verify that punch list items are completed. Where building code inspections are required, the building code inspector’s


248                                                                                                                    Monitoring HOME
       reports or other documentation from the jurisdiction indicating that the work meets codes/standards should be
       included in the project file.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.505(a), 92.251(a), and 24 CFR 85.36(b)(2)
 Documentation:
    • Inspection reports

              HUD Checklist 7-7 Selected Excerpts                                           Identified Problems

 41. Were progress inspections of the project performed prior         No inspection notes in the file
     to approving the developer or contractor’s request for
                                                                      Requests for payment made without inspection, or prior to
     payment? [24 CFR 92.505(a) and 24 CFR 85.36(b)(2)]                inspection
       Yes      No

 42. Was a final property standards inspection performed? [24         No final inspection report in the file
     CFR 92.251(a) and 24 CFR 85.36(b)(2)]
                                                                      Final payment made and/or certificate of occupancy issued
       Yes      No                                                   without final inspection



3. Change Orders
Background: Any change in the scope of work or budget for a project must be documented and approved as a change order
before the work is initiated. A change order then becomes a binding part of the construction contract and helps the PJ ensure
the quality of the work.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.505(a), 24 CFR 85.36(b)(2), and 85.36(f )
 Documentation:
    • Change orders
    • Justification for change order(s)

              HUD Checklist 7-7 Selected Excerpts                                           Identified Problems

 43. Did the PJ review and approve change orders for any              Insufficient documentation to justify need for change order
     changes in the scope of work? [24 CFR 92.505(a) and 24
                                                                      Change orders not signed or approved
     CFR 85.36(b)(2) and 85.36(f)]
                                                                             Justifying Change Orders
                                          TIP




       Yes      No      N/A
                                                 Prior to approval, the program administrator should review change order requests
                                                 to determine that: (1) The costs are reasonable and eligible, (2) The work is
                                                 needed to meet property codes and standards, and (3) With the additional cost
                                                 the project is still within HOME’s per unit subsidy limits [221(d)(3) limits].


 44. Is there a change order on file for any work that was (1)        Contractor paid more than the original contract amount, but
     Completed but not in the original contract, and (2) Paid for      no change orders or justification on file
     (to the contractor) above the original contract amount?         No change order for all work completed by contractor that
       Yes      No      N/A                                         was not in original contract
                       TIP




                                                          Unauthorized Expenditures

                              For any costs above the amount of the construction contract, if the expenditures
                              were unauthorized and paid for with HOME funds, HUD may determine that the
                              PJ must repay those funds.



NOTES on Construction Management

Chapter 6: Rental Housing Programs                                                                                                  249
H. Initial and Ongoing Rent and Occupancy Requirements
Certain requirements apply initially and throughout the affordability period, related to:
      1. Income eligibility
      2. Project targeting requirements
      3, Fixed and floating units
      4. Rent structure
      5. PJ approval of rents
      6. Annual income recertification
      7. Voucher and project-based assistance
      8. Utility allowances
      9. Leases
      10. Tenant selection policy

1. Income Eligibility
Background: All tenants of HOME-assisted units must qualify as low-income households. A low-income household has
an annual gross income that is no greater than 80 percent of area median income. In addition, the PJ generally needs to set
deeper income targeting limits for its projects to ensure that it meets the HOME “program rule.” The program rule requires
that 90 percent of each annual HOME allocation invested in rental housing (including rental development and tenant-based
rental assistance activities combined) be occupied initially by tenants with annual gross incomes at or below 60 percent of area
median income. The written agreement should specify the PJ’s income targeting requirements for each project.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.252
 Documentation:
      • Tenant application
      • Worksheets or form that shows how tenant household income was determined
      • Written agreement between PJ and State recipient, subrecipient, contractor, and/or developer that specifies the defini­
        tion of income for the project
      • Source documentation (such as pay stubs or bank statements)

250                                                                                                           Monitoring HOME
    • HOME income limits in effect at time of tenant application
    • Worksheet or form that shows comparison of household income and applicable income limits

              HUD Checklist 7-7 Selected Excerpts                                          Identified Problems

 45. Are tenants income-eligible at the time of initial occupancy?    Incorrect income limits used (e.g., wrong year)
     [24 CFR 92.252]
                                                                      Insufficient source documentation to determine income of
      Yes       No                                                   household
                                                                      Income not properly calculated
                                                                      Tenant household not income-eligible

 46. Is the project owner using the correct income limits to          Program administrator not clear about which definition of
     determine eligibility of tenants? [24 CFR 92.2, “Low-income       income should be used
     family,” and 92.252]                                             No documentation showing which income limits were used
      Yes       No                                                  Incorrect income limits used (e.g., wrong year)

 47. Is the project owner using the same definition of income to      Different definitions of income used for different applicants
     qualify all applicants?
                                                                      Incorrect definition of income used
      Yes       No

 48. Is income being determined in accordance with the                Household size not verified through application or personal
     Technical Guide to Determining Income and Allowances for          interview
     the HOME Program (HUD-1780-CPD, issued January 2005)?            All applicable income not “counted”
      Yes       No                                                  Income that should have been excluded was counted
    TIP




                                                                      Anticipated income (expected in the next twelve months) not
                    Income Determination Guidance
                                                                       used
          The Technical Guide to Determining Income and               Income for all family members not counted
          Allowances for the HOME Program is available from           Errors in the calculation
          Community Connections at 1-800-998-9999.


 49. Are initial tenant incomes determined based upon source          No source documentation in the file
     documentation? [24 CFR 92.203(a)(1)]
                                                                      Insufficient source documentation
      Yes       No



2. Project Targeting Requirements
Background: All HOME units must be occupied by low-income tenants (households with annual gross income at or below
80 percent of area median income). In projects with five or more HOME-assisted units, initially and throughout the afford-
ability period, 20 percent of the units must be occupied by very low-income tenants (with annual gross incomes that are at
or below 50 percent of the area median income). The balance of the HOME-assisted units may be occupied by low-income
tenants.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.252(a) and (b)
 Documentation:
    • Rent and occupancy report submitted to the PJ by the property owner
    • Rent rolls or rent/income summary completed by owner or property manager




Chapter 6: Rental Housing Programs                                                                                                 251
               HUD Checklist 7-7 Selected Excerpts                                     Identified Problems

 50. Were project targeting requirements met at initial           Insufficient documentation to verify compliance with project
     occupancy (i.e., all HOME units occupied by low-income        targeting
     tenants and, if 5 or more HOME-assisted units, 20% of        Fewer than 20% of the units occupied by very low-income
     HOME units occupied by tenants below 50% of area median       households
     income)? [24 CFR 92.252(a) and (b)]
                                                                  Units rented to over-income tenants
        Yes     No



3. Fixed and Floating Units
Background: For properties with both assisted and non-assisted units, units must be designated as “fixed” or “floating” units
in the written agreement at the time of project commitment. When HOME-assisted units are “fixed,” the specific units that
are HOME-assisted (and, therefore, subject to HOME rent and occupancy requirements) are designated and never change.
When HOME-assisted units are “floating,” the units that are initially designated as HOME-assisted may change when the
occupant’s income increases above the income limit for the unit, and a new unit is designated as HOME-assisted. While the
specific unit designations may change, the total number of HOME-assisted units in the project remains constant.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.252(j)
 Documentation:
      • Written agreement between PJ or other program administrator and the developer

               HUD Checklist 7-7 Selected Excerpts                                     Identified Problems

 51. Does the written agreement specify whether the units are     Written agreement does not specify fixed or floating
     fixed or floating?                                           designation
        Yes     No



4. Rent Structure
Background: The rents for HOME-assisted units cannot exceed HUD-issued maximum
HOME rents. However, to ensure financial soundness of the project, HUD does not require            The high and low HOME
a project owner to reduce rents below the HOME rents in effect at the time of project com­         rents are available on
mitment. With the exception of one- to four-unit rental projects, every rental project has two     the HOME Program
HOME rent levels: “high HOME rents" and “low HOME rents.” Both the high and low                    website at http://www.
HOME rents represent the maximum that tenants can pay for rent and utilities combined.             hud.gov/offices/cpd/
                                                                                                   affordablehousing/
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.252(a) and (b)                                                         programs/home/limits/
                                                                                                   rent/index.cfm.
 Documentation:
      • Tenant lease
      • Copy of rent rolls or rental compliance worksheet




252                                                                                                            Monitoring HOME
              HUD Checklist 7-7 Selected Excerpts                                       Identified Problems

 52. Did the initial project rent structure meet HOME              Insufficient documentation to determine if rents charged are
     requirements (i.e., rents no greater than the high HOME        in compliance
     rents and, in projects with 5 or more HOME-assisted units,    Lease does not specify tenant rent
     at least 20% of HOME units charging rents not higher than
     the low HOME rent)? [24 CFR 92.252(a) and (b)]                Program administrator or owner used wrong rent limits (i.e.,
                                                                    wrong year) to determine maximum rents
       Yes      No
                                                                   Rents exceed the applicable rent limits
                        Using Utility Allowances
                                                                   Tenant-paid utilities (utility allowance) not deducted from
        When the tenant pays for utilities, a utility allowance     rents
        must be deducted from the HOME rent in order to            Incorrect utility allowance used
  TIP




        determine the maximum rent that can be charged by          Error(s) made in determining maximum rents allowable
        the owner. For example, if the published HOME Rent is
        $700/month for a one- bedroom unit and the tenant
        pays utilities of $100 (current utility allowance), the
        maximum rent that can be charged is $600/month.
        (HOME rent minus tenant paid utilities equals maximum
        rent charged to tenant.)



5. PJ Approval of Rents
Background: The PJ must approve the initial rent structure and any subsequent rent increases, to ensure that rents are
reasonable for the area and to ensure that rents minus applicable utility allowances for tenant-paid utilities do not exceed the
maximum HOME rents established by HUD.
HUD publishes the high and low HOME rents annually. Owners can increase rents in accordance with tenant leases and PJ
approval, as long as the rents do not exceed the maximum allowable current high or low HOME rents, as applicable.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.252(c)
 Documentation:
     • Written agreement between program administrator and developer
     • Letter of approval/authorization (or comparable document) from the PJ to the property owner allowing rent increases
       at lease renewal, if applicable

              HUD Checklist 7-7 Selected Excerpts                                       Identified Problems

 53. Did the PJ review and approve the project rents? [24 CFR      No evidence that PJ approved initial rent structure
     92.252(c)]
                                                                   No evidence that PJ approved subsequent rent increases
       Yes      No



6. Annual Income Recertification
Background: Every year, the property owner must determine that the tenants of HOME-assisted units are income-eligible
and (that is, low-income tenants reside in high HOME rent units and very low-income tenants reside in low HOME rent
units). If the PJ permits, owners can recertify tenant income with a written statement from the household or the administra­
tor of another government program under which the household receives benefits. Every sixth year during the affordability
period, however, the owner must re-verify tenant income with source documentation.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.252(h)
 Documentation:
     • Signed certification or worksheet that documents the tenant household income


Chapter 6: Rental Housing Programs                                                                                                253
      • Source documentation used to verify household income, as applicable

               HUD Checklist 7-7 Selected Excerpts                                      Identified Problems

 54. Is the project owner recertifying tenant income annually?     No certification of tenant income on file
     [24 CFR 92.252(h)]
                                                                   Income certification is not signed by head of household
        Yes      No                                              No worksheet to show that program administrator compared
                                                                    tenant income with HOME income limits in effect at the time
                                                                    of determination
                                                                   Program administrator used wrong HOME income limits
                                                                    when making income-eligibility determination
                                                                   Errors in income determination calculation

 55. Are tenant incomes being reexamined using source              Source documentation not used in sixth year
     documentation every 6th year? (NOTE: This does not apply
                                                                   Income not reexamined annually
     to projects less than 6 years old.) [24 CFR 92.252(h)]
                                                                   No documentation of tenant income reexamination
        Yes      No      N/A

       If the answer to “a” above is “yes,” what is the process
       used for the tenant income reexamination?

       ___________________________________________________



7. Voucher and Project-based Assistance
Background: If a project receives Federal or State project-based assistance (PBA), the PBA rent may be charged only in units
occupied by very low-income tenants (with annual gross incomes at or below 50 percent of area median income). Tenants
receiving Housing Voucher Choice Program (HVC) assistance cannot be charged more than the maximum allowable HOME
rent.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.252(a) and (b)
 Documentation:
      • Tenant lease
      • Rental compliance form
      • HUD rents limits
      • Marketing and application materials
      • Interviews with tenant households and applicants
      • Documentation of justifications for denying applicants

               HUD Checklist 7-7 Selected Excerpts                                      Identified Problems

 56. If the tenants receive Housing Voucher Choice Program         No lease on file
     (HVC) assistance, is the total rent charged by the owner
                                                                   Lease does not clearly state the tenant’s monthly rent
     (to both the HVC and the tenant) not greater than the
     maximum allowable HOME rent? [24 CFR 92.252(a) or (b)]        Tenant is charged more than the applicable low HOME rent
        Yes      No      N/A                                    No worksheet to show that program administrator verified
                                                                    that tenant rent does not exceed the low HOME rent
                                                                   Program administrator used wrong HOME rent limits when
                                                                    determining rents
                                                                   Errors in maximum rent determination




254                                                                                                              Monitoring HOME
 57. Does the owner refrain from discriminating against tenants       No nondiscrimination clauses in marketing and application
     with rental assistance subsidies? [24 CFR 92.252(d)]              materials
       Yes      No        N/A                                      Applicants rejected because of rental assistance subsidies
                                                                       without other justification
                                                                      Evidence of discrimination complaints from fair housing
                                                                       offices

 58. If the project received Federal or State project-based           No documentation of tenant income
     assistance (PBA), is the allowable PBA rent charged only in
                                                                      No documentation of rent charged to tenant
     units occupied by very low-income tenants (i.e., income is
     below 50% of area median income)? [24 CFR 92.252(b)              Tenant with PBA has income greater than 50% of area
     (2)]                                                              median income and is charged the PBA rent (not the HOME
                                                                       rent)
       Yes      No        N/A
                                      TIP                                   HOME and PBA Rents

                                             In a project receiving PBA, the allowable rent for a unit that is occupied by a very
                                             low-income tenant is no greater than the PBA rent. If tenant income is greater than
                                             50% of area median income, then the high HOME rent must be charged.




8. Utility Allowances
Background: The fair market rents and high and low HOME rents include all utilities. The PJ adopts and annually adjusts a
utility allowance. This can be prepared by the local public housing agency (PHA) or the PJ itself. If the tenant pays utilities,
the utility allowance must be deducted from the published HOME rents to determine the maximum allowable HOME rents.
Utility adjustments proposed by owners or developers that differ from the PJ’s utility allowance must be approved by the PJ
and must be supported by documentation.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.252(c)
 Documentation:
     • Utility allowance
     • Rental compliance form

              HUD Checklist 7-7 Selected Excerpts                                          Identified Problems

 59. Did the project use the established utility allowances to        PJ has not adopted annual utility allowance
     calculate maximum rent levels? [24 CFR 92.252(c)]
                                                                      No evidence that PJ provided annual utility allowance to
       Yes      No                                                   project owner
                                                                      Wrong utility allowance was deducted from the HOME rent
                                                                      No deductions made for tenant-paid utilities



9. Over-income Tenants
Background: When an owner recertifies a tenant’s income and finds that it has increased over the current applicable HOME
income limit, he/she must take steps to restore compliance with the HOME affordability requirements. The steps vary,
depending on if the units are fixed or floating; and if the tenant resides in a low HOME rent unit, depending on whether the
tenant’s income exceeds the very low-income limit or the low-income limit. See Attachment 6-F for a flow chart of how to
maintain the proper unit mix.
     • If the income of a tenant occupying a low HOME rent unit increases, but does not exceed 80 percent of area median
       income, that unit becomes a high HOME rent unit when the next available unit (for “floating” unit projects) or next
       available HOME-assisted unit (for “fixed” unit projects) becomes available and is occupied by a very low-income



Chapter 6: Rental Housing Programs                                                                                                  255
        tenant (whose annual gross income is at or below 50 percent of area median income). Subject to the terms of the lease,
        the rent of the initial tenant whose income has increased may be increased to the high HOME rent for the unit. (This
        can be done only after a replacement low HOME unit is occupied by a very low-income household.) This process
        should not increase the number of assisted units.
      • If a tenant’s income increases above 80 percent of the area median income, the unit this tenant occupies is still con­
        sidered to be a HOME-assisted unit, but the tenant’s rent must be adjusted to 30 percent of their adjusted income
        for rent and utilities as soon as the lease permits. (For floating units, the amount may not exceed the market rent for
        comparable, unassisted units in the neighborhood.) In projects with floating HOME units, the next available unit in
        the project that is of comparable or larger size must be rented to a HOME-eligible household. At that point, the unit
        occupied by the over-income tenant is no longer considered HOME-assisted, and that tenant’s rent can be adjusted
        accordingly. In projects with fixed units, the tenant’s rent must be adjusted to 30 percent of their adjusted income for
        rent and utilities but there is no cap. (Where State or local law imposes rent controls, the rent control applies.)
Note: In units that are financed with both HOME and Low-Income Housing Tax Credits (LIHTCs), the LIHTC rules apply.
Under the LIHTC program, the tenant’s rent is not adjusted, and the unit does not need to be replaced by another compa­
rable unit until the tenant’s income rises above 140 percent of the LIHTC program eligibility threshold.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.252(i)
 Documentation:
      • Written tenant selection plan
      • Rental compliance form
      • Interview notes with property manager

               HUD Checklist 7-7 Selected Excerpts                                       Identified Problems

 60. If any in-place tenant has an income above 80% of the area     Unclear what rent is being charged to over-income tenant
     median income, is the correct rent being charged to the
                                                                    Incorrect rents charged and tenant is paying too little
     over-income tenant? [24 CFR 92.252(i)]
        Yes     No      N/A

 61. As tenants vacate low HOME rent units, are they replaced       New tenants are not very low-income
     by other tenants with incomes below 50% of area median
     income? [24 CFR 92.252(i)]
        Yes     No      N/A

 62. If the income of a tenant in a low HOME rent unit rises        Change in unit designation is not occurring
     above 50% of area median income, is the unit designated
                                                                    Rent increase (from low to high HOME rent) is implemented
     as a high HOME rent unit and the next available,                when tenant income increases, and not when new low HOME
     comparable unit designated as low HOME rent unit? [24           rent unit is designated
     CFR 92.252(b)(1)]
        Yes     No      N/A

 63. In projects where the HOME-assisted units float, when an       Change in unit designation is not occurring
     in-place tenant’s income increases above 80% of median
     income, is the next available, comparable unit made
     available to a HOME-eligible tenant? [24 CFR 92.252(j)]
        Yes     No      N/A



10. Leases
Background: Leases for HOME-assisted units must specify the rent and rents may not exceed the maximum allowable
HOME rent for the units' type (high or low HOME rent unit) minus any applicable utility allowance. Lease terms must be
for at least one year unless otherwise mutually agreed upon by the tenant and owner. Leases may not contain any of the pro­
hibited provisions outlined in Figure 6-5.

256                                                                                                                Monitoring HOME
                 Figure 6-5. Prohibited Lease Clauses for HOME-assisted Rental Properties
 The lease between the owner and tenant in a HOME-assisted property can not contain any of the following provisions:
 • Agreement to be sued. Agreement by the tenant to be sued, to admit guilt, or to a judgment in favor of the owner in a
   lawsuit brought in connection with the lease.
 • Treatment of property. Agreement by the tenant that the owner may seize or sell personal property of household
   members without notice to the tenant and a court decision on the rights of the parties. This provision does not apply
   to disposition of personal property left by a tenant who has vacated a property.
 • Excusing owner from responsibility. Agreement by the tenant not to hold the owner or the owner’s agents legally
   responsible for any action or failure to act, whether intentional or negligent.
 • Waiver of notice. Agreement by the tenant that the owner may institute a lawsuit without notice to the tenant.
 • Waiver of legal proceedings. Agreement by the tenant that the owner may evict the tenant or household members
   without instituting a civil court proceeding in which the tenant has the opportunity to present a defense, or before a
   court decision on the rights of the parties.
 • Waiver of a jury trial. Agreement by the tenant to waive any right to a trial by jury.
 • Waiver of right to appeal court decision. Agreement by the tenant to waive the tenant’s right to appeal or to
   otherwise challenge in court a court decision in connection with the lease.
 • Tenant chargeable with cost of legal actions regardless of outcome. Agreement by the tenant to pay attorney’s
   fees or other legal costs, even if the tenant wins in a court proceeding by the owner against the tenant. The tenant,
   however, may be obligated to pay costs if the tenant loses.

Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.253
 Documentation:
     • Tenant leases

              HUD Checklist 7-7 Selected Excerpts                                      Identified Problems

 64. Are leases free of all prohibited provisions? [24 CFR         No lease with tenant
     92.253(b)]
                                                                   Lease contains prohibited provisions
       Yes     No

 65. Are the leases for a minimum of one year (unless otherwise    No lease with tenant
     agreed upon by tenant and owner)? [24 CFR 92.253(a)]
                                                                   Lease is for less than one year, but no evidence of mutual
       Yes     No                                                 agreement



11. Tenant Selection Policy
Background: Owners of HOME-assisted rental property must adopt written tenant selection procedures and criteria to
ensure that tenants understand the income-eligibility requirements, and to ensure that there is an equitable selection process
that is applied consistently to all tenants.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.253(d)
 Documentation:
     • Interview notes with property manager
     • Written tenant selection policies and criteria
     • Rental compliance form
     • Waiting list
     • Application



Chapter 6: Rental Housing Programs                                                                                               257
              HUD Checklist 7-7 Selected Excerpts                                      Identified Problems

 66. Does the owner have written tenant selection criteria? [24    No tenant selection policy
     CFR 92.253(d)]
                                                                   Tenant selection policy is not adequate because:
       Yes     No
                      Tenant Selection Procedures                    ____________________________________________________

        The tenant selection procedures should explain the           ____________________________________________________
        process for:
          • Taking applications
          • Determining household income and making
  TIP




            income-eligibility determinations
          • Selecting tenants and how the PJ's selection
            preferences are applied (including preference
            for renting accessible units to persons with
            disabilities and low HOME rent units to very low-
            income households)
          • Maintaining waiting lists
          • Notifying applicants of eligibility or rejection
          • Annual income recertifications
          • Maintaining the appropriate HOME unit mix.

 67. Does the owner follow his/her tenant selection policy? [24    No tenant selection policy
     CFR 92.253(d)]
                                                                   Tenant approvals/rejections are inconsistent with the
       Yes     No                                                 selection policy


NOTES on Initial and Ongoing Rent and Occupancy Requirements




258                                                                                                            Monitoring HOME
                                 Summary of Results: Project Monitoring
                                                    Rental Programs
Instructions: Using the completed checklists, complete the following chart to assist with summarizing the monitoring
results.

                             No Apparent Problems           Problems Identified                  Follow-Up Needed

 A. Project Descriptions
    1. Project information

    2. Financial
       information

 B. Subsidy
    1. Minimum and
       maximum HOME
       investment

    2. Subsidy layering

    3. Forms of
       assistance

 C. Cost Allocation

 D. Eligible and
 Reasonable Costs
    1. Eligibility of HOME
       costs

    2. Cost
       reasonableness

    3. Refinancing

 E. Property Standards
    1. Inspections

    2. Lead-based paint
       requirements

    3. International
       Energy
       Conservation Code

    4. Accessibility
       requirements

 F. Other Project
 Requirements
    1. Deed restrictions

    2. Site and
       neighborhood
       standards

    3. Affirmative
       marketing




Chapter 6: Rental Housing Programs                                                                                     259
      4. Environmental
         review

      5. Labor and related
         requirements

 G. Construction
 Management
      1. Qualified
         contractors

      2. Inspections

      3. Change orders

 H. Initial and Ongoing
 Rent and Occupancy
 Requirements
      1. Income-eligibility

      2. Project targeting
         requirements

      3. Fixed and floating
         units

      4. Rent structure

      5. PJ approval of
         rents

      6. Annual income
         recertification

      7. Voucher and
         project-based
         assistance

      8. Utility allowances

      9. Leases

 10. Tenant selection
     policy




260                           Monitoring HOME
Section 3. Program Monitoring: Rental Programs
Purpose of the Program Review
The program review helps the PJ assess how well the rental program is operating. Ideally, it is done in conjunction with the
pre-monitoring review of policies and procedures (Section 1 of this chapter) and the project file review (Section 2 of this
chapter). It helps the PJ answer:
     • Does the program administrator comply with HOME requirements in all cases? By looking all of the project file
       reviews, the PJ monitor can more easily identify areas where the program administrator performs consistently and
       where there are recurring problems.
     • Does the program administrator have effective written documentation supporting the program? This includes
       the written agreement with the PJ; and policies, procedures, and other program materials that clearly state HOME
       requirements and expectations. By evaluating the program’s written documentation, the PJ monitor can determine if
       the program administrator has adequate systems in place to promote compliance and performance.
 How this Section Is Organized
The checklist in this section summarizes the HOME requirements that are reviewed in detail in Section 1 (pre-monitoring)
and Section 2 (project monitoring). This section does not use HUD Checklist questions verbatim, as do the other sections
of this chapter. However, this section covers the same HOME requirements and is organized in the same manner as HUD
Checklist Exhibit 7-8, Guide for Review of Rental Programs. It includes following sections:
     A. Project recordkeeping
     B. HOME provisions
     C. Eligible costs, subsidy layering, and cost allocation
     D. Initial and ongoing rents, incomes, and occupancy
     E. Property standards
     F. Other project requirements
                                                                                 How to Use the Program Review
     G. Eligible costs
                                                                        The PJ monitor can use the program review in a
     H. Construction management                                         few different ways:

     I. Loan servicing                                                  • To consolidate the results of a pre-monitoring
                                                                          and project monitoring review. To do this,
 Instructions                                                            complete the questions in Column 2. For any
                                                                          area where there is a potential problem, also
The PJ monitor should use one copy of this checklist to conduct a
                                                                          complete Column 3.
program review of the rental program administrator (funded entity
or PJ).                                                                 • To conduct a cursory review of the program’s
                                                                          operations. To do this, complete the questions
Column 1, “HOME Requirement,” identifies the HOME require­                in Column 3 only. This results in a review of the
ment under review.                                                        written documentation and the program policies
In columns 2a, 2b, and 2c, “Program Implementation,” the PJ moni­         and procedures that constitute the foundation
tor summarizes its findings of the project monitoring review and          of the program’s operation.
indicates how often the program administrator effectively met the • To interview staff. To do this, ask the
requirement (always, sometimes, or never).                          interviewee how the requirement specified
                                                                           in Column 1 is implemented. Take notes in
In columns 3a, 3b, and 3c, “Effectiveness of Documentation,” the PJ
                                                                           Column 3(c), to the extent possible, or on other
monitor documents the findings of the pre-monitoring review, if it
                                                                           paper as needed. Use interview results in
was done, or reviews the program’s written documentation. The PJ
                                                                           conjunction with desk and project file reviews
monitor checks whether the requirement was: (1) Stated in the writ­
                                                                           to draw conclusions about the program’s
ten agreement between the PJ and the State recipient, subrecipient,
                                                                           operations.
or contractor (as applicable) in column 3a; (2) Adequately reflected


Chapter 6: Rental Housing Programs                                                                                         261
in the PJ's or program administrator’s policies and procedures in column 3b, or (3) Documented in other written materials
(such as the program application) in column 3c.
A "Notes" section is provided at the end of each area of review for the PJ monitor to elaborate on any of its findings and
recommended actions, as needed.
Documentation:
The following documents are needed for a program review:
      • Copy of the HOME regulations found at 24 CFR Part 92
      • Written agreement between the program administrator and the developer
      • Pre-monitoring file(s) or checklist results, if available
      • Project case file monitoring file(s) or checklist results, if available

             1. HOME Requirement                    2. Effectiveness of Implementation         3. Effectiveness of Documentation

                                                   Project monitoring shows that program
                                                      administrator complied with this       This requirement is clearly stated in….
                                                              requirement…
       Does the program administrator or
                  developer…                          (a)          (b)             (c)          (a)               (b)            (c)
                                                    Always      Sometimes         Never        Written      Administrator’s     Other
                                                                                           Agreement with     Policies &      (Specify)
                                                                                                 PJ          Procedures
 PROJECT RECORDKEEPING
 1. Document HOME compliance through
    effective recordkeeping (overall)
      [24 CFR 92.508(a)(2) and (3)]
 2. Retain records regarding individual tenant
    income verifications, project rents, and
    project inspections for five years after the
    termination of the affordability period
      [24 CFR 92.508(c)(1)]
 3. Retain other records for five years after
    project completion
      [24 CFR 92.508(c)(1)]
 Notes:




 HOME PROVISIONS
 1. Have an executed written agreement with
    the PJ that contains all applicable HOME
    provisions
      [24 CFR 92.504(c)(3)]
      *PJ responsibility
 2. Perform onsite inspections to determine
    compliance with property standards, and
    to verify rent, income, and occupancy
    information submitted by the owner every
    1, 2, or 3 years depending on the total
    number of units in the project
      [24 CFR 92.251, 92.252, and 92.504(d)
      (1)]



262                                                                                                                  Monitoring HOME
            1. HOME Requirement                   2. Effectiveness of Implementation         3. Effectiveness of Documentation

                                                 Project monitoring shows that program
                                                    administrator complied with this       This requirement is clearly stated in….
                                                            requirement…
     Does the program administrator or
                developer…                          (a)          (b)           (c)            (a)               (b)            (c)
                                                  Always      Sometimes       Never          Written      Administrator’s     Other
                                                                                         Agreement with     Policies &      (Specify)
                                                                                               PJ          Procedures
3. Review the financial condition of rental
   projects periodically to ensure that they
   remain viable
4. Take action(s) promptly to correct
   underlying conditions for troubled
   projects (financially, physically, or
   otherwise)
Notes:




ELIGIBLE COSTS, SUBSIDY LAYERING, AND COST ALLOCATION
1. Comply with the minimum and maximum
   per unit investment requirements
    [24 CFR 92.205(c) and 92.250(a)]
2. Adopt subsidy layering review procedures
    [24 CFR 92.250(b)]
3. Use subsidy layering guidelines to review
   all projects that combine HOME with
   other public funds
    [24 CFR 92.250(b)]
    *PJ responsibility
4. Provide HOME subsidy only in a form
   that is eligible (i.e., equity investments,
   interest bearing or non-interest bearing
   loans or advances, interest subsidies,
   deferred payment loans, grants, or loan
   guarantees)
    [24 CFR 92.205(b)]
5. Secure HUD approval for providing HOME
   funds in a form not listed above
    [24 CFR 92.205(b)(1)]
6. Allocate costs and determine the number
   of HOME-assisted units correctly
    [24 CFR 92.205(d)]
    *Determining number of HOME-assisted
    units is PJ responsibility.
Notes:




Chapter 6: Rental Housing Programs                                                                                                   263
             1. HOME Requirement                   2. Effectiveness of Implementation         3. Effectiveness of Documentation

                                                  Project monitoring shows that program
                                                     administrator complied with this       This requirement is clearly stated in….
                                                             requirement…
       Does the program administrator or
                  developer…                         (a)          (b)           (c)            (a)               (b)            (c)
                                                   Always      Sometimes       Never          Written      Administrator’s     Other
                                                                                          Agreement with     Policies &      (Specify)
                                                                                                PJ          Procedures
INITIAL AND ONGOING RENTS, INCOMES, AND OCCUPANCY
1. Provide current HOME rent and income
   limits to owners
      [24 CFR 92.2 (“low-income family”) and
      92.252(c) and (f)]
      *PJ responsibility
2. Approve initial rents and subsequent rent
   increases for projects
      [24 CFR 92.252(c)]
3. Use correct utility allowances in projects
   and subtract them from tenant rents
   when utilities are paid by tenants
      [24 CFR 92.252(c)]
4. Use the same definition of income for all
   tenants
5. Use source documentation to determine
   tenant’s initial income
      [24 CFR 92.203(a)]
6. Recertify tenant income annually
      [24 CFR 92.252(h)]
7. For projects with more than five HOME-
   assisted units, rent at least 20% of units
   to households with annual gross incomes
   at or below 50% of area median income
   and charge rents no greater than low
   HOME rents
      [24 CFR 92.252(b)]
8. Make unit substitutions and fill vacancies
   so that the project remains in compliance
   with occupancy requirements
      [24 CFR 92.252(a), and 92.252(i) and (j)]
Notes:




PROPERTY STANDARDS
1. Ensure that applicable property
   standards are met upon project
   completion
      [24 CFR 92.251(a)]
2. Ensure applicable property standards are
   met during period of affordability
      [24 CFR 92.251(c)]




264                                                                                                                 Monitoring HOME
           1. HOME Requirement                     2. Effectiveness of Implementation         3. Effectiveness of Documentation

                                                  Project monitoring shows that program
                                                     administrator complied with this       This requirement is clearly stated in….
                                                             requirement…
     Does the program administrator or
                developer…                           (a)          (b)           (c)            (a)               (b)            (c)
                                                   Always      Sometimes       Never          Written      Administrator’s     Other
                                                                                          Agreement with     Policies &      (Specify)
                                                                                                PJ          Procedures
3. Adopt written rehabilitation standards
   (i.e., methods and materials standard)
    [24 CFR 92.251(a)]
    *PJ responsibility
4. Apply written rehabilitation standards to
   rental rehabilitation projects
    [24 CFR 92.251(a)]
5. Comply with IECC, for new construction
   projects
    [24 CFR 92.251(a)]
6. Comply with the lead safety requirements
   of 24 CFR Part 35, as applicable. (This
   determination may be made based upon
   use of the Lead Hazards Monitoring
   Exhibits 24-1, 24-2, or 24-3 for projects
   sampled; or using staff interviews or
   other verification methods.)
    [24 CFR 92.355]
7. Meet the applicable Section 504
   accessibility requirements
    [24 CFR 92.251(a)(3)]
Notes:




OTHER PROJECT REQUIREMENTS
1. Follow PJ’s refinancing guidelines if using
   HOME funds to refinance existing debt
    [24 CFR 92.206(b)]
    *PJ responsibility to establish refinancing
    guidelines in the Consolidated Plan
2. Perform site and neighborhood
   standards reviews for new construction
   in accordance with 24 CFR 983.57(e)(2)
   and (3)
    [24 CFR 92.202(b)]
    *PJ responsibility
3. If PJ is providing TBRA to in-place tenants
   in its rental projects, have and follow
   procedure to ensure that tenants are in
   place at the time of rehabilitation
    [24 CFR 92.209(c)(3)]




Chapter 6: Rental Housing Programs                                                                                                    265
             1. HOME Requirement                    2. Effectiveness of Implementation         3. Effectiveness of Documentation

                                                   Project monitoring shows that program
                                                      administrator complied with this       This requirement is clearly stated in….
                                                              requirement…
       Does the program administrator or
                  developer…                          (a)          (b)           (c)            (a)               (b)            (c)
                                                    Always      Sometimes       Never          Written      Administrator’s     Other
                                                                                           Agreement with     Policies &      (Specify)
                                                                                                 PJ          Procedures
4. Comply with environmental review
   requirements
      (This determination may be based
      upon HUD Checklist Exhibit 21-1, Guide
      for Environmental Review, for projects
      sampled; or using staff interviews or
      other verification methods.)
      [24 CFR 92.352]
5. Comply with flood insurance protection
   when assistance was used for
   acquisition or construction (including
   rehabilitation) of real property located
   within the Special Flood Hazard Area
      (Use HUD Checklist Exhibit 27-1, Guide
      for Review of Flood Insurance Protection.)
      [24 CFR 92.352]
6. Comply with labor standards
   requirements for projects of 12 or more
   HOME-assisted units
      (Use HUD Checklist Exhibit 23-1,
      Guide for Review of Labor Standards
      Administration.)
      [24 CFR 92.354]
7. Select qualified contractors that are
   not excluded, disqualified or otherwise
   ineligible (e.g., suspension, debarment,
   or limited denial of participation)
   for Federal procurement and non-
   procurement programs at the time of
   contract execution or during the period of
   project work?
      [24 CFR 92.350(a), 92.505(a), and 24
      CFR 85.35]
Notes:




ELIGIBLE COSTS
1. Verify there are sufficient HOME-eligible
   project costs to support the amount of
   HOME funds provided, in the sources and
   uses statements or other records
      [24 CFR 92.205(d)]




266                                                                                                                  Monitoring HOME
           1. HOME Requirement                   2. Effectiveness of Implementation         3. Effectiveness of Documentation

                                                Project monitoring shows that program
                                                   administrator complied with this       This requirement is clearly stated in….
                                                           requirement…
     Does the program administrator or
                developer…                         (a)          (b)           (c)            (a)               (b)            (c)
                                                 Always      Sometimes       Never          Written      Administrator’s     Other
                                                                                        Agreement with     Policies &      (Specify)
                                                                                              PJ          Procedures
2. Review and evaluate cost estimate to
   determine cost reasonableness
    [24 CFR 92.505(a); 24 CFR 85.20(b)(5)
    and 85.36(f)]
3. Review and evaluate project costs
   and supporting documentation (e.g.,
   acquisition costs supported by appraisal,
   developer’s fees, rehabilitation or
   construction costs within local norms,
   etc.)
    [24 CFR 92.505(a) and 24 CFR 85.22]
4. Verify that site improvements were
   HOME-eligible improvements located on
   project sites
    [24 CFR 92.206(a)(3)(iii)]
5. Execute written agreements that contain
   all applicable HOME provisions
    (This determination may be based upon
    review of the PJ’s standard language
    for HOME agreements or review of
    agreements for projects sampled by
    completing HUD Checklist Exhibit 7-16,
    Guide for Review of Owner, Developer,
    Sponsor Written Agreements.)
    [24 CFR 92.504(c)(3)]
    *PJ responsibility
Notes:




CONSTRUCTION MANAGEMENT
1. Inspect projects under construction
   periodically and at project completion to
   ensure work is finished and of adequate
   quality
    [24 CFR 92.505(a) and 24 CFR 85.36(b)
    (2)]
2. Verify that work write-ups or plans comply
   with all applicable property standards
   and codes
Notes:




Chapter 6: Rental Housing Programs                                                                                                  267
            1. HOME Requirement                 2. Effectiveness of Implementation         3. Effectiveness of Documentation

                                               Project monitoring shows that program
                                                  administrator complied with this       This requirement is clearly stated in….
                                                          requirement…
       Does the program administrator or
                  developer…                      (a)          (b)           (c)            (a)               (b)            (c)
                                                Always      Sometimes       Never          Written      Administrator’s     Other
                                                                                       Agreement with     Policies &      (Specify)
                                                                                             PJ          Procedures
LOAN SERVICING
1. Record lien instruments
       [24 CFR 92.505(a) and 24 CFR 85.20(b)
      (3)]
2. Follow written loan servicing procedures
      [24 CFR 92.505(a) and 24 CFR 85.20(b)
      (3)]
3. Address loan defaults promptly
      [24 CFR 92.505(a) and 24 CFR 85.20(b)
      (3)]
Notes:




268                                                                                                              Monitoring HOME
                                                      Attachment 6-A
                                            Client File Form – Rental Programs
                                      Are Items in Project Case File?                           Answer
              Property Information
              1. Program application                                                          Yes        No
              2. Project description showing property location, type of property,
                                                                                              Yes        No
                 development plan
              3. In-place tenant profile, if applicable                                       Yes        No
              4. Environmental review, statutory checklist or other review, as appropriate    Yes        No
              Legal and Financial Documents
              5. Documentation of all costs                                                   Yes        No
              6. Project development and operating budgets showing eligible costs and
                                                                                              Yes        No
                 activities
              7. Determination of HOME-assisted units; per unit subsidy level                 Yes        No
              8. Subsidy layering review certification, if applicable                         Yes        No
              9. Layering analysis of project finances                                        Yes        No
              10. Loan agreement (or other project agreement) that identifies HOME-
                                                                                              Yes        No
                  assisted units and describes long-term affordability requirements
              11. Deed restriction or covenants enforcing affordability requirements          Yes        No
              12. Title search and other closing documents                                    Yes        No
              13. Flood insurance                                                             Yes        No
              14. Owner’s property insurance                                                  Yes        No
              15. Program income or repayment records                                         Yes        No
              16. Project underwriting worksheet                                              Yes        No
              17. HOME written agreement                                                      Yes        No
              18. HOME rent notification limit documentation                                  Yes        No
              19. Appraisal/market analysis                                                   Yes        No
              20. Environmental clearance                                                     Yes        No
              21. Loan documents and deed restrictions                                        Yes        No
              Project and Construction Management
              22. Relocation notices, if applicable                                           Yes        No
              23. Affirmative marketing plan                                                  Yes        No
              24. Initial inspection form                                                     Yes        No
              25. Work write-up/cost estimate                                                 Yes        No
              26. Contractor bid documents                                                    Yes        No
              27. Contractor eligibility form                                                 Yes        No
              28. Contractor's certificate of insurance                                       Yes        No
              29. Evidence of contractor licensure                                            Yes        No
              30. Evidence contractor is not on debarment/suspension list                     Yes        No
              31. Pre-construction conference report (optional)                               Yes        No
              32. Lead-based paint compliance documentation                                   Yes        No
              33. New construction or rehabilitation contract                                 Yes        No
              34. Notice to proceed                                                           Yes        No
              35. Approved change orders, if applicable                                       Yes        No
              36. Progress inspections                                                        Yes        No
              37. Contractor payment requests/authorizations                                  Yes        No




Chapter 6: Rental Housing Programs                                                                              269
      38. Payment certifications                                Yes    No
      39. Documentation of final inspection                     Yes    No
      40. Waiver of liens from all contractors and suppliers    Yes    No
      41. Receipt of final payment form                         Yes    No
      42. Warranties and guarantees                             Yes    No
      43. Other Federal requirements documentation              Yes    No




270                                                                       Monitoring HOME
                                                Attachment 6-B
                        Summary of Key HOME Rental Program Rules and How to Document
                                                                                                     Documentation
                                                Key HOME Requirement
                                                                                                (See checklists for details)
Eligible Activities
Eligible Activities                    • Acquisition, new construction,                • Documentation of all expenditures
                                         rehabilitation                                • Plans and specifications or work
                                       • Developer may be for-profit, nonprofit,         write-ups
                                         CHDO, public                                  • Picture of unit (optional)
Eligible Costs                         • Wide variety of costs eligible                • Documentation of all costs
                                       • May refinance (certain conditions) and
                                         do initial operating reserves (during first
                                         18 months of project lease-up)
Eligible Participants
Applicant Eligibility                  • 100% of households have annual                • Completed application
                                         gross incomes at or below 80% of area         • Source documentation (wage
                                         median income                                   statements, interest statements)
                                       • Initially, PJ determines number of            • Worksheet or form that shows
                                         households that must have annual                calculation of income was done in
                                         gross incomes at or below 60% of                accordance with selected income
                                         area median income in order to meet             definition
                                         “program rule”
                                       • In units with 5 or more HOME-assisted
                                         units, tenants of low HOME rent units
                                         must have annual gross income at or
                                         below 50% of area median income
                                       • Income determined using allowable
                                         definition and verified by source
                                         documents at tenants’ initial occupancy,
                                         and every 6th year during affordability
                                         period
Tenant Selection                       • Maintain and follow a written tenant          • Written tenant selection policy
                                         selection policy                              • Waiting list
                                       • Cannot refuse to lease to Section 8           • Tenant files
                                         Housing Choice voucher holders or
                                         households with comparable assistance
Applicant Occupancy                    • Maintain rent and occupancy throughout        • Documentation of occupancy of units in
                                         affordability period                            each rental project (rental compliance
                                                                                         report)
Eligible Properties
Property Type                          • Common ownership, management, and             • Documentation of type of property
                                         financing                                       (inspection, picture, or other
                                       • Permanent and transitional                      documentation)
                                                                                       • If more than one building on a site or
                                                                                         multiple sites, documentation that it is
                                                                                         one project
Property Location                      • Property must be located within               • Application with address in PJ’s
                                         geographic area of the PJ                       geographic area
                                                                                       • Map (optional)




Chapter 6: Rental Housing Programs                                                                                             271
HOME Minimum and Maximum Subsidy   • A minimum of $1,000 in HOME funds          • Documentation of expenditures
                                     must be invested in each assisted unit     • Worksheet or form that shows that the
                                   • Maximum may not exceed the 221(d)            per unit HOME investment was at least
                                     (3) limits and is based on the               $1,000 but not greater than the 221(d)
                                     portion of total project costs that are      (3) limits
                                     HOME-eligible
HOME Units                         • Designate units as “fixed” or “floating”   • Documentation that specifies whether
                                     before commitment                            units are fixed or floating
                                   • Minimum # of units based on per unit       • If units are floating, documentation that
                                     HOME investment                              units are comparable
                                                                                • Worksheet or form that shows how
                                                                                  number of units was determined
Affordability Period               • Varies based on HOME investment            • Copy of deed restriction and evidence
                                   • HOME rules apply throughout                  that it was recorded
                                     affordability period, regardless of        • Other legal documentation that specifies
                                     ownership                                    HOME requirements and is enforceable
                                                                                  through affordability period
Rents                              • Low HOME rents: based on 30% of            • Documentation that shows designation
                                     tenant income, or 30% of income of           of high and low HOME rent units
                                     household at 50% of area median            • Copy of utility allowances
                                     income, or the rent allowable under
                                     project-based subsidy
                                   • If ≥5 units, 20% of units must have
                                     rents that are no more than low HOME
                                     rents
                                   • High HOME rents: based on fair market
                                     rents, or 30% of income of household at
                                     65% area median income
Property Standards                 • Acquisition: State/local codes             • Documentation of applicable property
                                   • Rehabilitation: State/local codes,           standards
                                     rehabilitation standards                   • Copy of written rehabilitation standards
                                   • New construction: State/local codes,       • Inspection checklists and work write-ups
                                     rehabilitation standards, IECC             • Inspection reports or certification by
                                                                                  inspectors
Leases
Lease Provisions                   • Term of lease must be at least one year,   • Tenant leases
                                     unless mutually agreed otherwise
                                   • Leases may not contain certain
                                     prohibited provisions (listed in 24 CFR
                                     92.253)
Termination or Refusal to Renew    • Termination or refusal to renew lease      • Tenant files for tenants whose leases
                                     must be based on good cause                  have been terminated or not renewed
                                   • Tenants must be given 30-day written
                                     notice before termination of tenancy or
                                     refusal to renew leases
                                   • Notice must specify grounds for such
                                     action




272                                                                                                      Monitoring HOME
                                                    Attachment 6-C
                         Summary of Other Federal Requirements for Rental Programs
  Other Federal Requirements         Apply to Homebuyer            Special Issues/Considerations            Regulatory Citations
                                         Programs?
Nondiscrimination and Equal Access Rules
Fair Housing and Equal         Yes                                 • PJs must affirmatively further • 24 CFR 92.202 and 92.250
Opportunity                                                          fair housing in the jurisdiction • Title VI of Civil Rights Act of
                                                                   • Pay particular attention to        1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000d et.
                                                                     signs of discrimination in         seq.)
                                                                     leasing practices                • Fair Housing Act (42 U.S.C.
                                                                                                         3601-3620) (implemented at
                                                                                                         24 CFR Part 100)
                                                                                                      • Executive Order 11063
                                                                                                        (amended by Executive Order
                                                                                                        12259)
                                                                                                      • Age Discrimination Act of
                                                                                                        1975, as amended (42
                                                                                                        U.S.C. 6101)
                                                                                                      • 24 CFR 5.105(a)
Affirmative Marketing          Yes, for projects containing five   • PJ must adopt specific      • 24 CFR 92.351
                               or more HOME-assisted units           procedures and requirements
                                                                     for the project
Accessibility                  Yes                                 • New construction in projects     • Section 504 of the
                                                                     with 5+ units and substantial      Rehabilitation Act of 1973
                                                                     alteration projects with 15+       (implemented at 24 CFR Part
                                                                     units must have accessible         8)
                                                                     units (5% for mobility-          • For multifamily buildings
                                                                     impaired and 2% for sensory-       only, 24 CFR 100.205
                                                                     impaired; no less than one         (implements the Fair Housing
                                                                     of each)                           Act)
                                                                   • Other rehabilitated properties
                                                                     may require modifications
                                                                   • Program must be accessible
                                                                     to persons with disabilities
Employment and Contracting Rules
Equal Opportunity Employment   Yes                                 • Contracts and subcontracts       • Executive Order 11246
                                                                     over $10,000 should                (implemented at 41 CFR Part
                                                                     include language prohibiting       60)
                                                                     discrimination
Section 3 Economic             Yes, if amount of assistance        • Include Section 3 clause in      • Section 3 of the Housing and
Opportunity                    exceeds $200,000 or contract          contracts and subcontracts         Urban Development Act of
                               or subcontract exceeds              • Employment and contracting         1968 (implemented at 24
                               $100,000                              goals to hire low-income           CFR Part 135)
                                                                     business concerns and low-
                                                                     income residents
Minority/Women Employment      Yes                                 • PJ must prescribe procedures • Executive Orders 11625,
                                                                     and include in contracts and   12432 and 12138
                                                                     subcontracts                 • 24 CFR 85.36(e)
Davis-Bacon                    Yes, if construction contract       • Include language in all          • 24 CFR Part 70 (volunteers)
                               includes 12 or more HOME-             contracts and subcontracts       • Copeland Anti-Kickback Act
                               assisted units                      • Requirements apply to whole        (40 U.S.C. 276c)
                                                                     project not just the HOME-       • 24 CFR 92.354
                                                                     assisted units
                                                                                                      • Davis-Bacon Act (40 U.S.C.
                                                                                                        276a - 276a-5)



Chapter 6: Rental Housing Programs                                                                                                  273
Conflict of Interest         Yes                                 • PJs should ensure               • 24 CFR 92.356
                                                                   compliance both                 • 24 CFR 85.36
                                                                   in-house and when using
                                                                   subrecipients                   • 24 CFR 84.42
Debarred Contractors         Yes                                 • PJs must check HUD list of      • 24 CFR Part 5
                                                                   debarred contractors
Environmental Requirements
Environmental Reviews        Yes                                 • Level of review depends upon • 24 CFR 92.352
                                                                   the activity                   • 24 CFR Part 58
                                                                 • For rehabilitation and new     • National Environmental Policy
                                                                   construction (4 or fewer         Act (NEPA) of 1969
                                                                   units); categorically excluded
                                                                   subject to 24 CFR 58.5
                                                                 • New construction (more
                                                                   than 5 units) subject to
                                                                   environmental assessment
Flood Insurance              Yes, for PJs that are cities or     • Must obtain flood insurance     • Section 202 of the Flood
                             counties                              if located in a FEMA              Disaster Protection Act of
                             No, for State programs                designated 100-year flood         1973 (42 U.S.C. 4106)
                                                                   plain
                                                                 • Community must be
                                                                   participating in FEMA’s flood
                                                                   insurance program
Site and Neighborhood        Yes, for new construction only                                        • 24 CFR 893.6(b)
Standards
Lead-based Paint             • Yes, for rehabilitation of pre­   Rehabilitation                    • 24 CFR 92.355
                               1978 units                        • Notices to owners               • Lead-based Paint Poisoning
                             • Applies to HOME and non­          • Paint testing of surfaces to      Prevention Act of 1971 (42
                               HOME-assisted units                 be disturbed                      U.S.C. 4821 et. seq.)
                             • Requirements differ               • Risk assessment, if             • 24 CFR Part 35
                               depending on whether                applicable, based on level of   • 24 CFR 982.401(j) (except
                               rehabilitation work is              rehabilitation assistance         paragraph 982.401(j)(1)(i))
                               performed
                                                                 • Appropriate level-hazard        • 40 CFR Part 745
                             • EPA's Renovation, Repair,           reduction activity (based
                               and Painting Rule applies           on level of rehabilitation
                                                                   assistance)
                                                                 • Safe work practices and
                                                                   clearance
                                                                 • Provisions included in all
                                                                   contracts and subcontracts
                                                                 Activities not involving
                                                                 rehabilitation
                                                                 • Notices to purchasers and
                                                                   tenants
                                                                 • Visual assessment must be
                                                                   performed
                                                                 • Paint stabilization must be
                                                                   completed, if applicable
                                                                 • Safe work practices and
                                                                   clearance
                                                                 • Provisions included
                                                                   in all contracts and
                                                                   subcontracts




274                                                                                                             Monitoring HOME
Relocation                   Yes     • Displacement must be           • 24 CFR 92.353
                                       minimized; existing tenants    • Uniform Relocation
                                       must be provided a               Assistance and Real Property
                                       reasonable opportunity to        Acquisition Policies Act
                                       lease a dwelling unit in the     of 1970 (URA) (42 U.S.C.
                                       building upon completion of      4201-4655)
                                       the project
                                                                       • 49 CFR Part 24
                                     • Reimbursement for
                                       temporary relocation,           • 24 CFR Part 42 (subpart B)
                                       including moving costs and      • Section 104(d) “Barney Frank
                                       increase in monthly rent/         Amendments”
                                       utilities, must be provided, as
                                       well as advisory services




Chapter 6: Rental Housing Programs                                                               275
                                                       Attachment 6-D
                        Summary of Lead-based Paint Requirements for Rental Programs
                                                                       Rehabilitation
                                                                        (Subpart J)
                                             <$5,000                $5,000 – $25,000                 >$25,000
Approach to Lead Hazard        Do no harm                     Identify and control lead    Identify and abate lead hazards
Evaluation and Reduction                                      hazards
Notification                   Yes                            Yes                          Yes
Lead Hazard Evaluation         Paint Testing                  Paint Testing and Risk       Paint Testing and Risk
                                                              Assessment                   Assessment
Lead Hazard Reduction          Repair surfaces disturbed      Interim Controls             Abatement (Interim Controls on
                               during rehabilitation                                       exterior surfaces not disturbed
                                                                                           by rehabilitation)
                               • Safe work practices          • Safe work practices        • Safe work practices
                               • Clearance                    • Clearance                  • Clearance
Ongoing Maintenance            Rental only                    Rental only                  Rental only
EIBLL Requirements             No                             No                           No
Options                        • Presume lead-based paint     • Presume lead-based paint   • Presume lead-based paint
                               • Use safe work practices on     and/or hazards               and/or hazards
                                 all surfaces                 • Use standard treatments    • Abate all applicable surfaces




276                                                                                                      Monitoring HOME
                                     Project: ____________________________________________________________ Date: _______________________________________________________________
                                     Address: ___________________________________________________________ Reporting Period: _____________________________________________________
                                     No. of Units:____________________________________
                                     No. of HOME Units:______________________________
                                     Low HOME Rent Units: ___________________________
                                     High HOME Rent Units: __________________________


                                          A         B            C             D            E              F                G              H             I            J             K            L
                                                               Low or
                                                                                                                       Date of Last                                Maximum         Unit in
                                                   No. of    High HOME                   Household   Annual (Gross)                    Low or High      Utility




Chapter 6: Rental Housing Programs
                                        Unit #                             Tenant Name                                    Income                                  Actual Rent   Compliance?   Comments
                                                 Bedrooms     Rent Unit                    Size         Income                         HOME Rent     Allowance
                                                                                                                      Re-Examination                                 (H-I)        (Y or N)
                                                             Designation

                                      Example       2            L          J. Doe          3         $14,000            1/97           $450           $75         $375             Y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Attachment 6-E

                                                                                                                                                                                                         (PJ should complete and place in project file)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          HOME Rental Project Compliance Report




277
                                             Attachment 6-F
                                       Maintaining Unit Mix Flow Chart

                              Income Recertification Conducted



           Income between
              50 - 80% AMI                                     Income greater than 80% AMI

      MATTERS ONLY FOR LOW HOME                            SAME ACTIONS FOR HIGH AND LOW
              RENT UNITS                                            HOME UNITS




  • Rent: stays at Low HOME rent until           Fixed unit:                   Floating unit:
    High HOME rent unit is designated            • Rent: raise to 30% of       • Rent: raise to LESSER
    as Low HOME rent                               monthly income                OF 30% monthly income
  • Once replacement is identified, rent                                         or Comparable Market
                                                 • Next Available HOME           Rent
    adjusts to High HOME rent                      unit must address
  • Unit is now designated as a High               High/Low HOME unit          • Next available
    HOME rent unit                                 proportions                   non-HOME unit
                                                 • No action for next             • Must be designated
                                                   available non-HOME unit          as HOME unit
                                                                                  • Address High/Low
                                                                                    HOME unit
                                                                                    proportions




278                                                                                         Monitoring HOME
Chapter 7: Tenant-based Rental Assistance Programs


This chapter describes how to monitor HOME-funded tenant-based rental assistance (TBRA) programs. It is organized into
sections that correlate to the three key stages of monitoring:
    • Section 1. Pre-monitoring (program design and operations). Pre-monitoring is a systematic way for the PJ to gather
      background information on the program’s administration. It helps the PJ assess if the program administrator has poli-
      cies and procedures in place to facilitate HOME compliance and helps the PJ prepare for a monitoring site visit.
    • Section 2. Project (or case file) monitoring. The core of the PJ’s monitoring, project monitoring is a systematic way
      to review specific case files to assess whether the program administrator follows its procedures in a consistent way while
      implementing the program, and whether each case is in compliance with the HOME requirements.
    • Section 3. Program monitoring. Program monitoring is a systematic way to review the overall performance and com-
      pliance of the program. It helps the PJ identify patterns and trends in the program, and helps the PJ draw conclusions
      about the program administrator’s policies, procedures, practices, and outcomes.
A TBRA program can be administered by the PJ itself, or by a subrecipient, State recipient, or contractor. This chapter uses
the term “program administrator” to refer to any of these entities.

Basis of this Chapter
The checklists in this chapter assist the PJ monitor in evaluating compliance with the key HOME Program requirements
related to the TBRA activity. They are based on the following HUD checklists:
    • Exhibit 7-0, HOME PJ Pre-monitoring Preparation for Tenant-based Rental Assistance (TBRA) Program
    • Exhibit 7-9, Guide for Review of TBRA Projects
    • Exhibit 7-10, Guide for Review of TBRA Programs.
The checklists in this chapter can be used instead of the HUD checklists in the CPD Grantee Monitoring Handbook. The
HUD checklist questions cited in this chapter have been revised slightly for use by the PJ, rather than HUD. Changes to the
HUD checklist questions are denoted with [brackets]. In addition, some new questions have been added to the HUD check-
lists to facilitate the PJ's review. Questions that are denoted with the icon  are not on the HUD checklists. All questions
are numbered sequentially; the original HUD checklist numbering has not been retained.
Complete copies of the HUD checklists are found in the CPD Grantee Monitoring Handbook, available online at http://www.
hud.gov/offices/cpd/library/monitoring/handbook.cfm#7. Chapter 7 of this handbook covers the HOME Program.

Framework for the Monitoring Review
In addition to the key HOME requirements covered in this chapter, there are a number of additional requirements that the
PJ monitor needs to review to conduct a comprehensive monitoring review of a TBRA program.
    • Program Administration. To monitor requirements related to the administration and financial management of the
      program, refer to other chapters of this guidebook, depending on what entity administers the program:
       — Use Chapter 2, Section 2 of this guidebook to monitor State recipients’ and subrecipients’ compliance with appli-
         cable uniform administrative requirements, and the PJ’s management and oversight of these funded entities, when
         these entities administer the homeowner rehabilitation program.


Chapter 7: Tenant-based Rental Assistance Programs                                                                         279
        — Use Chapter 3 of this guidebook to monitor the PJ’s administrative and financial management systems. This
          should be done regardless of how the TBRA program is administered.
      • Written Agreements. To monitor whether the HOME written agreement adequately conveys HOME requirements
        and whether it is enforceable, use one of the following HUD checklists, depending on what type of entity administers
        the program:
        — Exhibit 7-18, Guide for Review of Subrecipient Written Agreement, when a subrecipient administers program
        — Exhibit 7-15, Guide for Review of Contractor Written Agreements, when
          a contractor administers program                                             This guidebook has adapted the
                                                                                       HUD monitoring checklists for key
        — Exhibit 7-17, Guide for Review of State Recipient Written Agreements,
                                                                                       HOME Program requirements for
          when a State recipient administers program.
                                                                                       use by the PJ when it monitors itself
        In addition, regardless of who administers the program, the PJ monitor         and its funded entities. For these
        should review the written agreement with the beneficiary. To do this, it       areas of review, the PJ monitor
        can use the following HUD checklist:                                           is directed to other chapters of
                                                                                       this guidebook. For some areas
        — Exhibit 7-14, Guide for Review of Beneficiary Written Agreements.
                                                                                       of review (such as other Federal
      • Other Federal Requirements. The PJ monitor should use the following            requirements, procurement, and
        HUD checklists to monitor cross-cutting Federal requirements:                  written agreements), the HUD
                                                                                       checklists have not been adapted for
        — Exhibit 22-3, Guide for Review of Civil Rights-Related Program Require-
                                                                                       PJ use. For these areas of review,
          ments for the HOME Investment Partnerships Program, Sections B
                                                                                       the PJ monitor is directed to the
          (beneficiary data)
                                                                                       HUD checklists in the CPD Grantee
        — Exhibit 24-3, Guide for Review of Lead-based Paint Compliance in Prop-       Monitoring Handbook. The PJ
          erties Receiving Tenant-based Rental Assistance (TBRA).                      monitor should be able to use these
                                                                                       HUD checklists in their existing form.
Resources
The following attachments are provided at the end of this chapter to facilitate the monitoring review:
      • Attachment 7-A: Guidance on Calculating Rental Assistance for Certificate and Voucher Programs
      • Attachment 7-B: Client File Form – Tenant-based Rental Assistance Programs
      • Attachment 7-C: Summary of Key HOME Rules for TBRA and How to Document
      • Attachment 7-D: Summary of Other Federal Requirements for TBRA Programs
      • Attachment 7-E: Summary of Lead-based Paint Requirements for TBRA Programs.

Section 1. Pre-monitoring: Design and Operation of the TBRA Program
 Overview of the Pre-monitoring Review
Pre-monitoring helps the PJ:
      • Gather background information about how the program administrator has designed its TBRA program
      • Prepare for an onsite monitoring visit
      • Assess whether the program administrator has the necessary policies and procedures in place to administer the program
        in compliance with the HOME requirements.
Pre-monitoring is not required before every onsite monitoring visit. It is recommended when:
      • The program administrator is new
      • The PJ monitor is reviewing the program administrator for the first time


280                                                                                                         Monitoring HOME
     • The subject under review appears to pose a high risk.
 Organization of this Section
This section reviews key program design and operational requirements of a TBRA program, including:
     A. Marketing, tenant selection, and program design
     B. Program administrator
     C. Income definition
     D. Unit compliance
 Instructions
The PJ monitor should copy and use the checklists in this chapter to facilitate its pre-monitoring review. For each area of
review, the PJ monitor should review relevant documents and answer each checklist question.
The first column, “HUD Checklist Exhibit 7-0 Selected Excerpts,” provides the HUD checklist question. It may be adapted
somewhat (indicated by the use of [brackets]) for use by PJs.
The second column, “What to Analyze,” provides guidance to help the PJ monitor assess compliance.
The third column, “Follow-up Needed at Site Visit,” provides space for the PJ monitor to make notes that will facilitate the
onsite review. This might be a record of items where a determination of compliance could not be made during pre-monitor-
ing, or a list of questions the PJ monitor will want to ask of the program administrator when on site.
 Documentation
The following documents are needed for a pre-monitoring review:
                                                                                                 The PJ monitor should
     • Copy of the HOME regulations found at 24 CFR Part 92                                      request any documentation
     • HOME income limits in effect for the years under review                                   it does not have from
                                                                                                 the PJ staff or the State
     • Desk review monitoring file, if available                                                 recipient, subrecipient, or
     • Written agreement(s) between the PJ and the subrecipient, State recipient, or             contractor (as applicable)
       contractor, if applicable                                                                 prior to conducting the pre-
                                                                                                 monitoring review.
     • TBRA program policies and procedures
     • Application form and program information for TBRA applicants
     • Participant selection and TBRA preference policies
     • Marketing procedures or plan and marketing materials (such as advertisements and flyers)

 TBRA Rental Assistance Models
 Generally, there are two models that PJs follow to implement their TBRA programs:
 • Section 8 Certificate Program model. Under a TBRA program modeled after the Section 8 Certificate Program,
   (which was combined with the Section 8 Voucher program), a tenant pays 30 percent of its monthly adjusted gross
   income toward rent. The TBRA assistance makes up the gap between the tenant’s payment and the actual rent plus
   utilities for the tenant’s unit. The rent and utilities of the unit selected by the household may not exceed the PJ’s
   payment (rent) standard.
 • Section 8 Voucher Program model. Under a TBRA program modeled after the Section 8 Housing Choice Voucher
   Program, the PJ calculates the difference between 30 percent of the household’s monthly adjusted gross income
   and a payment (rent) standard established by the PJ. This gap is the constant amount of the monthly TBRA
   assistance. The household is free to select any unit, at any rent. If the household selects a unit that rents for more
   than the payment (rent) standard, the household’s monthly payment will exceed 30 percent of its monthly adjusted
   income. If the household selects a unit that rents for less than the payment (rent) standard, the household’s
   monthly payment will be less than 30 percent of its monthly adjusted income.


Chapter 7: Tenant-based Rental Assistance Programs                                                                            281
      • Guidance on making income determinations (provided by the PJ)
      • Local standards or HUD’s housing quality standards (HQS) used for TBRA program

A. Marketing, Tenant Selection, and Program Design
Background: PJs are permitted to undertake TBRA programs only when they certify in their Consolidated Plans that they
have an unmet housing need that can be addressed by TBRA, and they present the local market conditions that lead to the
decision to provide TBRA assistance. TBRA programs must be marketed and administered in an equitable manner and in
compliance with fair housing legislation and HOME Program regulations.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.209 and 92.350
 Documentation:
      • Participant selection policy
      • Marketing procedures or plan and materials (such as advertisements and flyers)
      • Application for TBRA assistance
      • Consolidated Plan and/or annual action plan with description of TBRA program
      • TBRA certification form
      • TBRA program policies and procedures

        HUD Checklist Exhibit 7-0
                                                       What to Analyze                   Follow-up Needed at Site Visit
           Selected Excerpts

 1. Are there written informational       Marketing should be conducted to
    materials about the program           reach a full range of potential clients.
    available for potential applicants    Marketing materials:
    or unit owners? If “yes” obtain       • Must include fair housing language
    copies.                                 and logo
       Yes      No                      • Should be written in clear and simple
                                            terms
                                          • Should be available in other
                                            languages.




282                                                                                                         Monitoring HOME
 2. Obtain written information on the       Program materials should be written in
    PJ’s program design to determine        user-friendly terms and clearly explain:
    the following:                             How to apply for assistance
    a) What type of TBRA program               What assistance is available
       does the PJ administer (e.g.,
       rental assistance or security           Who is eligible to receive
       deposit only)?                           assistance

    b) Does the PJ have its own TBRA           How the assistance amount is
       waiting list or does it use the          determined
       Section 8 waiting list?                 What housing the applicant can
    c) What is the preference system            use the assistance for (location/
       used in the TBRA program?                portability).

    d) Is the TBRA program targeted         If assistance is provided on first-come
       to a special needs population?       first-served basis, procedures should
                                            specify that date and time must be
    e) Does the PJ have a residency         stamped on each application upon
       preference or requirement for        receipt.
       TBRA applicants?
                                            If lottery system is used, procedures
    f) Does the PJ permit HOME              should state date of lottery draw and that
        TBRA to be used outside of          applicants will be notified in writing of
        its geographic boundaries           outcome.
        (portability)?
                                            If other, the selection procedures must
                                            reflect an equitable process.

                               Elements of a Selection Policy
          Selection policy must:
          • State that applicants that are not selected will be notified in writing,
            with an explanation of why they were not selected
   TIP




          • Specifically prohibit unlawful discrimination, favoritism towards
            friends or relatives, and potential conflicts of interest.
          Selection policy should also:
          • Specify tenant selection criteria and preferences, if applicable
          • Accurately and clearly explain the income limits of the program.
          • Specify what documentation the applicant must submit to
            demonstrate that he/she meets the selection criteria

 3. Obtain a copy of written TBRA           Program procedures should clearly
    program procedures to determine         describe the in-take and tenant selection
    whether:                                process to ensure that applicants are
    a) Recipients receive accurate and      given:
       timely information regarding             Full information about their
       the amount and period of                  determination of eligibility
       assistance; the PJ’s policy              Amount and type of financial
       on renewals; the unit size for            assistance they are entitled to
       which they are approved; and              receive
       rent reasonableness.
                                                What housing they can use
    b) Participating unit owners                 the assistance for (unit size,
       receive written information               standards, lease terms, etc).
       regarding property standards;
       lease conditions; rent               Basis of funding decisions must be
       reasonableness and payment           consistent for all applicants.
       standards, and utility
       allowances.




Chapter 7: Tenant-based Rental Assistance Programs                                       283
 4. Does the PJ’s TBRA program meet         Consolidated Plan and/or annual action
    an unmet need identified in its         plan must indicate that TBRA can meet
    Consolidated Plan, based upon           an unmet need, and must include
    the description of the program          description of market conditions that
    in the annual action plan or            lead to this conclusion.
    other written materials? [24 CFR
    92.209(b)]
                                                    TBRA Preferences
       Yes      No
                                      The PJ can determine its preferences for TBRA


                             TIP
                                      assistance; however, these preferences must
                                      be documented in the PJ’s Consolidated Plan
                                      and a TBRA certification must be completed.
                                      Typical preferences for TBRA programs include:
                                      • Seniors (62 years of age and older)
                                      • Persons with special needs
                                      • Formerly homeless persons.

 5. Has the PJ submitted a signed           The TBRA certification must be attached
    TBRA certification with its             to the Consolidated Plan.
    Consolidated Plan? [24 CFR
    91.255(d)(1), 91.325(d)(1), and
    91.425(a)(2)(i)]
       Yes     No




B. Program Administrator
Background: TBRA programs must be administered by a qualified program administrator, and the PJ monitor should be
familiar with the program administrator’s roles and responsibilities before conducting a site visit.
Regulatory Basis: Recommended
 Documentation:
      • Written agreement(s) between the PJ and the subrecipient, State recipient, or contractor that administers the TBRA
        program
      • HOME status reports from staff or subrecipients




284                                                                                                        Monitoring HOME
       HUD Checklist Exhibit 7-0
                                                        What to Analyze                    Follow-up Needed at Site Visit
          Selected Excerpts

 6. Does the PJ directly administer         Written agreement must contain certain
    the TBRA program or use                 required provisions that are outlined at
    subrecipient[s] for this purpose?       24 CFR 92.504(c).
    If a subrecipient is used, obtain       Written agreement should describe how
    a copy of the HOME written              the TBRA program will be administered,
    agreement for this activity.            and clarify the roles and responsibilities
      Yes       No                        of the PJ and the program administrator.
                       Required Provisions of the Written Agreement
             Most TBRA programs are administered by either the PJ itself or
             a subrecipient (often, the public housing authority). A written
             agreement with a subrecipient must include the following
             provisions, in accordance with 24 CFR 92.504(c)(2):
     TIP




             • Use of HOME funds
             • Program income
             • Uniform administrative requirements
             • Other program requirements
             • Affirmative marketing
             • Requests for disbursement of funds
             • Reversion of assets
             • Records and reports
             • Enforcement of the agreement.




C. Income Definition
Background: All HOME funds must benefit low-income or very low-income households. A low-income household is defined
as a household with an annual gross income at or below 80 percent of the area median income, as determined by HUD and
adjusted for household size. A very low-income household has an annual gross income at or below 50 percent of area median
income as determined by HUD. In addition, 90 percent of the PJ’s annual HOME allocation that is invested in rental hous-
ing (TBRA and rental development programs combined) must be in housing that is occupied by persons with annual gross
incomes at or below 60 percent of area median income.
In order to meet these requirements, the program administrator determines the income-eligibility of households assisted with
HOME funds. Income-eligibility is based on the anticipated annual gross income of family members in the household using
one of the following definitions:
    • Part 5 (Section 8) definition of annual income
    • Internal Revenue Service (IRS) definition of adjusted gross income from IRS Form 1040 Long Form
    • U.S. Census Bureau Long Form definition of annual income.
The PJ must identify definition of income is used for the TBRA program. Only one definition can be used for the TBRA
program.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.203
 Documentation:
    • Written agreement between the PJ and the State recipient, subrecipient, or contractor, if applicable
    • Policies and procedures identifying the definition of income used for the activity
    • Copies of the HUD income limits for the years being monitored



Chapter 7: Tenant-based Rental Assistance Programs                                                                          285
        HUD Checklist Exhibit 7-0
                                                         What to Analyze                         Follow-up Needed at Site Visit
           Selected Excerpts

 7. What definition of income is being      The written agreement and TBRA policies
    used for the TBRA program?              and procedures should identify what
    Obtain the HUD income limits for        definition of income must be used to
    years being monitored. [24 CFR          determine household income-eligibility.
    92.203(b)]                              The PJ should provide program
                                            administrator with detailed guidance
                                            about how to apply the definition of
                                            income.




D. Unit Compliance
Background: Housing that is occupied by persons receiving TBRA must meet certain property standards. At a minimum,
the property must meet HUD’s housing quality standards (HQS). The PJ can use a higher State/local standard.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.251
 Documentation:
      • Procedures that identify the applicable property standard (State or local code, or HQS)
      • Unit inspection procedures, inspection form, and approval documentation

        HUD Checklist Exhibit 7-0
                                                         What to Analyze                         Follow-up Needed at Site Visit
           Selected Excerpts

 8. Is the property standard in place       Policies and procedures should specify
    at least HQS or a higher local          what property standards apply.
    standard? [24 CFR 92.251]              HUD HQS is a minimum standard. If
       Yes     No                         a State/local code is used, it must
                                            be equivalent or more stringent than
                                            HQS.


 9. Are units inspected and approved        Written agreement and procedures for
    prior to household occupancy?           inspections must specify that units
       Yes     No                         must pass inspection prior to approval/
                                            occupancy.
                                            Written agreement and procedures
                                            should specify the PJ’s occupancy
                                            standards.
                                            Occupancy standards should be
                                            clearly stated in program materials for
                                            applicants.
                                               Occupancy Standards
          The program administrator is permitted to impose occupancy standards, in addition to the
  TIP




          applicable property standard. Occupancy standards ensure that units are the appropriate size
          for the applicant household. The HQS may be used and modified to take into consideration
          specific household composition and circumstances. Examples include:
          • Permitting persons of the opposite sex, other than spouses, to have separate bedrooms
          • Permitting or requiring young children of the opposite sex to share a bedroom
          • Permitting different generations of the same sex to have separate bedrooms
          • Providing for less than two persons per living/sleeping area in the case of medical necessity.




286                                                                                                                 Monitoring HOME
                                     Summary of Pre-monitoring Review
                                                      TBRA Program
Instructions: Using the completed checklists from the pre-monitoring review, complete the following chart to summarize the
monitoring results. The written documentation that should have been examined includes: written agreement between the PJ
and the subrecipient, State recipient, or contractor, if applicable; subsidy contract with the landlord or tenant; and program
policies, procedures, and other program materials.

                                  No Apparent
                                   Problems
                                                                                Follow-Up Needed
                                  with written
                                 documentation

 A. Marketing, tenant
    selection, and program
    design

 B. Program administrator


 C. Income definition


 D. Unit compliance




Chapter 7: Tenant-based Rental Assistance Programs                                                                       287
Section 2. Project (Case File) Monitoring
 Overview of the Project Monitoring Review
During project monitoring, the PJ monitor:
      • Reviews individual project files for the tenant-based rental assistance program
      • Determines whether the program administrator complies with the HOME requirements in the implementation of the
        program.
The program administrator should have a project file (also known as a “case file”) for each tenant that receives HOME TBRA
assistance. The PJ monitor must review a sufficient sample of project files to determine that the program administrator is
complying with all applicable HOME requirements. Generally, the PJ monitor should randomly select at least 10 percent of
the files, or a minimum three project files if the program is small. In addition, it should select the files of any project that it
has concerns may be at risk for noncompliance or performance difficulties.
When the PJ uncovers instances of noncompliance in the project review, it must take steps to see that the noncompliance is
corrected in each instance.
Note, the results of project monitoring can be aggregated, or looked at in their entirety, to draw conclusions about the overall
performance of the program administrator. This process can be done at the conclusion of the project monitoring review, or it
can be done as part of the PJ’s program monitoring, which is discussed in Section 3 of this chapter.

 Organization of this Section
This section is organized into the following sections:
      A. Participant eligibility
      B. Subsidy administration
      C. Unit compliance
      D. Lease provisions
 Instructions
The PJ monitor should copy and use the checklists in this chapter to conduct its project monitoring review. For each area of
the review, the PJ monitor should review relevant documents and answer each checklist question. A separate checklist should
be completed for each case file reviewed.
The first column, “HUD Checklist Exhibit 7-9 Selected Excerpts,” provides the HUD checklist questions. It may be adapted
somewhat (indicated by the use of [brackets]) for use by PJs.
The second column, “Identified Problems,” lists potential compliance issues. The PJ monitor should check off any of the
“Identified Problems” that he or she encounters while reviewing project files.
At the end of each subsection is a "Notes" form for the PJ to make notes on findings and recommended actions.
 Documentation to Bring
The following documents are needed for an onsite project monitoring review:
      • Pre-monitoring review, if available
      • HOME written agreement between the PJ and the subrecipient, State recipient, or contractor, if applicable
      • Policies and procedures for the TBRA program
      • Copy of the HOME regulations found at 24 CFR Part 92
      • HOME income limits in effect for the years under review



288                                                                                                              Monitoring HOME
A. Participant Eligibility
The requirements related to participant eligibility describe who is eligible to receive TBRA and covers the following topics:
     1. Income-eligibility
     2. Participant selection

1. Income-eligibility
Background: Income-eligibility refers to the requirement that every tenant that receives HOME TBRA must have an annual
gross income that is at or below 80 percent of the area median income. In addition, the PJ must ensure that 90 percent
of each annual HOME allocation that is invested in rental housing (TBRA and rental development programs combined)
provides housing that is initially occupied by households with an annual gross income at or below 60 percent of area median
income. Therefore, most households receiving TBRA must meet this deeper income targeting requirement. The PJ deter-
mines how these income targeting requirements are met and specifies its income targeting requirements for the TBRA pro-
gram in its written agreement with the State recipient, subrecipient, or contractor.
Tenant household income-eligibility must be determined prior to occupancy and then annually using source documentation.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.203(b), 92.203(a)(1), 92.209(c) and 92.508(a)(3)(v)
 Documentation:
     • Written agreement between the PJ and the State recipient, subrecipient, or contractor, if applicable
     • Application that lists all household members and states the income/employment of each household member, including
       the applicant’s position, income, and length of time at job
     • Procedures that specify the applicable income definition and describe how to determine the household income for the
       TBRA program
     • Source documentation of income (such as pay stubs, bank statements, or verification of public assistance) for all
       household members
     • Worksheet or form that shows calculation of anticipated household income and compares it to current HUD income
       limits for the applicable household size
     • Acceptance or rejection letter




Chapter 7: Tenant-based Rental Assistance Programs                                                                          289
               HUD Checklist 7-9 Selected Excerpts                                        Identified Problems

 1. Was the household’s projected annual income calculated in       No worksheet in file showing how income was determined
    accordance with the Technical Guide for Determining Income
                                                                    Household size not verified through application or personal
    and Allowances for the HOME Program? [24 CFR 92.203(b)]          interview
       Yes     No                                                 Income not calculated correctly—all applicable income
                                                                     not “counted” as income or income that could have been
                    Resources for Determining Income                 excluded was counted
          HUD Income Limits are revised annually and are            Anticipated income (expected in the next twelve months) not
          available from the HUD Field Office or on the HUD          used
          website at http://www.hud.gov/offices/cpd/
                                                                    Income for all household members not counted
  TIP




          affordablehousing/programs/home/limits/income/
          index.cfm.                                                Income not calculated within six months of HOME
                                                                     assistance
          Technical Guide for Determining Income and Allowances
          for the HOME Program, is available from Community
          Connections at 1-800-998-9999.
          HUD’s Income and Allowances Calculator is available
          online at http://www.hud.gov/offices/cpd/
          affordablehousing/training/calculator/calculator.
          cfm.


 2. Was the applicable definition of income used (e.g., the         Wrong definition used
    definition selected for the TBRA program)?
                                                                    No definition used
       Yes       No

 3. Was household income supported with source                      Income not verified with source documentation
    documentation? [24 CFR 92.203(a)(2)]
                                                                    Source documentation not sufficient
       Yes       No
                                              Acceptable Income Source Documentation
                            TIP




                                   • Wage statements
                                   • Social security letters
                                   • Third party verification (such as verification from employers,
                                     public assistance administrator, unemployment office, etc.).
                                   Note: Income-eligibility determinations must be done with source
                                   documentation on an annual basis for TBRA.

 4. Was the household’s annual income not more than 80% of          No worksheet to show comparison of HUD income limits to
    the area median income? [24 CFR 92.209(c)(1)]                    the household income
       Yes       No                                               Wrong HUD income limits used (e.g., wrong year)
                                                                    Household received funds, but was over-income

 5. Is the household’s income re-determined annually? [24 CFR       Household income not re-determined annually
    92.209(c)]
                                                                    No source documentation for re-determination
       Yes       No



2. Participant Selection
Background: The program administrator must adopt and use the PJ’s tenant selection policies and preferences.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.209(c)
 Documentation:
      • Consolidated Plan or annual action plan that describes TBRA preferences
      • PJ’s tenant selection criteria


290                                                                                                             Monitoring HOME
    • Program procedures that indicate tenant selection preferences and residency requirement (if applicable), and how these
      are applied
    • Waiting list and/or applicant selection information
    • Worksheet or form that documents tenant selection and/or referral form from a service provider
    • Documentation of residency (such as driver’s license or utility bills), if applicable
    • Section 8 waiting list at time of tenant selection and at time of monitoring visit

              HUD Checklist 7-5 Selected Excerpts                                           Identified Problems

 6. Was the participant selected in accordance with the                No documentation that participant met PJ preferences
    preferences adopted by the PJ? [24 CFR 92.209(c)]                  Participant did not meet preferences
     Yes      No

 7. If the PJ has a residency requirement for TBRA recipients,         Participant served lives outside of PJ boundaries
    did the participant meet it?
                                                                       No documentation of residency
     Yes      No

 8. Does the file indicate whether or not the participant is on the    No documentation about participant’s spot on the waiting list
    Section 8 waiting list (so that the [program administrator]
                                                                       Participant served lost its place on the Section 8 waiting list
    may ensure the household maintains its place on that list)?
    [24 CFR 92.209(1)]
     Yes      No                                 Maintaining Spot on Section 8 Waiting List
                               TIP




                                      Monitors should be able to determine (based upon a comparison
                                      of the waiting list and applicant files) those applicants who
                                      met the preference criteria and when they were chosen for
                                      assistance.


NOTES on Participant Eligibility




Chapter 7: Tenant-based Rental Assistance Programs                                                                                   291
B. Subsidy Administration
Subsidy administration covers the following topics:
      1. Type of assistance
      2. Rental assistance calculation
      3. Subsidy contracts.

1. Type of Assistance
Background: HOME can be used to pay rental assistance and/or to provide funds for security or utility deposits, provided
that the PJ documents that this type of assistance is needed in the jurisdiction in its Consolidated Plan. Utility deposit assis-
tance can only be provided in conjunction with rental or security deposit assistance.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.209(a) and (b)
 Documentation:
      • Consolidated Plan or annual action plan and program materials that specify the type of TBRA assistance provided in
        the program
      • Worksheet or form that shows subsidy calculation
      • Worksheet or form that shows security deposit amount
      • Copy of checks for security and/or utility deposit provided to the landlord, tenant, or utility company, as applicable

               HUD Checklist 7-9 Selected Excerpts                                         Identified Problems

 9. Are all costs paid in connection with the tenant eligible         No clear documentation on how funds were used
    (rental assistance, security deposit, and utility deposits
                                                                      Type of assistance is not consistent with the PJ’s
    if provided in conjunction with rental or security deposit         Consolidated Plan and/or procedures
    assistance)? [24 CFR 92.209(a) and 24 CFR 85.20(b)(5)]
                                                                      Utility deposit assistance was provided without rental
       Yes     No                                                    assistance or security deposit assistance

                                                     Eligible Utility Deposit Assistance
                        Appropriate utility deposits include those costs allowed under the Section 8 program which
                 TIP




                        are typically standard tenant-paid utilities:
                        • Gas
                        • Electric
                        • Water/sewer
                        • Garbage removal.
                        Utilities that are optional and are not required to be paid by tenants (such as telephone,
                        cable, or internet service) are not eligible to be included in utility deposit assistance.

 10. If security deposit assistance was provided, was the             No clear documentation on how the security deposit amount
     amount less than 2 months’ rent? [24 CFR 92.209(j)(2)]            was determined
       Yes      No                                                  Security deposit was greater than two months rent
                                                                      Amount of security deposit assistance was not reasonable
                                                                       or customary in the local housing market



2. Rental Assistance Calculation
Background: Rental assistance must be calculated correctly and consistently for all participants, given the program model
chosen: voucher, certificate, or other. Detailed guidance on how to calculate rental assistance for each model type is provided
in Attachment 7-A at the end of this chapter.



292                                                                                                                  Monitoring HOME
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.209(e), (f ) and (h)
 Documentation:
    • Worksheet or form that shows how the annual gross income was calculated for the household, and related source
      documentation
    • Worksheet or form that shows how the adjusted monthly gross income was calculated
    • Worksheet or form that shows how the subsidy amount was calculated
    • Worksheet or form that shows the comparison of the actual rent of the unit to the payment standard, for certificate
      model program
    • Worksheet or form that shows the comparison of the actual rent of the unit to area market rents, for voucher model
      program
    • Worksheet or form that shows the comparison of the tenant total tenant payment to the PJ’s established policy for
      minimum contribution toward rent

             HUD Checklist 7-9 Selected Excerpts                                          Identified Problems

 11. Was the total tenant payment calculation based upon              No documentation showing how total tenant calculation was
     adjusted (gross) income? [24 CFR 92.209(e) and (h)]               determined
      Yes      No                                                   Total tenant payment based on adjusted (gross) income, but
                                                                       not calculated correctly
                                                                      Total tenant payment based on something other than
                                                                       adjusted (gross) income

 12. Was the participant’s adjusted (gross) income calculated         No documentation showing how income was determined
     using the exclusions established in 24 CFR 5.611 and
                                                                      Inaccurate adjusted monthly (gross) income calculation
     explained in the Technical Guide for Determining Income
     and Allowances for the HOME Program? [24 CFR 92.203(c)]
      Yes      No

 13. Is the monthly TBRA subsidy no more than the difference          No documentation that this determination was made
     between the PJ’s rent standard for the unit size and 30%
                                                                      Correct PJ’s rent standard not used
     of the household’s adjusted (gross) income? [24 CFR
     92.209(h)(1)]                                                    30% of household adjusted (gross) income was not
                                                                       calculated correctly
      Yes      No
                                                                      Monthly TBRA assistance is greater than difference between
                                                                       the PJ’s rent standard and 30% of the household’s adjusted
                                                                       monthly gross income

                                                                Rent Standards
              The PJ must establish a rent standard for each unit size, based on:
        TIP




              • Market conditions, or
              • Estimation of rents for the area that is not less than 80% of the Fair Market Rents (FMR) nor greater than
                the FMR or HUD-approved exception rent for the area (approved for the local housing authority).
              The rent standards for the area must be updated annually.
              On a case-by-case basis, up to 20% of the units approved for TBRA may exceed the rent standard by no more
              than 10%.




Chapter 7: Tenant-based Rental Assistance Programs                                                                              293
 14. Does the tenant pay a contribution toward rent at least         Tenant contribution toward rent is less than the minimum
     equal to the PJ’s established minimum rent contribution?         contribution toward rent
     [24 CFR 92.209(h)(2)]                                           Tenant does not contribute toward rent
       Yes      No

                                         Determining the Tenant Payment and Subsidy Limit

                   TIP   The PJ must establish a minimum tenant payment and maximum subsidy limit.
                         Tenant Rent Contribution. Tenants must pay some amount (more then $0) toward rent.
                         The PJ can set this as a percentage of the household income, or as a flat amount.
                         Maximum subsidy per household. TBRA assistance cannot be provided in an amount that
                         is greater than the difference between the program’s payment standard (see question
                         above) and 30% of the household’s  s adjusted monthly gross income.

 15. Is the rent charged for the unit reasonable? [24 CFR            No documentation to show that the program administrator
     92.209(f)]                                                       verified that the rent was reasonable
       Yes      No                                                 Rent exceeds the payment standard for a certificate model
                                                                      program; rent is not comparable to rents for non-assisted
                                                                      units in the area for a voucher model program



3. Subsidy Contracts
Background: The PJ must have a written agreement (subsidy contract) with the recipient of HOME funds; the PJ can make
rental payments to either the landlord or the tenant. A subsidy contract with a landlord cannot exceed the length of the lease;
a subsidy contract with the tenant cannot exceed 24 months.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.209(e) and (k), and 92.504(b)
 Documentation:
      • TBRA contract or written agreement between the PJ and either the landlord or the participant ; or a three-party
        agreement
      • Financial records that indicate the payments to landlord, if applicable

              HUD Checklist 7-9 Selected Excerpts                                         Identified Problems

 16. Is the TBRA contract between the PJ and the participant         TBRA contract with the participant is for a period that is
     for a period of no more than 24 months (there may be a           greater than 24 months
     renewal clause)? [24 CFR 92.209(e)]                             TBRA contract with the participant does not specify the time
       Yes      No                                                  period
                                                                     PJ provides TBRA funds to the participant but has not
                                                                      executed a subsidy contract


 17. Has the PJ entered into a written agreement with the            TBRA contract or written agreement with the landlord
     landlord enumerating his or her responsibilities with            exceeds the lease timeframe
     respect to the HOME TBRA? [24 CFR 92.209(k) and 24              PJ provides TBRA funds to the landlord but has not executed
     CFR 92.504(b)]                                                   subsidy contract
       Yes      No
                          TIP




                                                     Using Three-Party Agreements
                                 When the program administrator provides rental payments directly to
                                 the landlord, it is strongly recommended that the program administrator
                                 require the tenant to sign this agreement as well so that the tenant is
                                 informed of the landlord’s s responsibilities and rights.




294                                                                                                                Monitoring HOME
 18. Has the PJ made timely rental assistance payments to the     PJ’s payments are not made on a timely basis consistently
     landlord or tenant?
      Yes      No

NOTES on Subsidy Administration




C. Unit Compliance
Background: Tenants receiving TBRA assistance must occupy units that meet applicable property standards. Units must
meet, at a minimum, the Housing Quality Standards (HQS) of the Section 8 Housing Choice Voucher program, found at 24
CFR 982.401. The PJ can adopt a higher property standard. The program administrator must inspect the unit initially and
re-inspect it annually.
The program administrator must also ensure that in pre-1978 units where there is a child under the age of 6 years, a visual
assessment for chipping, peeling, or flaking paint is conducted.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.209(i)
 Documentation:
    • Annual HQS inspection forms, including a visual assessment for lead-based paint hazards
    • Tenant application
    • Tenant lease
    • PJ occupancy standards
    • HQS inspection form
    • Property maintenance requests and notes on resolution of requests
    • Correspondence with property owner regarding any violations and corrective actions




Chapter 7: Tenant-based Rental Assistance Programs                                                                         295
              HUD Checklist 7-9 Selected Excerpts                                         Identified Problems

 19. Is there evidence in the file of an initial Section 8 Housing       No initial HQS inspection form in file
     Quality Standards (HQS) inspection at the time the
                                                                         HQS inspection conducted after lease was signed
     original lease was signed? [24 CFR 92.209(i) and 24 CFR
     982.401]
                                              Determine HQS Compliance Before Tenant Signs Lease




                                   TIP
      Yes       No
                                            The PJ monitor should compare the date of the inspection
                                            (on the inspection report) with the date the tenant signed
                                            the lease (on the lease) to ensure that the unit passes
                                            inspection before the tenant executed a binding lease
                                            agreement.

 20. Did the unit meet the HQS requirements (including               No HQS inspection form in file
     applicable lead hazard reduction requirements) before the
                                                                     Inspection revealed that repairs were needed prior to
     tenant moved in? (Complete Exhibit 24-5, Lead Hazard             occupancy, but re-inspection report not in file
     Monitoring Guidance, to answer this question.) [24 CFR
     92.209(i)]                                                      Inspection conducted after the lease was signed
       Yes     No

 21. Are periodic Section 8 HQS inspections being carried out at     No annual HQS re-inspection forms in file
     least annually? [24 CFR 92.209(i)]
                                                                     HQS inspections not conducted on an annual basis
       Yes     No

 22. If a child with an environmental intervention blood lead        Proper steps not taken:
     level (EIBLL) was living in the assisted unit, were the
                                                                         No risk assessment
     property evaluation (risk assessment within 15 days
     of notice by health department or medical health care               No notice to tenants in building
     provider), reduction of hazards (within 30 days of owner's          No reduction of hazards
     receipt of risk assessment), and notification steps
                                                                         Action(s) not timely
     (evaluation and hazard reduction within 15 days of the
     activity) taken? [24 CFR 35.1225]
       Yes      No      N/A


 23. If a tenant complaint indicated that local codes and HQS        No documentation on the resolution of tenant repair
     were not being met, did the PJ investigate and ensure that       requests
     the problems were corrected timely?                             Repair requests not conducted timely
       Yes      No      N/A

 24. Is the unit in compliance with the jurisdiction’s occupancy     Unit size for household does not meet the PJ’s occupancy
     standards with respect to household and unit size?               standard
       Yes     No


NOTES on Unit Compliance




296                                                                                                               Monitoring HOME
D. Lease Provisions
Background: Units occupied by tenants receiving HOME TBRA must meet HOME lease requirements: (1) The lease must
be for at least one year in length, unless otherwise mutually agreed upon, and (2) The lease must not contain any prohibited
lease provisions.
Regulatory Basis: 24 CFR 92.209(g) and 92.253(a) and (b)
 Documentation:
    • Lease
    • TBRA written agreement between the PJ and landlord
    • Documentation of PJ review and approval of lease (such as a lease review checklist)

              HUD Checklist 7-9 Selected Excerpts                                         Identified Problems

 25. Is the lease for at least one year, unless otherwise agreed      Lease is for less than one year, and no documentation on
     upon by the owner and tenant? [24 CFR 92.209(g) and               file of mutual agreement
     92.253(a)]
       Yes      No

 26. Is the lease free of the following prohibited lease              Lease contains this prohibited lease provision
     provisions: Agreement to be sued? Agreement by the
     tenant to be sued, to admit guilt, or to a judgment in favor
     of the owner in a lawsuit brought in connection with the
     lease. [24 CFR 92.253]
       Yes      No

 27. Is the lease free of the following prohibited lease              Lease contains this prohibited lease provision
     provisions: Treatment of property? Agreement by the
     tenant that the owner may take, hold, or sell personal
     property of household members without notice to the
     tenant and a court decision on the rights of both parties.
     (This prohibition, however, does not apply to an agreement
     by the tenant concerning disposition of personal property
     remaining in the housing unit after the tenant has moved
     out of the unit. The owner may dispose of this personal
     property in accordance with State law). [24 CFR 92.253]
       Yes      No

 28. Is the lease free of the following prohibited lease              Lease contains this prohibited lease provision
     provisions: Excusing owner from responsibility? Agreement
     by the tenant not to hold the owner or the owner’s agents
     legally responsible for any action or failure to act, whether
     intentional or negligent. [24 CFR 92.253]
       Yes      No




Chapter 7: Tenant-based Rental Assistance Programs                                                                                297
 29. Is the lease free of the following prohibited lease             Lease contains this prohibited lease provision
     provisions: Waiver of notice? Agreement by the tenant that
     the owner may institute a lawsuit without notice to the
     tenant. [24 CFR 92.253]
       Yes      No

 30. Is the lease free of the following prohibited lease             Lease contains this prohibited lease provision
     provisions: Waiver of legal proceedings? Agreement by the
     tenant that the owner may evict the tenant or household
     members without instituting a civil court proceeding in
     which the tenant has the opportunity to present a defense,
     or before a court decision on the rights of the parties. [24
     CFR 92.253]
       Yes      No

 31. Is the lease free of the following prohibited lease             Lease contains this prohibited lease provision
     provisions: Waiver of jury trial? Agreement by the tenant to
     waive any right to a trial by jury. [24 CFR 92.253]
       Yes      No

 32. Is the lease free of the following prohibited lease             Lease contains this prohibited lease provision
     provisions: Waiver of right to appeal court decision?
     Agreement by the tenant to waive the tenant’s right to
     appeal, or to otherwise challenge in court, a court decision
     in connection with the lease. [24 CFR 92.253]
       Yes      No

 33. Is the lease free of the following prohibited lease             Lease contains this prohibited lease provision
     provisions: Tenant chargeable with cost of legal actions
     regardless of outcome? Agreement by the tenant to pay
     attorney’s fees or other legal costs even if the tenant wins
     in a court proceeding by the owner against the tenant. The
     tenant, however, may be obligated to pay costs if the tenant
     loses. [24 CFR 92.253]
       Yes      No

 34. [If TBRA assistance was provided to landlord,] did the lease
     and the TBRA written agreement begin and, if applicable,
     end on the same date? [24 CFR 92.209(e)]
       Yes      No

 35. Did the [program administrator] review and approve the          No documentation of lease review
     lease? [24 CFR 92.209(k)
                                                                     Lease review did not include review of:
       Yes      No                                                    Prohibited provisions
                                                                        Length of lease
                                                                        Rent amount




298                                                                                                              Monitoring HOME
NOTES on Lease Provisions




Chapter 7: Tenant-based Rental Assistance Programs   299
                                  Summary of Results: Project Monitoring
                                                     TBRA Program
Instructions: Using the completed checklists, complete the following chart to assist with summarizing the monitoring
results.

                              No Apparent Problems          Problems Identified                  Follow-Up Needed

 A. Participant Eligibility
      1. Income-eligibility

      2. Participant
         selection

 B. Subsidy
 Administration
      1. Type of assistance

      2. Rental assistance
         calculation

      3. Subsidy contracts

 C. Unit Compliance

 D. Lease Provisions
			




300                                                                                                      Monitoring HOME
Section 3. Program Monitoring: TBRA Program
Purpose of the Program Review
The program review helps the PJ assess how well the TBRA program is operating. Ideally, it is done in conjunction with the
pre-monitoring review of policies and procedures (Section 1 of this chapter) and the project file review (Section 2 of this
chapter). It helps the PJ answer:
     • Does the program administrator comply with HOME requirements in all cases? By looking at the results of the
       project file review, the PJ monitor can identify areas where the program administrator performs consistently and where
       there are recurring problems.
     • Does the program administrator have effective written documentation supporting the program? The program’s
       written documentation includes the written agreement with the PJ, policies, procedures, and other program materi-
       als that clearly state the HOME requirements and expectations. By evaluating the program’s written documentation,
       the PJ monitor can determine if the program administrator has adequate systems in place to promote compliance and
       performance.
 How this Section Is Organized
The checklist in this section summarizes the HOME requirements that are reviewed in detail in Section 1 (pre-monitoring
review) and the Section 2 (project review). This section does not use HUD checklist questions verbatim, as do the other sec-
tions of this chapter. However, this section covers the same HOME requirements and is organized in the same manner at the
HUD Checklist Exhibit 7-10, Guide for Review of Tenant-based Rental Housing (TBRA) Programs. It includes the following
sections:
     A. Program design
     B. Participant eligibility
     C. Subsidy administration
     D. Unit compliance                                                      How to Use the Program Review
 Instructions                                                               The PJ monitor can use the program review in a
The PJ monitor should use one copy of the checklist in this section of       few different ways:
this chapter to conduct a program of review the TBRA program admin-          • To consolidate the results of a pre-
istrator (funded entity or PJ).                                                monitoring and project monitoring review.
                                                                               To do this, complete the questions in
Column 1, “HOME Requirement,” identifies the HOME requirement
                                                                               Column 2. For any area where there is a
under review.                                                                  potential problem, also complete Column 3.
In columns 2a, 2b, and 2c, “Program Implementation,” the PJ monitor          • To conduct a cursory review of the
summarizes its findings of the project monitoring review and indicates         program’s operations. To do this, complete
how often the program administrator effectively met the requirement            the questions in Column 3 only. This results
(always, sometimes, or never).                                                 in a review of the written documentation
In columns 3a, 3b, and 3c, “Effectiveness of Documentation,” the PJ            and program policies and procedures that
monitor documents the findings of the pre-monitoring review, if it was         constitute the foundation of the program’s
                                                                               operation.
done, or reviews the program’s written documentation. The PJ monitor
checks whether the requirement was: (1) Stated in the written agreement      • To interview staff. To do this, ask the
between the PJ and the program administrator State recipient, subrecipi-       interviewee how the requirement specified
ent, or contractor (as applicable) in column 3a; (2) Adequately reflected      in Column 1 is implemented. Take notes
in the program administrator’s policies and procedures in column 3b,           in Column 3(c), to the extent possible and
or (3) Documented in other written documentation such as program               on other paper as needed. Use interview
application or other program materials in column 3c.                           results in conjunction with desk and project
                                                                               file reviews to draw conclusions about the
A "Notes" section is provided at the end of each area of review for the PJ     program’s operations.
monitor to elaborate on any of its findings, as needed.


Chapter 7: Tenant-based Rental Assistance Programs                                                                       301
 Documentation
The following documents are needed for a program review:
      • Copy of the HOME regulations found at 24 CFRR Part 92
      • Written agreement between the PJ and the State recipient, subrecipient, or contractor, if applicable
      • Written agreement between the program administrator and the TBRA participant, and/or the landlord, as applicable
      • Lease
      • Pre-monitoring file(s) or checklist results, if available
      • Project monitoring file(s) or checklist results, if available

              1. HOME Requirement                   2. Effectiveness of Implementation      3. Effectiveness of Documentation

                                                   Project monitoring shows that program
                                                      administrator complied with this     This requirement is clearly stated in….
                                                              requirement…
       Does the program administrator or
                  developer…                          (a)          (b)           (c)           (a)             (b)             (c)
                                                    Always      Sometimes       Never       Written      Administrator’s      Other
                                                                                           Agreement       Policies &       (Specify)
                                                                                             with PJ      Procedures
 PROGRAM DESIGN
 1. Certify the need for TBRA in Consolidated
    Plan
       Yes      No
      [24 CFR 92.209(b)]
      *PJ responsibility
 2. Identify special needs group as having an
    unmet need in Consolidated Plan
       Yes      No
      [24 CFR 92.209(c)(2)(ii)]
      *PJ responsibility
 3. Follow PJ’s tenant selection policies and
    criteria (preferences)
      [24 CFR 92.209(c)]
      *PJ responsibility to establish the policy
 4. For programs where a special needs
    group(s) has a preference, make
    services non-mandatory
      [24 CFR 92.209(c)(2)(i)]
 5. Apply preference system consistently
    and in a manner that does not limit the
    opportunities of persons on any basis
    prohibited by law
      [24 CFR 5.105(a)]
 6. Ensure that participants who are on the
    Section 8 waiting list retain their Section
    8 eligibility after they receive HOME TBRA
      [24 CFR 92.209(c)(1)]




302                                                                                                               Monitoring HOME
           1. HOME Requirement                  2. Effectiveness of Implementation      3. Effectiveness of Documentation

                                               Project monitoring shows that program
                                                  administrator complied with this     This requirement is clearly stated in….
                                                          requirement…
     Does the program administrator or
                developer…                        (a)          (b)           (c)           (a)             (b)             (c)
                                                Always      Sometimes       Never       Written      Administrator’s      Other
                                                                                       Agreement       Policies &       (Specify)
                                                                                         with PJ      Procedures
Notes:




PARTICIPANT ELIGIBILITY
1. Use current HOME income limits
    [24 CFR 92.209(c)(1)]
2. Use one of the three permissible
   definitions of income
    [24 CFR 92.203(b)]
3. “Count” anticipated household income
   (for upcoming 12 month period)
    [24 CFR 92.203(d)]
4. Verify household income with source
   documentation
    [24 CFR 92.203(a)(2)]
5. Determine household income on an
   annual basis
    [24 CFR 92.209(c)(1)]
Notes:




SUBSIDY ADMINISTRATION
1. Execute TBRA contracts with the
   participant for a period of no more than
   24 months (when assistance is provided
   to tenant)
    [24 CFR 92.209(e)(1)]
2. Calculate adjusted (gross) income
   correctly
    [24 CFR 92.203(d)]
3. Ensure maximum monthly TBRA
   subsidies are no more than the
   difference between the PJ’s rent
   standard for the unit size and 30% of the
   participants’ adjusted (gross) income
    [24 CFR 92.209(h)(l)]
4. Ensure that the tenant pays the
   minimum rent contribution established
    [24 CFR 92.209(h)(2)]
    *PJ responsibility to establish the
    minimum contribution



Chapter 7: Tenant-based Rental Assistance Programs                                                                           303
             1. HOME Requirement               2. Effectiveness of Implementation      3. Effectiveness of Documentation

                                              Project monitoring shows that program
                                                 administrator complied with this     This requirement is clearly stated in….
                                                         requirement…
       Does the program administrator or
                  developer…                     (a)          (b)           (c)           (a)             (b)             (c)
                                               Always      Sometimes       Never       Written      Administrator’s      Other
                                                                                      Agreement       Policies &       (Specify)
                                                                                        with PJ      Procedures
5. Use a reasonable payment standard,
   based on either market conditions or
   80-100% of FMR
      [24 CFR 92.209(h)(3)(i)]
      *PJ responsibility to establish a
      reasonable payment standard
Notes:




LEASES
1. Review and approve all leases
      [24 CFR 92.253(a) and (b)]
2. Ensure no prohibited lease provisions
   are included in leases
      [24 CFR 92.253(a) and (b)]
3. Disapprove leases (initial and renewal)
   for units that are not rent-reasonable
      [24 CFR 92.209(f)]
Notes:




RENTAL ASSISTANCE CONTRACT
1. Ensure landlord requirements in written
   agreements are met with respect to their
   HOME TBRA responsibilities
      [24 CFR 92.209(e)]
2. Allocate correct utility payments to the
   owner or tenant, depending on which
   party pays utility bills
      [24 CFR 92.209(k) and 92.504(b)]
3. Pay landlords and tenants timely
      [24 CFR 92.209(e)]
4. Ensure costs paid are eligible and
   reasonable
      [24 CFR 92.209(a) and 24 CFR 85.20(b)
      (5)]
Notes:




304                                                                                                          Monitoring HOME
          1. HOME Requirement             2. Effectiveness of Implementation      3. Effectiveness of Documentation

                                         Project monitoring shows that program
                                            administrator complied with this     This requirement is clearly stated in….
                                                    requirement…
     Does the program administrator or
                developer…                  (a)          (b)           (c)           (a)             (b)             (c)
                                          Always      Sometimes       Never       Written      Administrator’s      Other
                                                                                 Agreement       Policies &       (Specify)
                                                                                   with PJ      Procedures
UNIT COMPLIANCE




Notes:




Chapter 7: Tenant-based Rental Assistance Programs                                                                     305
                                                       Attachment 7-A
          Guidance on Calculating Rental Assistance for Certificate and Voucher Model Programs
One of the most important decisions PJs must make with regard to TBRA programs is how to calculate the tenant and PJ
contributions to rent. Three important factors affect the PJ’s (and the household’s) payment:
      • The family's income—the lower the family's income, the higher the PJ’s payment
      • The payment (rent) standard the PJ establishes for each bedroom size
      • The cost of housing and utilities for the unit the family selects.
In addition, the subsidy depends upon the TBRA model selected by the PJ. How to determine the subsidy under the differ-
ent methods is discussed below.
Calculating Rental Assistance when Using the Section 8 Certificate Model
The Section 8 Rental Certificate Program model assumes a fixed tenant payment. The tenant's share of housing costs (Total
Tenant Payment, or TTP) is calculated by formula. The PJ then pays the difference between the tenant's share and the
approved rent for the unit.
The formula for computing TTP under the Section 8 Rental Certificate Program requires a tenant to pay the greater of:
      • 30 percent of monthly adjusted income
      • 10 percent of monthly gross income
      • The welfare rent in as-paid states.
Figure 7-A-1 demonstrates this method.
      Figure 7-A-1. Example: Calculating Rental Assistance when Using a Certificate Program Model
 The Cleavers have been issued a two-bedroom HOME TBRA Coupon. Their annual (gross) and adjusted incomes are $22,500 and
 $18,300, respectively. They find an apartment that rents for $725 (including utilities).
 The Cleavers must pay the greater of:
                             $458                                                                $188
                30% of adjusted monthly income                   OR              10% of annual (gross) monthly income
                    ($18,300/12 x 0.30)                                                  ($22,500/12 x 0.10)

 The program administrator must pay the difference between the tenant’s share and the approved rent:
               Approved Rent                      $725
               Less Total Tenant Payment          $458
               PJ Share of the Rent               $267


Calculating Rental Assistance when Using the Section 8 Voucher Model
The Rental Voucher Program model assumes a fixed PJ payment. The maximum PJ subsidy is calculated, and the tenant
pays the difference between the subsidy and the approved rent for the unit. Using the Section 8 Rental Voucher method,
the PJ first establishes a payment (rent) standard for the program as a whole. The PJ generally pays the difference between its
payment (rent) standard and 30 percent of the tenant's adjusted monthly income. However, a minimum tenant payment is
required. Figure 7-A-2 demonstrates this method.




306                                                                                                            Monitoring HOME
       Figure 7-A-2. Example: Calculating Rental Assistance when Using a Voucher Program Model
 The Cleavers have been issued a two-bedroom HOME TBRA Coupon. Their annual and adjusted incomes are $22,500 and $18,300
 respectively. As in Figure 7-A-1, their monthly annual (gross) and adjusted income amounts are $458 and $188 respectively. They
 find an apartment that rents for $800 (including utilities). The PJ's rent standard is $775.
 The maximum program administrator subsidy is:
          $775      Rent standard
          $458      (less) 30% of adjusted monthly income
          $317      Maximum program administrator subsidy
 The Cleaver's share of the rent is:
          $800     Approved rent
          $317     (less) Maximum subsidy
          $483     Cleavers payment
 In this example, the Cleavers will pay more than 30% of their adjusted income for housing because they selected a unit that rents
 for more than the payment (rent) standard.
 Had the Cleavers found a very inexpensive unit, the requirement that the family must pay at least 10% of monthly gross income
 might apply.
          $500     Approved rent
          $317     (less) Maximum program administrator subsidy
          $183     Calculated tenant share
 However, the Cleavers must pay at least 10% of gross monthly income ($22,500 / 12 months x 0.10 = $188).
 The program administrator's contribution would be reduced by $5.


Using Utility Allowances When Determining Rental Assistance
To determine the portion of the housing cost that will be paid by the PJ and the portion that will be paid by the house-
hold, the PJ must establish a utility allowance schedule that estimates the average cost of utilities for typical types of housing
(single-family, row house, high-rise, etc.) and for various utilities and fuel sources (gas, oil, electricity).
     • Utilities included in the schedule generally include those required for water/sewer, electric, gas and trash.
     • Telephone and cable TV are not considered utilities for this purpose.
     • PJs may adopt the utility allowance schedule that the PHA uses for its Section 8 program, or establish their own sched-
       ule based on a survey of typical utility costs in the area. (See Figure 7-A-3.)
     • Sometimes PHAs must make a utility reimbursement to the family and a payment to the owner. (See Figure 7-A-4.)
                                              Figure 7-A-3. Using Utility Allowances
      (1) The Jones family selects a unit which rents for $575. They must pay electricity and gas separately.
      (2) The PJ’s utility allowance schedule indicates that the average cost of electricity and gas for the unit size selected is $75.
      (3) 30% of the family's adjusted income is $300.
      (4) The family makes its tenant contribution as follows:
             $75    For gas and electricity
          +$225     Rent to the owner
            $300
      (5) The PJ pays the difference between the rent the owner is charging and the amount paid by the tenant:
            $575    Rent to owner
           -$225    Paid by family
            $350    Subsidy




Chapter 7: Tenant-based Rental Assistance Programs                                                                                        307
           Figure 7-A-3. Using Utility Allowances when Family Requires a Utility Reimbursement
Assume that 30% of the Smith family's monthly adjusted income is only $50, and that the Smith family rents a unit similar to the
Jones family’ unit.
The family’s $50 contribution is not enough to pay utilities (much less contribute to rent). In this case, payments are made as
follows:
              $50     Family retains $50 to pay utility bills
            +$25      PHA pays family $25 to cover remaining utility bills
              $75     Entire utility allowance
            $575      PHA pays entire rent to owner




308                                                                                                                Monitoring HOME
                                                      Attachment 7-B
                          Client File Form – Tenant-based Rental Assistance Program
                                      Are Items in Project Case File?                                Answer
              Applicant Documentation
              1. Does the file contain a completed application form?                               Yes        No
              2. Are income limits of participant at or below
                  a.    60% of median?                                                             Yes        No
                  b.    80% of median?                                                             Yes        No
              3. If applicable, were additional income criteria imposed by the PJ met?             Yes        No
              4. Did the applicant meet the PJ’s residency requirement?                            Yes        No
              5. Was eligibility for preferences verified and appropriate preference weight
                                                                                                   Yes        No
                 assigned, if applicable?
              Leasing Process Documentation
              6. Coupon/Offer Date                                                                 Yes        No
              7. Date of Briefing                                                                  Yes        No
              8. PJ/Owner Contract                                                                 Yes        No
              9. Acceptable Tenant Lease                                                           Yes        No
              10. Proper Tenant Lease Addendum                                                     Yes        No
              11. Tenant Payment Calculation                                                       Yes        No
              Tenant Income Recertification
              12. Current at time of assistance and accurate income recertification
                   a.   Was household income properly calculated using the proper income
                                                                                                   Yes        No
                        definition?
                   b.   Is there source documentation and third party verification in the file?    Yes        No
                   c.   If income information was older than six months, was it updated
                                                                                                   Yes        No
                        prior to the provision of assistance?
              13. Copies of notices sent to owners and tenants noting the change in PJ and
                                                                                                   Yes        No
                  tenant payments, if applicable ?
              14. Termination information, with date and reason, if applicable                     Yes        No
              Local Property Codes/Standards and Section 8 HQS
              15. Did the unit meet Section 8 HQS at the time of the original lease?               Yes        No
              16. Were HQS inspections conducted on time?                                          Yes        No
              17. Were any code-related problems are corrected within the required time
                                                                                                   Yes        No
                  frame?
              18. If a tenant or owner complaint indicated that HQS were not being met,
                  was the problem:
                  a.    Investigated within a reasonable time?                                     Yes        No
                  a.    Corrected within 30 days?                                                  Yes        No
              Unit Characteristics
              19. Is the unit located in correct jurisdiction?                                     Yes        No
              20. Does unit meet local occupancy standards?                                        Yes        No
              21. Do the units meet local housing quality requirements, if applicable?             Yes        No
              22. Do any of the tenants also receive project-based assistance? (If yes,
                                                                                                   Yes        No
                  check to make sure the TBRA subsidy is not duplicative.)
              23. If the PJ chooses to set a payment standard that is not tied to the
                  HUD-published Fair Market Rent (FMR), has the PJ conducted a market
                                                                                                   Yes        No
                  analysis that shows comparable non-assisted units have comparable
                  rents to the unit under consideration?



Chapter 7: Tenant-based Rental Assistance Programs                                                                   309
      File Documentation
      24. Is there an application on file for every applicant?                         Yes    No
      25. Is there an executed coupon on file for all applicants that were issued a
                                                                                       Yes    No
          coupon?
      26. Are copies of all requests for unit approval on file?                        Yes    No
      27. Does each tenant file contain an executed contract between the owner
                                                                                       Yes    No
          and the PJ?
      28. Does the file contain an executed lease and lease addendum?                  Yes    No
      29. Are copies of all inspections conducted on file?                             Yes    No
      30. Is the tenant payment amount documented and are the tenant and PJ
                                                                                       Yes    No
          paying the appropriate amounts?
      31. Does the file contain annual income recertification documentation? Was
                                                                                       Yes    No
          the recertification done on time?
      32. Does the beneficiary file contain documentation of termination and has
                                                                                       Yes    No
          assistance has been stopped?




310                                                                                              Monitoring HOME
                                               Attachment 7-C
                        Summary of Key HOME Rules for TBRA and How to Document
                                                                                              Documentation
                                                Key HOME Requirement
                                                                                         (See checklists for details)
Eligible Participants
Eligible Participants                 • Gross income ≤80% of area median         • Completed application
                                        income based on the upcoming 12          • Source documentation (wage
                                        months                                     statements, interest statements)
                                      • Income is defined by one of three
                                        options: Section 8 annual income;
                                        annual income under U.S. Census long
                                        form; or adjusted (gross) income under
                                        IRS Form 1040
Subsidy Administration
Eligible Activities                   • Rental assistance                        • Documentation of all costs and
                                      • Security deposits                          calculations associated with the type of
                                                                                   eligible activity
                                      • Utility deposits, if done with rental
                                        assistance or security deposits
TBRA Portability                      • PJ can decide if TBRA is portable        • Application shows address
                                        outside its jurisdiction
HOME Minimum and Maximum Rent         • Minimum tenant rent payment              • Worksheet or form that shows that
Payments                              • The maximum rental assistance              minimum tenant rent is equal to or
                                                                                   greater than PJ-established minimum
                                                                                 • Worksheet or form that shows that
                                                                                   rental assistance provided did not
                                                                                   exceed PJ’s maximum rental assistance
                                                                                   subsidy limit
Unit Compliance
Property Standards                    • At a minimum, property must meet         • HQS inspection report
                                        Section 8 Housing Quality Standards
                                        (HQS)




Chapter 7: Tenant-based Rental Assistance Programs                                                                       311
                                                     Attachment 7-D
                             Summary of Other Federal Requirements for TBRA Programs
 Other Federal Requirements             Apply to Homebuyer        Special Issues/Considerations           Regulatory Citations
                                            Programs?
Nondiscrimination and Equal Access Rules
Fair Housing and Equal            Yes                             • PJs must affirmatively further   • 24 CFR 92.202 and 92.250
Opportunity                                                         fair housing in jurisdiction     • Title VI of Civil Rights Act of
                                                                  • Pay particular attention to        1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000d et.
                                                                    signs of discrimination in         seq.)
                                                                    leasing practices                • Fair Housing Act (42 U.S.C.
                                                                                                       3601-3620)
                                                                                                     • Executive Order 11063
                                                                                                       (amended by Executive Order
                                                                                                       12259)
                                                                                                     • Age Discrimination Act of
                                                                                                       1975, as amended (42
                                                                                                       U.S.C. 6101)
                                                                                                     • 24 CFR 5.105(a)
Accessibility for Disabled        Yes                             • Make reasonable                  • Section 504 of the
Persons                                                             accommodations for tenants         Rehabilitation Act of 1973
                                                                    with disabilities, at tenant’s     (implemented at 24 CFR
                                                                    expense (unless unit is            Part 8)
                                                                    HOME-assisted)
                                                                  • Program must be
                                                                    administered in a way that is
                                                                    accessible to persons with
                                                                    disabilities
Conflict of Interest              Yes                             PJs should ensure compliance       • 24 CFR 92.356
                                                                  both in-house and when using       • 24 CFR 85.36
                                                                  subrecipients
                                                                                                     • 24 CFR 84.42
Environmental Requirements
Environmental Reviews             Yes                             • TBRA is an exempt activity;      • 24 CFR 92.352
                                                                    document as such and             • 24 CFR Part 58
                                                                    proceed
                                                                                                     • National Environmental Policy
                                                                                                       Act (NEPA) of 1969
Lead-based Paint                  Yes, pre-1978 units with at     • Notices to tenants               • 24 CFR 92.355
                                  least one child age 6 and under • Visual assessment for lead-      • Lead-based Paint Poisoning
                                                                    based paint hazards                Prevention Act of 1971 (42
                                                                  • Paint stabilization,               U.S.C. 4821 et. seq.)
                                                                    if applicable or test            • 24 CFR Part 35
                                                                    deteriorated paint (optional)    • 24 CFR 982.401(j) (except
                                                                  • Safe work practices and            paragraph 982.401(j)(1)(i))
                                                                    clearance




312                                                                                                                Monitoring HOME
                                                        Attachment 7-E
      Summary of Lead-based Paint Requirements for Tenant-based Rental Assistance Programs
                                                                                                 TBRA
                          Requirements
                                                                                       (24 CFR Part 35, Subpart M)
Approach to Lead Hazard Evaluation and Reduction                   Identify and stabilize deteriorated paint
Notification                                                       Notice of Lead Hazard Reduction and Lead Disclosure form
                                                                   should be in the tenant file.
Lead Hazard Evaluation                                             The unit inspection form should show that unit was inspected for
Visual assessment for deteriorated paint is required.              deteriorated paint.
Lead Hazard Reduction                                              If the inspection shows deteriorated paint, the project file should
Deteriorated paint must be stabilized, using lead safe work        include documentation that the paint was stabilized, using lead
practices. Clearance is required to demonstrate that the unit is   safe work practices and that the work area passed clearance.
safe after work is complete.
Ongoing Maintenance                                                Project files should show that the unit is inspected annually
                                                                   for deteriorated paint and that deteriorated paint is properly
                                                                   stabilized.
EIBLL Requirements                                                 If a child with an EIBLL is identified in the unit, project files must
                                                                   show compliance with 24 CFR Part 35.1225.




Chapter 7: Tenant-based Rental Assistance Programs                                                                                    313
314   Monitoring HOME
Appendix I: Serious Findings


The following compliance issues are considered serious findings, and generally result in the repayment of HOME funds.

Violations of Programwide HOME Requirements
    • HOME funds are used to pay ineligible costs
    • Less than $1,000 invested per HOME-assisted unit (unless TBRA)
    • PJ exceeds administrative cap
    • HOME funds used to assist a household with an annual gross income above 80% of area median income
    • Program administrator uses incorrect income limits
    • PJ’s HOME investment exceeds the maximum per unit subsidy limit
    • PJ is unable to use the required 15% CHDO set-side
    • PJ uses HOME funds to pay for non-customary, luxury costs; or pays an amount that is unreasonable for the area

Violations of Rental Requirements
    • PJ/Owner charges rents that exceed applicable HOME rents
    • PJ/Owner applies inaccurate utility allowances
    • Owner executes leases with prohibited lease provisions
    • Owner does not maintain HOME-assisted units in standard condition
    • PJ/Owner does not affirmatively market units (in project with 5+ HOME-assisted units)
    • Owner does not accurately maintain correct unit mix of high HOME rent and low HOME rent units, and unit mix

Violations of TBRA Requirements
    • PJ/Owner overcharges for tenant’s portion of rent
    • PJ/Owner applies inaccurate utility allowances
    • Owner executes leases with prohibited lease provisions
    • PJ inaccurately applies tenant preferences that are not documented in the Consolidated Plan
    • Owner does not maintain HOME-assisted units in standard condition

Violations of Homebuyer Requirements
    • PJ invests HOME funds in a housing unit whose sales price/after-rehabilitation value is greater than the 95% value
      limit
    • PJ fails to impose resale or recapture restrictions


Appendix I: Serious Findings                                                                                            315
      • PJ calculates the amount subject to recapture wrong
      • PJ fails to take action on a violation of principal residence requirement

Violations of Homeowner Rehabilitation Requirements
      • PJ provides HOME funds to assist a household in a unit that is not the principal residence of the household at the
        time of HOME assistance
      • PJ invests HOME funds in a housing unit whose value is greater than 95% of the median purchase price for the area
        (the HOME value limit)
      • PJ fails to ensure that the property is rehabilitated in accordance with applicable property standards




316                                                                                                              Monitoring HOME
