                                   Dual Enrollment
                                   Ensuring Instructor Quality
  Education Commission of the States                                                            www.ecs.org
                  700 Broadway, Suite 810 « Denver, CO 80203-3442   ¢ 303.299.3600 © ecs@ecs.org


        Certifying Dual Enrollment Instructor Qualifications and Ensuring
                            Quality: State Approaches
                                               Jennifer Dounay Zinth
                                                    April 2015


    e      Thirty states have established instructor qualifications for dual enrollment courses led by high
           school instructors.
    e      Eight states (including Oregon) have two or more dual enrollment programs, with instructor
           qualifications set in state policy for one program, but instructor qualifications are either not
           applicable for another program (i.e., Expanded Options courses offered only at postsecondary
           campuses or online), or are not set in state policy.
    e      Eight states do not set dual enrollment instructor qualifications in state policy.
    e      Four states and the District of Columbia do not offer dual enrollment courses at high schools.

State                Dual Enrollment Instructor Qualifications and Quality Assurances
Alabama              A high school teacher teaching a dual enrollment course through a community college
                     must be designated an adjunct faculty member of the college and must meet the state
                     board and other accrediting agencies’ credentialing requirements. Faculty must be under
                     the college's control and supervision, and the college must provide for faculty
                     orientation, supervision and evaluation.

                     For courses offered through four-year institutions, instructor and course quality
                     provisions are determined at the institutional level.
Alaska               Not set in state policy
Arizona              Each faculty member must meet requirements established by the governing board. The
                     CEO of each community college district must establish an advisory committee of full-time
                     faculty to assist in the selection, orientation, ongoing professional development and
                     evaluation of faculty teaching college courses in conjunction with high schools. The
                     advisory committee must meet at least twice each academic year.
Arkansas             Instructors of endorsed concurrent enrollment courses must have at least a master's
                     degree that includes a minimum of 18 graduate hours of coursework in the subject area
                     of the course. The instructor's credentials must be approved by the academic unit or
                     chief academic officer of the postsecondary institution offering the course. The instructor
                     must also have the relevant credentials and experience necessary to teach from the
                     syllabus approved by the postsecondary institution. For the purpose of teaching a
                     concurrent course under this policy, an individual under contract with the school district
                     as a teacher will not be considered an adjunct faculty member of the college/university.

                     The institution must provide the course instructor with staff development, supervision,
                     and evaluation. Institutions may collaborate to provide this staff development,
State                     Dual Enrollment Instructor Qualifications and Quality Assurances
                          supervision, and evaluation. Institutions of higher education must demonstrate
                          “ownership” of any course offered for concurrent credit for which students are reported
                          for funding purposes. Ownership of courses means that the college/university must (1)
                          provide the instructors with appropriate training and orientation in course curriculum,
                          assessment criteria, course philosophy, and administrative requirements after approval
                          of the instructors to teach the college/university courses; and (2) ensure that instructors
                          receive continuing collegial interaction with college faculty through professional
                          development, required seminars, and site visits. These interactions must address topics
                          such as course content, course delivery, student learning assessment, in-class evaluation,
                          and professional development in the field of study.

                          Any college or university that participates in a concurrent enrollment program must be
                          accredited by the National Alliance of Concurrent Enrollment Partnerships or be
                          authorized by the Arkansas Higher Education Coordinating Board no later than August 1,
                          2015. An institution offering concurrent enrollment only on the college/university
                          campus has satisfied the requirements for initial authorization for Concurrent Enrollment
                          Program participation.

                          Postsecondary faculty who travel to the high school or secondary center to teach
                          concurrent courses (and/or faculty and staff who have direct contact with the high school
                          student) must have a criminal background check and complete the child maltreatment
                          training course as required of public school teachers.
California                Not set in state policy
Colorado                  The postsecondary institution is responsible for course content, placement of the student
                          in the course, and the quality of instruction.

                          A postsecondary instructor may not be required to hold a teacher's license.
Connecticut               Not set in state policy
Delaware                   A dual enrollment instructor must meet the requirements of a faculty member or
                          adjunct faculty member at the institution.
District of               Courses are offered only at postsecondary institutions
Columbia
Florida                   Yes. Each faculty member teaching a dual enrollment course must:


                          e    Meet the qualifications required by the entity accrediting the postsecondary
                               institution offering the course, including meeting the Southern Association of
                               Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges’ Principles of Accreditation:
                               Foundations for Quality Enhancement, 2010 Edition, section 3.7.1, for postsecondary
                               instructors in the course and discipline. The qualifications apply to all faculty
                               members regardless of the location of instruction. The postsecondary institution
                               offering the course must require compliance with these qualifications.
                          e    Provide the institution offering the dual enrollment course a copy of his/her
                               postsecondary transcript.
                          e    Provide a copy of the current syllabus for each course taught to the discipline chair or
                               department chair of the postsecondary institution before the start of each term. The
                               content of each syllabus must meet the same standards required for all college-level
                               courses offered by that postsecondary institution. All full-time and adjunct faculty
                               teaching dual enrollment courses must file a copy of their current course syllabus
                               with the college's discipline chair or department chair prior to the start of each term.


              Education   Commission of the States   * 700 Broadway,   Suite 810 * Denver,   CO   80203-3460 * 303.299.3600 * www.ecs.org
                                                                           Page 2
State                 Dual Enrollment Instructor Qualifications and Quality Assurances
                      e    Adhere to the professional rules, guidelines, and expectations stated in the
                           postsecondary institution's faculty or adjunct faculty handbook. Any exceptions must
                           be included in the dual enrollment articulation agreement.
                      e    Adhere to the rules, guidelines, and expectations stated in the postsecondary
                           institution's student handbook, including those related to add/drop and withdrawal
                           policies, student code of conduct, grading policies, and critical dates. Any exceptions
                           must be noted in the dual enrollment articulation agreement.

                      In addition, each president (or designee) of an institution offering a dual enrollment
                      course must:

                      e    Provide a copy of the institution's current faculty or adjunct faculty handbook to all
                           faculty members teaching a dual enrollment course.
                      e    Provide to all faculty members teaching a dual enrollment course a copy of the
                           institution's current student handbook, which may include, but is not limited to,
                           information on registration policies, the student code of conduct, grading policies,
                           and critical dates.
                      e    Designate an individual or individuals to observe all faculty members teaching a dual
                           enrollment course, regardless of the location of instruction.
                      e    Use the same criteria to evaluate faculty members teaching a dual enrollment course
                           as the criteria used to evaluate all other faculty members.
                      e    Provide course plans and objectives to all faculty members teaching a dual
                           enrollment course.


                      The postsecondary institution must provide all adjunct faculty teaching dual enrollment
                      courses with a full-time faculty contact or liaison in the same discipline.

                      The comprehensive dual enrollment articulation agreement between a school district and
                      a public postsecondary institution must identify exceptions, if any, to the professional
                      rules, guidelines, and expectations stated in the faculty or adjunct faculty handbook for
                      the postsecondary institution, and exceptions, if any, to the rules, guidelines, and
                      expectations stated in the student handbook of the postsecondary institution that apply
                      to faculty members.
Georgia               Dual Credit/Dual Enrollment: Yes. The department, the Board of Regents of the
                      University System of Georgia, and the State Board of the Technical College System of
                      Georgia must jointly establish policies to ensure dual credit courses reflect college-level
                      work. Such policies must include requirements for faculty.

                      Move on When           Ready: Courses are offered only at postsecondary institutions or online
Hawaii                Courses are offered only at postsecondary institutions
Idaho                 Dual credit instructors meet the academic requirements for faculty and instructors
                      teaching in postsecondary, or provisions are made to ensure instructors are capable of
                      providing quality college-level instruction through ongoing support and professional
                      development. Teacher qualifications are reviewed, professional development is provided
                      as needed, course content and assessment expectations are reviewed, faculty
                      assessment is discussed, etc.

                      The postsecondary institution provides high school instructors with training and
                      orientation in course curriculum, student assessment criteria, course philosophy, and


          Education   Commission of the States   * 700 Broadway,   Suite 810 * Denver,   CO   80203-3460 * 303.299.3600 * www.ecs.org
                                                                       Page 3
State                  Dual Enrollment Instructor Qualifications and Quality Assurances
                       dual credit administrative requirements before certifying the instructors to teach the
                       college/university’s courses. Instructors teaching dual credit courses are part of a
                       continuing collegial interaction through professional development, such as seminars, site
                       visits, and ongoing communication with the postsecondary institutions’ faculty and dual
                       credit administration. This interaction addresses issues such as course content, course
                       delivery, assessment, evaluation, and professional development in the field of study. High
                       school faculty is evaluated by using the same classroom performance standards and
                       processes used to evaluate college faculty.
Illinois               Dual credit instructors teaching credit-bearing college-level courses must meet the same
                       academic credential requirements as faculty teaching on campus. Instructors for
                       community college courses taught in high schools must be selected, employed and
                       evaluated by the community college. They must be selected from full-time faculty and/or
                       from adjunct faculty with appropriate credentials and demonstrated teaching
                       competencies at the college level. Instructors in career and technical education courses
                       must possess the credentials and demonstrated teaching competencies appropriate to
                       the field of instruction.

                       Institutions must provide high school instructors with an orientation in course curriculum,
                       assessment methods, and administrative requirements before high school instructors are
                       permitted to teach dual credit courses. Dual credit instructors must be given the
                       opportunity to participate in all activities available to other adjunct faculty, including
                       professional development, seminars, site visits, and internal communication, provided
                       that such opportunities do not interfere with an instructor's regular teaching duties.
Indiana                The institution must set the criteria for a faculty member or other instructor teaching the
                       course with the institution or school corporation, depending on whether the course is
                       taught by postsecondary faculty or high school instructor.


                       In addition, a state educational institution or campus thereof that offers concurrent
                       college courses must be either accredited by the National Alliance of Concurrent
                       Enrollment Partnerships, or approved by the commission for higher education's Indiana
                       Dual Credit Review Process.
lowa                   All Senior Year Plus Programs: Course instructors must meet the standards and
                       requirements that other full-time instructors in the academic department are required to
                       meet and that are approved by the appropriate postsecondary administration.
                       Community colleges must report instructor degree, certifications, and other qualifications
                       to meet the minimum hiring standards.

                       District-to-Community College Sharing or Concurrent Enrollment: The course instructor
                       must be employed or contracted by a community college.

                       Postsecondary Enrollment Options: Courses are offered only at postsecondary
                       institutions


                       Project Lead the Way: An instructor must have successfully completed the training
                       required by and meet the minimum                      requirements of the national organization that
                       administers the Project Lead the Way program.
Kansas                 High school faculty teaching college-level, non-tiered Concurrent Enrollment Partnership
                       courses must meet Higher Learning Commission (HLC) Standards regarding faculty roles
                       and qualifications. Faculty teaching college-level tiered technical courses through a
                       Concurrent Enrollment Partnership must either meet the HLC standards or possess a

           Education   Commission of the States   * 700 Broadway,   Suite 810 * Denver,   CO   80203-3460 * 303.299.3600 * www.ecs.org
                                                                        Page 4
State                   Dual Enrollment Instructor Qualifications and Quality Assurances
                        valid/current industry-recognized credential and a minimum of 4,000 hours of work
                        experience in the specific technical field.


                        Postsecondary partner institutions may set higher standards.

                        Before approving high school instructors to teach CEP courses, the postsecondary
                        institution must provide them with orientation and training in course curriculum,
                        assessment criteria, course philosophy, and CEP administrative requirements. The
                        postsecondary partner institution must provide the high school faculty with ongoing
                        professional development opportunities. Orientation and/or professional development
                        activities must include collaborative faculty development programming such as
                        pedagogy, instructional design, course management, instructional delivery skill
                        improvement, curricular reform initiatives, and student success assessment strategies.
                        The postsecondary partner institution must annually conduct evaluations of high school
                        faculty teaching Concurrent Enrollment Partnership courses to ensure compliance with
                        the state expectations for Concurrent Enrollment Partnership courses.

                        CEP agreements must also include an implementation plan for ensuring high school
                        faculty teaching concurrently enrolled partnership students are integrated into the
                        postsecondary partner institution through orientation, professional development,
                        seminars, site visits, annual evaluations and ongoing communication with the
                        postsecondary partner institution’s faculty. CEP arrangements must include collaborative
                        faculty development programming such as pedagogy, instructional design, course
                        management, instructional delivery skill improvement, curricular reform initiatives, and
                        student success assessment strategies.
Kentucky                Dual credit courses and the instructors of those courses comply with all appropriate
                        Southern Association of Colleges and Schools - Commission on Colleges (SACS-COC)
                        criteria. Dual credit courses must be taught by postsecondary faculty or secondary school
                        teachers approved by the postsecondary institution as having appropriate credentials
                        established by the SACS-COC Guidelines for Faculty Credentials and university policy.
                        Secondary school faculty must demonstrate compliance with teaching credentials and
                        qualifications. The postsecondary institution grading policy applies to dual credit courses.
                        Postsecondary institutions must ensure that each secondary school teacher teaching dual
                        credit courses develops and uses a course syllabus with appropriate learning outcomes
                        and content for each course. Secondary schools are responsible for providing detailed
                        information to students in writing (i.e., a syllabus) consistent with the public
                        postsecondary institution policy. This information must include the nature of the course
                        and the expectations and requirements that correspond to its official catalog description.
                        Course requirement information must include course prerequisites, course content,
                        grading policy, attendance requirements, course completion requirements, performance
                        standards, information on adding and dropping courses, and other related course
                        information.


                        CPE postsecondary institutions are responsible for conducting faculty evaluations for dual
                        credit teachers in a manner consistent with the postsecondary institution’s guidelines for
                        evaluation of adjunct faculty and student evaluation of faculty (i.e., conducting
                        evaluations in a manner consistent with SACS-COC standards).
Louisiana               Dual Enrollment: The secondary and postsecondary institutions must agree upon faculty
                        appointment. Postsecondary institutions must ensure that secondary faculty possess
                        necessary qualifications and meet appropriate regional and program accreditation

            Education   Commission of the States   * 700 Broadway,   Suite 810 * Denver,   CO   80203-3460 * 303.299.3600 * www.ecs.org
                                                                         Page 5
State                     Dual Enrollment Instructor Qualifications and Quality Assurances
                          requirements for instruction. Secondary institutions must also ensure that postsecondary
                          faculty possess necessary qualifications and meet appropriate accreditation
                          requirements for instruction.

                          TOPS — Tech Early Start Award: The Louisiana Office of Student Financial Assistance
                          (LOSFA) conducts audits of participating Louisiana public postsecondary institutions to
                          ensure compliance with program requirements. LOFSA does not evaluate instructors.
Maine                     General program: Not set in state policy

                          Dual enrollment career and technical education program: Yes. A program must meet
                          national concurrent enrollment standards.
Maryland                  Courses are offered only at postsecondary institutions
Massachusetts             Not set in state policy
Michigan                  Not set in state policy
Minnesota                 Postsecondary Enrollment Options: Courses are generally offered at postsecondary
                          institutions or online.

                          Concurrent Enrollment: Postsecondary institutions are encouraged to apply for
                          accreditation by the National Alliance of Concurrent Enrollment Partnerships. Effective
                          with fiscal year 2011, districts only are eligible for state aid for concurrent enrollment
                          courses if the concurrent enrollment courses are accredited by the National Alliance
                          of Concurrent Enrollment Partnership, in the process of being accredited, or are shown
                          by clear evidence to be of comparable standard to accredited courses, or are technical
                          courses within a recognized career and technical education program of study approved
                          by the commissioner of education and the chancellor of the Minnesota State Colleges
                          and Universities.
Mississippi               All dual credit academic instructors must have a master's degree with a minimum of 18
                          graduate semester hours in their field of expertise. Dual credit career and technical
                          education instructors must meet the requirements set forth by the State Board for
                          Community and Junior Colleges in the qualifications manual for postsecondary Career
                          and Technical personnel. A high school teacher must be approved as an instructor by the
                          collaborating college or university. An instructor employed by the college or university
                          must be approved by the collaborating school district.                             A dual credit academic instructor
                          must meet the requirements set forth by the regional accrediting association (Southern
                          Association of College and Schools). University and community and junior college
                          personnel have the sole authority in the selection of dual credit instructors.
Missouri                  High school instructors must meet the same requirements for faculty teaching in
                          institutions of higher education as required for accreditation by the Higher Learning
                          Commission. They must have a master’s degree that includes 18 semester hours or more
                          in the field in which they are teaching. However, institutions may use professional
                          judgment in allowing faculty who do not meet all requirements for higher education
                          instruction to teach dual credit courses, provided 90% of any institution’s dual credit
                          faculty meet standard faculty eligibility requirements. Annual reports of student
                          performance must be submitted to the chief academic officer for both review and
                          consideration with respect to the continuation of a dual credit instructor.

                          The chief academic officer of the postsecondary institution is responsible for involving full
                          time faculty in the discipline in the selection and evaluation of all dual credit faculty. The
                          on-campus college faculty must also ensure comparable standards of evaluation.


              Education   Commission of the States   * 700 Broadway,   Suite 810 * Denver,   CO   80203-3460 * 303.299.3600 * www.ecs.org
                                                                           Page 6
State                  Dual Enrollment Instructor Qualifications and Quality Assurances


                       New dual credit instructors must participate in orientation activities provided by the
                       college and/or academic department. Continuing dual credit instructors must participate
                       in the same professional development and evaluation activities as adjunct faculty on the
                       college campus, with the recommendation for continuation being the responsibility of
                       the campus academic department. College academic departments must provide
                       instructors of dual credit courses with support services, including a designated on-
                       campus faculty member to serve as a liaison. The institution of higher education must
                       provide on-site supervision and evaluation of dual credit faculty. This process is best
                       served when the instructional site is within a reasonable commuting distance from the
                       institution of higher education.
Montana                Concurrent Enrollment: Yes. High school concurrent enrollment instructors must be
                       licensed secondary educators and possess a class 1, 2, 4, or 8 educator’s license
                       (described below). Class 8 is specific to college faculty instructing college courses with the
                       potential for high school credit (dual credit). Additionally, concurrent enrollment
                       instructors must meet all qualifications for faculty set forth by the Montana Board of
                       Regents Policy 730.1, which delineates the minimum criteria for two-year adjunct faculty.
                       The postsecondary institution must verify educational attainment level and experience
                       appropriate and required for the discipline for concurrent enrollment instructors to
                       ensure compliance with Montana Board of Regents Policy 730.1.

                       Class 8 Alternative License: If faculty of a postsecondary institution is teaching a course
                       for which students will receive high school and postsecondary credit, the faculty member
                       must hold a Class 8 dual credit license, unless already licensed or eligible for licensure as
                       a Class 1, 2 or 4 and properly endorsed. The licensure is valid for five years. Faculty must
                       apply to the Office of Public Instruction for a Class 8 alternative license. The application
                       requires verification of faculty employment from the Chief Academic Officer or an
                       appropriate official of the employing regionally accredited college or university;
                       compliance with all other nonacademic requirements for licensure; and completion of
                       application materials demonstrating:


                       e    The applicant plans to teach in a subject covered by the K-12 endorsement areas
                            identified in regulation, and will teach a subject area in which the applicant has a
                            major or minor; and
                       e    The applicant demonstrates adequate education and experience to instruct dual
                            enrollment courses as demonstrated by:
                                  o     Ability to create learning environments that support creativity, critical
                                        thinking, individual and collaborative learning, and that encourage positive
                                        social interaction, active engagement in learning, and self-motivation
                                  o     Understanding and ability to use a variety of instructional and assessment
                                        strategies to encourage learners to develop understanding of content areas
                                        and to build skills to apply knowledge in meaningful ways; and
                                  o     Understanding of individual differences and diverse cultures with an ability to
                                        integrate history, culture, heritage and contemporary status of American
                                        Indians and tribes in Montana.


Nebraska               The Nebraska Dual Enrollment Standards, which serve as guidelines but do not have force
                       of law, specify:

                       (1) Instructors must hold a master's degree and "have the mutual support of the district
           Education   Commission of the States   * 700 Broadway,   Suite 810 * Denver,   CO   80203-3460 * 303.299.3600 * www.ecs.org
                                                                        Page 7
State                    Dual Enrollment Instructor Qualifications and Quality Assurances
                         and college/university participating in the dual enrollment program."
                         (2) High school and postsecondary faculty must "receive appropriate orientation and
                         training[.]"
                         (3) "Collaboration between high school and postsecondary faculty is encouraged and
                         faculty development is available where appropriate."
                         (4) "High school and postsecondary faculty maintain contact throughout the program. In
                         some instances, this contact is facilitated by technology."

                         A dual credit teaching certificate is available to allow college faculty to teach courses
                         offered by the institution and approved by a local school system for high school credit.
                         Each applicant for the certificate must meet specified requirements for a general
                         teaching certificate, be eligible to teach courses for college credit as documented                               by the
                         employing college's submission of the Postsecondary Verification Form, hold a master’s
                         degree, and earned at least 6 graduate hours in the subject area for which a teaching
                         endorsement is sought. Regulations also specify certificate renewal requirements.
Nevada                   Courses are offered only at postsecondary institutions or online
New                      Not set in state policy
Hampshire
New Jersey               District boards and partner colleges must ensure that courses are taught by college
                         faculty with academic rank. Adjunct faculty and members of the district staff who have a
                         minimum        of a master's degree may also be included.
New     Mexico           The postsecondary partner must approve faculty for all dual credit courses.
New York                 Not set in state policy
North Carolina           Most Career & College Promise courses are taught by community college faculty, either
                         at the college campus or by traveling to the high school. Provisions allow high school
                         instructors to teach a Career & College Promise course if the instructor meets SACS
                         requisite qualifications for faculty credential requirements.
North Dakota             As is the case with all adjunct instructors, the instructor offering the course must be
                         approved by the academic administrators using the same criteria and procedure that
                         they would employ on campus. Approved high school instructors teaching dual-credit
                         courses within the high school are considered to be adjunct instructors of the sponsoring
                         NDUS college or university.


                         If the adjunct instructor is a high school teacher, the district superintendent must first
                         give written approval for their instructor to teach on behalf of NDUS sponsoring school.
                         Preference for teachers holding an MA degree in the content area will be only one
                         criterion considered in the employment of adjunct instructors to teach dual-credit college
                         courses.

                         Instructors (including a person already teaching in high school or college) who teach dual-
                         credit college courses for an NDUS sponsoring institution must follow the standard
                         procedure regarding the employment of adjunct instructors by that institution including
                         filing required documents, e.g., official transcripts, employment forms, etc..

Ohio                     Each instructor teaching a College Credit Plus course must meet the credential
                         requirements set forth in guidelines and procedures established by the chancellor of the
                         Ohio board of regents (below). If the guidelines require high school teachers to take any
                         additional graduate-level coursework to meet the credential requirements, that
                         coursework must be applicable to continuing education and professional development


             Education   Commission of the States   * 700 Broadway,   Suite 810 * Denver,   CO   80203-3460 * 303.299.3600 * www.ecs.org
                                                                          Page 8
State                  Dual Enrollment Instructor Qualifications and Quality Assurances
                       requirements for the renewal of the teacher's educator license. The partnering college
                       must also provide at least one professional development session per school year, and
                       conduct at least one classroom observation per school year for each course that is
                       authorized by the college and taught by a high school teacher, to ensure that the course
                       meets the quality of a college-level course.

                       In addition to the traditional on-campus instruction offered by an institution of higher
                       education for college level courses, under the College Credit Plus program an institution
                       may do all of the following:
                       (A) Provide instruction in college level courses in the secondary school with a secondary
                       teacher if:


                       (1) The teacher meets the qualification requirements to be the instructor that are set
                       forth in the guidelines established by the chancellor of the Ohio board of regents, which
                       are available at ohiohighered.org....
                       (3) The institution of higher education provides all secondary teachers who are teaching
                       at least one College Credit Plus course with at least one three-hour professional
                       development session per academic year.The institution of higher education may
                       determine the format and delivery mechanism for each professional development
                       session it provides. If the participating institution provides secondary teachers with
                       professional development using technology, then there must be a manner in place to
                       track secondary teachers’ participation and elicit teachers’ feedback, and for the
                       institution to respond to teachers’ questions.
                       (4) The institution conducts at least one full-period classroom observation of
                       each College Credit Plus course taught by each secondary teacher during the 2015-2016
                       school year or during the first academic year the secondary teacher instructs the college
                       course, and then alternating academic years thereafter. The institution may determine its
                       own classroom observation format and whether the observation is on-site at the location
                       of the classroom, partially on-site or uses technology provided the following are met :
                       (a) The chief academic officer of the institution approves the classroom observation
                       content expert and format;
                       (b) The higher education observer provides the secondary instructor with any feedback
                       supporting the quality of the college-level course;
                       (c) The secondary school building administrator is notified at least 24-hours in advance of
                       when each observation is expected to occur;
                       (d) If multiple sections of the same course are taught by the same instructor in the same
                       or different secondary buildings, then only one observation is required. If multiple
                       sections of the same course are taught by different instructors in the same or different
                       secondary buildings, then each instructor must be observed in accordance with this rule.


                       Regulation also establishes instructor criteria for online College Credit Plus courses.
Oklahoma               Courses at an off-campus site are taught by regular faculty whose primary educational
                       employment is as a faculty member at the institution delivering the course. Exceptions
                       may be made upon request to the Chancellor. “Regular faculty” is defined as a person
                       qualified for appointment to the full-time faculty of the institution proposing to award
                       credit. All appointments must be recommended                              by the academic unit awarding the
                       credit.
Oregon                 Expanded Options: Courses are offered only at postsecondary institutions or online

                       Dual Credit: Participating school districts and postsecondary institutions must develop

           Education   Commission of the States   * 700 Broadway,   Suite 810 * Denver,   CO   80203-3460 * 303.299.3600 * www.ecs.org
                                                                        Page 9
State                   Dual Enrollment Instructor Qualifications and Quality Assurances
                        written agreements based on the policies described in administrative rule regarding dual
                        credit programs. Agreements must include criteria regarding selection and approval of
                        instructors. Standards for teachers of lower division collegiate courses must include a
                        master's degree in a subject area closely related to that in which the instructor will be
                        teaching; however, in subject areas in which individuals have demonstrated their
                        competencies and served in professional fields and in cases in which documentation to
                        support the individual's proficiency and high level of competency can be assembled, the
                        master's degree requirement may be waived by the college president or substituted
                        according to the community college's personnel policy.

                        The Oregon Dual Credit Standards include:

                        e    Instructors teaching college or university courses through dual credit meet the
                             academic requirements for faculty and instructors teaching in postsecondary
                             institutions as stipulated by the respective academic departments.
                        e    The postsecondary institution provides high school instructors with training and
                             orientation in course curriculum, assessment criteria, course philosophy, and dual
                             credit administrative requirements before certifying the instructors to teach the
                             college/university courses.
                        e    Instructors teaching dual credit sections are part of a continuing collegial interaction,
                             through professional development, seminars, site visits, and ongoing communication
                             with the postsecondary institutions’ faculty and dual credit administration. This
                             interaction addresses issues such as course content, course delivery, assessment,
                             evaluation, and professional development in the field of study.

Pennsylvania            A school district or area vocational school employee who meets all qualifications for an
                        adjunct faculty member at the eligible postsecondary institution may teach a concurrent
                        enrollment course.

                        *Program currently inactive due to inadequate state funds*
Rhode   Island          Courses are offered only at postsecondary institutions or online
South Carolina          Courses must be taught by appropriately credentialed faculty. The chief academic officer
                        or designee is also responsible for selecting and evaluating all dual enrollment faculty,
                        using Southern Association of Colleges and Schools criteria as minimal requirements, and
                        ensuring standards of student evaluation and faculty evaluation are comparable to those
                        required of other sections of the same courses. Orientation and evaluation of instructors
                        teaching dual enrollment course sections rests with the appropriate academic
                        department of the respective institution of higher education. The chief academic officer
                        or designee must assure consistency and comparability of both orientation and
                        evaluation across the institution. To assure comparability, academic departments must
                        provide instructors with support services, including a designated on-campus faculty
                        liaison.


                        Dual enrollment instructors must participate in the institution’s expected, relevant
                        professional development and evaluation activities. Traditionally-delivered (non-online)
                        dual enrollment offered in high schools should only be offered within reasonable
                        commuting distance of the institution to facilitate on-site evaluation and supervision.
South Dakota            A high school-based dual enrollment course must be taught by a high school teacher who
                        has been approved by the university and who meets the standards used by the institution


            Education   Commission of the States   * 700 Broadway,   Suite 810 * Denver,   CO   80203-3460 * 303.299.3600 * www.ecs.org
                                                                        Page 10
State                   Dual Enrollment Instructor Qualifications and Quality Assurances
                        to hire adjuncts in the discipline. While a Master’s degree in the subject/discipline
                        teaching is preferred, faculty typically must have a Master’s degree with 15 graduate
                        hours in the subject discipline/taught.

                        A faculty member in the discipline of the course from the credit granting university must
                        be assigned to and actively engaged as a mentor for the high school teacher.
Tennessee               Dual Credit (taught in a high school by certified secondary instructors): College courses
                        offered at the high school during the regular school day must be taught by licensed
                        teachers or bona fide college instructors approved by the local school system and the
                        postsecondary   institution.


                        Dual Enrollment (allows a student to enroll in postsecondary courses for high school and
                        postsecondary credit): In order for a course to be taught in the high school, the course
                        must demonstrate equivalent faculty preparation.
Texas                   Dual credit: Yes. The college selects dual credit instructors. These instructors must be
                        regularly employed faculty members of the college or meet the same standards
                        (including minimal requirements of the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools)
                        and approval procedures used by the college to select faculty responsible for teaching
                        the same courses at the main campus of the college. The college must supervise and
                        evaluate instructors of dual credit courses using the same or comparable procedures
                        used for faculty at the main campus of the college.

                        Courses offered through partnerships between secondary schools and public two-year
                        colleges: The partnership agreement must address faculty qualifications.

                        Online courses: Administrative code specifies the qualifications and professional
                        development requirements applicable to secondary and college instructors offering
                        electronic dual credit courses.
Utah                    Public school teachers teaching concurrent enrollment courses in high schools must first
                        be approved as adjunct faculty and be supervised by the institution. Public school
                        educators must have secondary endorsements in the subject area(s) they teach and meet
                        highly qualified standards for their assignment(s). High school teachers with adjunct or
                        part time faculty status must be included as fully as possible in the academic life of the
                        supervising academic department. LEAs and institutions must share expertise and
                        professional development, as necessary, to adequately prepare teachers at all levels to
                        teach concurrent enrollment students and content, including both federal and state laws
                        specific to student privacy and student records. The annual concurrent enrollment
                        contract between an LEA and an institution must provide for discussion and training, as
                        necessary, to all concurrent enrollment instructors about student information, student
                        records laws, and student confidentiality.

                        Postsecondary faculty who are not K-12 teachers and who have significant unsupervised
                        access to K-12 students must complete a criminal background check.

                        The number of courses offered for concurrent enrollment must be kept small enough to
                        ensure coordinated statewide development and professional development activities for
                        participating teachers.
Vermont                 Dual Enrollment: Yes. When a course is offered at a high school, the public
                        postsecondary institution must work with the secondary school to select, monitor,
                        support, and evaluate instructors.

            Education   Commission of the States   * 700 Broadway,   Suite 810 * Denver,   CO   80203-3460 * 303.299.3600 * www.ecs.org
                                                                        Page 11
State                   Dual Enrollment Instructor Qualifications and Quality Assurances


                        Technical: Not set in state policy
Virginia                Faculty must be selected and employed by the participating community college and must
                        meet SACS [Southern Association of Colleges and Schools] and state board for community
                        colleges faculty hiring criteria (SACS requires faculty teaching associate degree courses
                        designed for transfer to four-year institutions to hold a minimum of 18 graduate
                        semester hours in the discipline).

                        All dual enrollment arrangements under the Virginia Plan for Dual Enrollment must
                        include formal mechanisms to evaluate faculty effectiveness and student success. Dual
                        enrollment instructors must be evaluated using the guidelines adopted for all adjunct
                        faculty members. A copy of the evaluation results must be given to the designated
                        district representative. Student evaluations of all dual enrollment adjunct instructors
                        must be held each semester for each course offered. Student evaluation results must be
                        shared with the dean, program lead, faculty member, and designated district
                        representative.
Washington              Running Start: Courses taught by postsecondary faculty

                        College in the High School: Yes. Full-time and part-time faculty at institutions of higher
                        education, including adjunct faculty, are eligible to teach program courses.
West Virginia           Dual Credit/Dual Enrollment: Not set in state policy

                        West Virginia EDGE: EDGE course teachers must attend the EDGE orientation led by the
                        Tech Prep Consortium Coordinator.

                        Early Enrollment (allows public two- and four-year institutions to offer college courses
                        delivered primarily to high school students): Faculty teaching early enrollment courses
                        must meet the minimum faculty credential requirements as specified by the college and
                        as approved by the department and chief academic officer of the college or university.
                        The institution must assign adjunct/part-time faculty status to high school teachers
                        teaching college courses. Employment of any early enrollment adjunct/part-time faculty
                        must be consistent with any institutional, statewide and regional accreditation standards
                        for employment of adjunct/part-time faculty.

                        Faculty for these courses will be evaluated by college personnel using the same processes
                        as for other college faculty.
Wisconsin               Dual Enrollment (in practice, courses are typically taught by high school teachers): Not
                        set in state policy

                        Youth Options: Courses taught primarily at postsecondary institutions.


                        Dual credit courses through other programs are offered only at postsecondary
                        institutions or online.
Wyoming                 High school instructors are approved as community college adjunct faculty.



Jennifer Dounay Zinth is Director, High School Policy Center and STEM Policy Center. She can be reached
at 303.299.3689 or jzinth@ecs.org.



            Education   Commission of the States   * 700 Broadway,   Suite 810 * Denver,   CO   80203-3460 * 303.299.3600 * www.ecs.org
                                                                        Page 12
© 2015 by the Education Commission of the States (ECS). All rights reserved.

ECS is the only nationwide, nonpartisan interstate compact devoted to education.

ECS encourages its readers to share our information with others. To request permission to reprint or
excerpt some of our material, please contact the ECS Information Clearinghouse at 303.299.3675 or e-
mail ecs@ecs.org.

                                     Equipping Education Leaders, Advancing Ideas




          Education   Commission of the States   * 700 Broadway,   Suite 810 * Denver,   CO   80203-3460 * 303.299.3600 * www.ecs.org
                                                                      Page 13
