Quantum Residential, Inc. | BBB Business Profile | Better Business Bureau Skip to main content Cookies on BBB.org We use cookies to give users the best content and online experience. By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to allow us to use all cookies. Visit our Privacy Policy to learn more. Accept All Cookies Manage Cookies Better Business Bureau ® Homepage Powered by data. Driven by trust. For Businesses Navigation menu Menu Powered by data. Driven by trust. Language My Local BBB BBB Great West + Pacific Change For Consumers Get a Quote Leave a Review File a Complaint Report a Scam Create an Account For Businesses Get Your Business Listed BBB Accreditation Apply for BBB Accreditation Business Resources About BBB Mission and Vision Directory of Local BBBs Careers Find Near Country US CA Search Find local businesses close Home Washington Vancouver Property Management Quantum Residential, Inc. (current page) Share Share Share on Facebook Share on Twitter Share on LinkedIn Share via Email copy URL Copy this link Business Profile Property Management Quantum Residential, Inc. This business is NOT BBB Accredited . Find BBB Accredited Businesses in Property Management . Visit Website (360) 696-9000 Write a Review Main Reviews Complaints Table of Contents Overview BBB Accreditation & Rating Business Details Industry Tip Latest Reviews More Resources Featured Content About Overview Quantum Residential, Inc. 601 E 16th St Vancouver , WA 98663-3416 View Service Area BBB Accreditation & Rating Quantum Residential, Inc. is NOT a BBB Accredited Business. To become accredited, a business must agree to BBB Standards for Trust and pass BBB's vetting process. Why choose a BBB Accredited Business? BBB Rating D- Reasons for rating Failure to respond to 3 complaint(s) filed against business More Information How are BBB ratings calculated? Join Trusted Businesses Become BBB Accredited About This Business Years in Business: 57 Business Details Local BBB: BBB Great West + Pacific BBB File Opened: 2/26/2003 Business Started: 1/1/1969 Business Started Locally: 1/1/1988 Business Incorporated: 9/19/1990 Type of Entity: Corporation Alternate Names: Quantum Residential Related Businesses: Greenway Services LLC Business Management: Crystal Temple, Director Kalib Locke, President/Owner Additional Contact Information Principal Contacts Crystal Temple, Director Kalib Locke, President/Owner Customer Contacts Crystal Temple, Director Kalib Locke, President/Owner Licensing information This business is in an industry that may require professional licensing, bonding or registration. BBB encourages you to check with the appropriate agency to be certain any requirements are currently being met. Additional Information Business Categories Property Management Latest Reviews Michelle F " I am movi g out today because this "company has given me repeated 30 day notices for something that has now been paid 3 times over. I got a 30 day notice and paid $700 to them to get them to stfu. " ... Read full review Brenda R " I put a holding deposit down for on of the properties this company is managing. I decided not to go through with the apartment and asked to cancel my application and the deposit to be returned. " ... Read full review Sydney L " They do lots of illegal activities such as not accepting personal checks and pining it on tenants, attempting to trick tenants into paying fees that do not exist even during and after receiving government housing assistance aid, allowing apartments to have mold within their walls, not repairing actively leaking appliances for over a year and a half, towing tenant vehicles without authorization. " ... Read full review View all Reviews Industry Tip BBB Tip: Property management More Resources BBB Reports On: Known Marketplace Practices Overview of Ratings Featured Content BBB Tips: BBB's new year's guide BBB Tip: Holiday returns and exchanges BBB Business Profiles may not be reproduced for sales or promotional purposes. BBB Business Profiles are provided solely to assist you in exercising your own best judgment. BBB asks third parties who publish complaints, reviews and/or responses on this website to affirm that the information provided is accurate. However, BBB does not verify the accuracy of information provided by third parties, and does not guarantee the accuracy of any information in Business Profiles. When considering complaint information, please take into account the company's size and volume of transactions, and understand that the nature of complaints and a firm's responses to them are often more important than the number of complaints. BBB Business Profiles generally cover a three-year reporting period, except for customer reviews. Customer reviews posted prior to July 5, 2024, will no longer be published when they reach three years from their submission date. Customer reviews posted on/after July 5, 2024, will be published indefinitely unless otherwise voluntarily retracted by the user who submitted the content, or BBB no longer believes the review is authentic. BBB Business Profiles are subject to change at any time. If you choose to do business with this company, please let them know that you checked their record with BBB. As a matter of policy, BBB does not endorse any product, service or business. Businesses are under no obligation to seek BBB accreditation, and some businesses are not accredited because they have not sought BBB accreditation. BBB charges a fee for BBB Accreditation. This fee supports BBB's efforts to fulfill its mission of advancing marketplace trust. For Consumers Get a Quote Start a Review File a Complaint Military & Veteran Resources File an Auto Warranty Complaint For Businesses Get Your Business Listed BBB Accreditation Apply for BBB Accreditation Business Education Partner Code of Conduct About BBB® Mission & Vision Directory of Local BBBs BBB Institute for Marketplace Trust BBB Wise Giving Alliance (Give.org) BBB National Programs Careers Frequently Asked Questions Language Translation Information our Twitter (opens in a new tab) our LinkedIn (opens in a new tab) our Facebook (opens in a new tab) our Instagram (opens in a new tab) Terms of Use Privacy Policy Trademarks © 2025. All Rights Reserved.