                     U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD)

                       HOME      EQUITY CONVERSION MORTGAGE             (HECM)

                MODEL ADJUSTABLE INTEREST RATE LOAN AGREEMENT

FHA Case No.:

                 HECM ADJUSTABLE            INTEREST RATE LOAN AGREEMENT

THIS AGREEMENT               is made this day of __, 20,   among                     (“Borrower”)
and                                (“Lender”).

Article 1 - Definitions

1.1. “Borrower” is defined above. The term does not include the Borrower’s successors or
assigns.

1.2. “Deferral Period” means the period of time following the death of the last surviving
Borrower during which the due and payable status of a HECM is further deferred based on the
continued satisfaction of the requirements for an Eligible Non-Borrowing Spouse determined by
the Secretary and all other FHA requirements.

1.3. “Eligible Non-Borrowing Spouse” means a Non-Borrowing Spouse who meets the
Qualifying Attributes for a Deferral Period.

1.4. “Expected Average Mortgage Interest Rate” means the amount indicated on the Payment
Plan. It is a constant interest rate used to calculate monthly payments to the Borrower throughout
the life of the loan.

1.5. “First 12-Month Disbursement Period” means the period that begins on the day of loan
closing and ends on the day before the anniversary date of loan closing. When the day before the
anniversary date of loan closing falls on a Federally observed holiday, Saturday or Sunday, the
period end date will be on the next business day.

1.6. [“Fully Funded Life Expectancy Set-Aside (LESA)” means a portion of the Borrower’s
Principal Limit that is designated for payment of property taxes, hazard insurance premiums and,
if applicable, flood insurance premiums for the estimated remainder of the Borrower’s life
expectancy.]!
1.7. “Ineligible Non-Borrowing Spouse” means a Non-Borrowing Spouse who does not meet the
Qualifying Attributes for a Deferral Period.

1.8. “Initial Disbursement Limit” means the maximum disbursement to the Borrower allowed at
loan closing and during the First 12-Month Disbursement Period which is the lessor of (1) the
greater of sixty percent (60%) of the Principal Limit; or the sum of Mandatory Obligations, plus
an additional ten percent (10%) of the Principal Limit; or (2) the Principal Limit less the sum of
the funds in the Life Expectancy Set-Aside for payment beyond the First 12-Month



Last Revised:   10/31/2023                                                                           1
Disbursement Period and the Servicing Fee Set-Aside. The Initial Disbursement Limit shall not
exceed the Principal Limit amount established at loan closing.

[1.9. “LA Property Charges” means certain Property Charges consisting of taxes, hazard
insurance premiums, flood insurance premiums, ground rents, and any other assessments that
may be required by local or State Law if indicated on the Payment Plan.|"

[1.10. “LESA Property Charges” means certain Property Charges consisting of property taxes
including special assessments levied by Municipalities or State Law, hazard insurance premiums,
and applicable flood insurance premiums.|""

1.11. “Loan Advances” means all funds advanced from or charged to Borrower's account under
conditions set forth in this Loan Agreement, whether or not actually paid to Borrower.

1.12. “Loan Documents” means the Note, Second Note, Security Instrument, and Second
Security Instrument.

1.13. “Mandatory Obligations” means only those charges, fees, amounts, and expenses as
authorized by the Secretary.

1.14. “Maximum Claim Amount” means the lesser of the appraised value of the Property, as
determined by the appraisal used in underwriting the HECM, or the sales price of the Property
being purchased for the sole purpose of being the Principal Residence, or the national mortgage
limit under Section 255(g) or (m) of the National Housing Act applicable to this Loan
Agreement. Closing costs must not be taken into account in determining the appraised value.

1.15. “Mortgage Insurance Premium (MIP)” means the mortgage insurance premium paid by the
Lender to the Secretary in consideration of the contract of insurance.

1.146 “Non-Borrowing Spouse” means the spouse [Name], as determined by the law of the state
in which the spouse [Name] and the Borrower [Name] reside or the state of celebration, of the
Borrower [Name] at the time of closing and who is not a Borrower.!

1.17. “Note” means the promissory note signed by Borrower together with this Loan Agreement
and given to Lender to evidence Borrower's promise to repay, with interest, Loan Advances by
Lender or Lender's assignees.

1.18. “Payment Plan” means the payment plan set forth in Exhibit 1, which is attached to and
made a part of this Loan Agreement.

1.19. “Principal” or “Principal Balance” means the sum of all Loan Advances made as of a
particular date, including interest and mortgage insurance premiums.



' If there is more than one Borrower and both and/or all Borrowers have a spouse, as determined by the law of the
state in which the spouse [Name] and the Borrower [Name] reside or the state of celebration, at the time of closing
and who is not a Borrower, add as needed “and the spouse [Name]”.




Last Revised:   10/31/2023                                                                                            2
1.20. “Principal Limit” means the amount indicated on the attached Payment Plan when this
Loan Agreement is executed, and increases each month for the life of the HECM at a rate
supplied by the Secretary that is listed on the Payment Plan. The Principal Limit is calculated by
multiplying the Maximum Claim Amount by a factor supplied by the Secretary.

1.21. “Principal Residence” means the dwelling where the Borrower and, if applicable, a Non-
Borrowing Spouse maintain their permanent place of abode, and typically spend the majority of
the calendar year. A person may have only one Principal Residence at any one time and the
Property is considered to be the Principal Residence of any Borrower who is temporarily in a
health care institution provided the Borrower’s confinement to a health care institution does not
exceed 12 consecutive months. The Property shall be considered to be the Principal Residence of
any Non-Borrowing Spouse who is temporarily in a health care institution, as long as the
Property is the Principal Residence of their Borrower spouse, who physically resides in the
Property. The Property is considered to be the Principal Residence of any Non-Borrowing
Spouse who occupies the Property as their Principal Residence, when the Borrower resides in a
health care institution for a length of time. The Property is considered to be the Principal
Residence during a Deferral Period of the Non-Borrowing Spouse, who is temporarily in a health
care institution, provided the Eligible Non-Borrowing Spouse physically occupied the Property
immediately prior to entering the health care institution and such confinement does not exceed
12 consecutive months.

].22. “Property” means Borrower’s property identified in the Security Instrument.

1.23. “Property Charges” means property taxes, hazard insurance premiums, flood insurance
premiums, ground rents, condominium fees, planned unit development fees, Homeowners’
Association fees, and any other special assessments that may be required by local or State Law.

1.24. “Qualifying Attributes” means those requirements established by the Secretary that the
Non-Borrowing Spouse must satisfy in order to be eligible for the Deferral Period.

1.25. “Secretary” means the Secretary of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development, or the Secretary’s authorized representatives.

1.26. “Second Note” means the promissory note signed by Borrower together with this Loan
Agreement and given to the Secretary to evidence Borrower's promise to repay, with interest,
Loan Advances by the Secretary secured by the Second Security Instrument.

1.27. “Second Security Instrument” means the mortgage, deed of trust, security deed or other
security instrument which is signed by Borrower together with this Loan Agreement and which
secures the Second Note.

1.28. “Security Instrument” means the mortgage, deed of trust, security deed, or other security
instrument which is signed by Borrower together with this Loan Agreement and which secures the
Note.




Last Revised:   10/31/2023                                                                           3
Article 2 - Loan Advances

2.1. General. Lender agrees to make Loan Advances under the conditions set forth in this Loan
Agreement in consideration of the Loan Documents given by Borrower on the same date as this
Loan Agreement.

2.2. Initial Advances.

    2.2.1. Loan Advances shall be used by the Lender to pay, or reimburse the Borrower for,
    closing costs listed in the Schedule of Closing Costs (Exhibit 2) attached to and made a part
    of this Loan Agreement, except that such Loan Advances will only be used to pay origination
    fees in an amount not to exceed the greater of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500) or
    two percent (2%) of the Maximum Claim Amount, up to a Maximum Claim Amount of two
    hundred thousand dollars ($200,000), plus one percent (1%) of any portion of the Maximum
    Claim Amount that is greater than two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000). The Lender
    may not charge the Borrower an origination fee in excess of six thousand dollars ($6,000).

    2.2.2. Loan Advances shall be used by the Lender to discharge those liens on the Property
    listed in the Schedule of Liens/HECM for Purchase Disbursements to Seller (Exhibit 2)
    attached to and made a part of this Loan Agreement.

    2.2.3. Lender shall pay an initial Loan Advance to the Borrower in the amount indicated on
    the Payment Plan.

    2.2.4. Initial advances required by this Section 2.2 shall be made as soon as such advances
    are permitted by the applicable provisions of 12 CFR Part 226 (Truth in Lending) governing
    Borrower's right of rescission, but not before that time.

    2.2.5. The Borrower’s aggregate initial advances and any subsequent advances made, except
    for any disbursements or accruals under 2.3.3, during the First 12-Month Disbursement
    Period may not exceed the Initial Disbursement Limit established at closing and in the
    amount indicated on the Payment Plan. In the event the Borrower makes a payment towards
    the outstanding loan balance on the line of credit during the First 12-Month Disbursement
    Period, the Lender may make subsequent Loan Advances during the remainder of the First
    12-Month Disbursement Period only to the extent the Borrower’s payment was applied to the
    outstanding Principal Balance.

    2.2.6. If any requested Loan Advance would exceed the Initial Disbursement Limit
    established at closing, the Lender must make a partial payment to the Borrower for the
    amount that would not exceed the limit. Prior to the Lender paying a partial Loan Advance to
    avoid causing the aggregate initial advances to exceed the Initial Disbursement Limit within
    the First 12-Month Disbursement Period, the Lender must provide the Borrower with written
    notice about inability to exceed the threshold.

    2.2.7. No Loan Advances are permitted during a Deferral Period, except for amounts
    disbursed or accrued from under 2.3.2, 2.3.3, 2.12.3, 2.13.3, and 2.15.3.

2.3. Set-Asides.


Last Revised:   10/31/2023                                                                          4
    2.3.1. Amounts set aside from the Principal Limit shall be considered Loan Advances to the
    extent actually disbursed or earned by Lender.

    2.3.2. The Lender shall initially set aside from the Principal Limit the amount indicated on
    the Payment Plan for repairs to be made in accordance with a Repair Rider attached to and
    made a part of this Loan Agreement (Exhibit 3). This set-aside remains available for
    disbursement during any Deferral Period and the Lender may add such disbursements to the
    Principal Balance for the sole purpose of paying the cost of the repairs specifically identified
    in the Repair Rider. Additionally, such repairs may only be disbursed if the repairs are
    satisfactorily completed during the time period established in the Repair Rider.

    2.3.3. The Lender shall initially set aside from the Principal Limit the amount indicated on
    the Payment Plan to be applied to payment due for a fixed monthly charge for servicing
    activities of the Lender or its servicer. Such servicing activities are necessary to protect the
    Lender's interest in the Property. A servicing fee set-aside, if any, is not available to the
    Borrower for any purpose, except to pay for loan servicing. A servicing set-aside under this
    Section remains available for disbursement during any Deferral Period and the Lender may
    add such disbursements to the Principal Balance.

    2.3.4. The Lender shall set aside from the Principal Limit any amounts required by Section
    2.10 as indicated on the Payment Plan.

2.4. Charges and Fees. The Borrower shall pay to the Lender reasonable and customary charges
and fees as permitted under 24 CFR § 206.207(a). Such amounts shall be considered Loan
Advances when actually disbursed by the Lender.

2.5. Monthly Payments.

    2.5.1. Loan Advances paid directly to the Borrower shall be made in equal monthly payments
    if requested by the Borrower.

    2.5.2. Monthly payments, if requested under 2.5.1, shall be calculated based on the payment
    option requested by the Borrower.

    2.5.3. Monthly payments under the term payment option are made only during a term chosen
    by the Borrower and shall be calculated so that the sum of (1) or (11) as applicable added to
    (111), (iv), (v), and (vi) shall be equal to or less than the Principal Limit at the end of the term;
    except that during the First 12-Month Disbursement Period, the amount calculated shall not
    be greater than the Initial Disbursement Limit:

         (i) Initial advances under Section 2.2 plus any initial servicing fee set-aside under
             Subsection 2.3.3, or

         (11) The Principal Balance at the time of a change in payments under Sections 2.8 and 2.9
              plus any remaining servicing fee set-aside under Subsection 2.3.3, and




Last Revised:   10/31/2023                                                                                  5
         (111) The portion of the Principal Limit set aside as a line of credit under Section 2.7,
               including any set-asides for repairs (Subsection 2.3.2) [and first-year LESA Property
              Charges/LA Property Charges (Subsection 2.3.4 and Section 2.10)], and

         (iv) All monthly payments due through the payment term, including funds withheld for
              payment of Property Charges under Section 2.10, and

         (v) All mortgage insurance premiums, or monthly charges due to the Secretary in lieu of
             mortgage insurance premiums, which are due through the payment term (Subsection
             2.13), and

         (vi) All interest through the payment term. The Expected Average Mortgage Interest Rate
              shall be used for this purpose.

    2.5.4. Monthly payments under the tenure payment option shall be calculated as in
    Subsection 2.5.3 as if there were a payment term with the number of months in the term
    equal to the sum of one hundred (100) minus the age of the youngest Borrower multiplied by
    twelve (12), but payments shall continue until the HECM becomes due and payable as
    provided in the Loan Documents.

    2.5.5. Monthly payments shall be paid to the Borrower on the first business day of a month.

    2.5.6. If the Borrower has requested monthly payments, payments shall be indicated on the
    Payment Plan. The payment option may be changed by the Borrower as provided in Sections
    2.8 and 2.9.

2.6. Line of Credit without Monthly Payments.

    2.6.1. The Borrower can request Loan Advances under a line of credit payment option in
    amounts and at times determined by the Borrower, if the Principal Balance of the HECM
    after the Loan Advance is made 1s less than or equal to the applicable Principal Limit,
    except that during the First 12-Month Disbursement Period the amount available shall not
    be greater than the maximum amount permitted under 2.2.5, excluding any portion of the
    Principal Limit set aside under Sections 2.3.2, 2.3.3, 2.3.4, and 2.10. The line of credit
    amount increases at the same rate as the total Principal Limit under Section 1.20.

    2.6.2. Line of credit payments shall be paid to the Borrower within five business days after
    the Lender has received a written request for payment by the Borrower.

    2.6.3. The Lender may specify a form for line of credit payment requests.

    2.6.4. The Lender shall provide the Borrower with a statement of the account every time a
    line of credit payment is made. The statement shall include the current interest rate, the
    previous Principal Balance, the amount of the current Loan Advance, the current Principal
    Balance after the Loan Advance, and the current Principal Limit.

2.7. Line of Credit with Monthly Payments.




Last Revised:   10/31/2023                                                                             6
    2.7.1. The Borrower may receive monthly payments under either a term or tenure payment
    option combined with a line of credit, as indicated on the Payment Plan.

    2.7.2. Subsections 2.6.2, 2.6.3, and 2.6.4, apply to a line of credit combined with term or
    tenure payments.

    2.7.3. If the Borrower combines a line of credit with a term or tenure payment option, the
    Principal Limit is divided into: (a) an amount for the line of credit payments, including any
    repair set-aside as provided for in Subsection 2.3.3 and amounts set-aside or withheld for
    Property Charges as provided for in Subsection 2.3.4 and Section 2.10, (b) an amount for
    monthly payments which shall be calculated under Subsection 2.5.3 or 2.5.4 and (c) an
    amount for a servicing fee set-aside, if required by the Lender under Subsection 2.3.3.
    Amounts designated for line of credit payments and monthly payments increase
    independently at the same rate as the total Principal Limit increases under Section 1.20. The
    Borrower can request Loan Advances in amounts and at times determined by the Borrower,
    if the requested amount is less than or equal to the difference between (a) the Principal Limit
    applicable to the line of credit set aside, except that during the First 12-Month Disbursement
    Period instead of using the applicable Principal Limit, the maximum amount permitted under
    2.2.5 shall be used, and (b) the portion of the outstanding Principal Balance attributable to
    draws on the line of credit, including accrued interest and mortgage insurance premium or
    monthly charge due to the Secretary, but excluding any portion of the Principal Limit set
    aside under Subsections 2.3.2, 2.3.3, 2.3.4, and 2.10.

    2.7.4. A Borrower receiving monthly payments in combination with a line of credit may
    prepay the outstanding mortgage balance in accordance with the terms of the Note.

2.8. Change in Payments Generally.

    2.8.1. Whenever the Principal Balance of the loan is less than the Principal Limit, the
    Borrower may change from any payment option allowable under this Loan Agreement to
    another.

    2.8.2. If the Borrower requests that monthly payments be made after a change in payment
    option, the Lender shall recalculate future monthly payments in accordance with Subsections
    2.5.3 or 2.5.4.

    2.8.3. The Lender may charge a fee not to exceed twenty dollars, whenever payments are
    recalculated and in any other circumstances in which the Borrower is required to sign a form
    acknowledging a change in payment option as provided in Subsection 2.8.5.

    2.8.4. Loan Advances under a new payment option shall be paid to the Borrower in the same
    manner and within the time period required under Sections 2.5, 2.6, or 2.7.

    2.8.5. Changes in the payment option must be acknowledged by the Borrower by signing a
    form containing the same information as the Payment Plan. The Lender shall provide a copy
    of the completed form to the Borrower.

2.9. Change in Payments Due to Initial Repairs.


Last Revised:   10/31/2023                                                                            7
    2.9.1. If initial repairs after closing, made in accordance with the Repair Rider, are completed
    without using all of the repair set-aside, the Lender shall inform the Borrower of the
    completion and the amount then available to the Borrower to be drawn under a line of credit.

    2.9.2. If initial repairs after closing, made in accordance with the Repair Rider, cannot be
    fully funded from the repair set-aside, any additional Loan Advances needed to complete the
    repairs shall be made in the manner provided under Section 2.16.

    2.9.3. If initial repairs are not completed when required by the Repair Rider, the Borrower
    shall not request and the Lender shall not make any further payments to the Borrower, except
    as needed to pay for repairs required by the Repair Rider and mandatory Loan Advances
    under Section 4.6. In order to complete the required repairs, Loan Advances shall be made
    first from the repair set-aside, and then in the manner provided under Section 2.16.

2.10. Payment of Certain Property Charges.”

To be used for Fully Funded Life Expectancy Set-Aside:

    2.10.1. Except as provided herein, the Borrower shall pay all Property Charges and shall
    provide evidence of payment to the Lender when required by the Lender.

    2.10.2. The Borrower [is required/has elected] to have a Fully Funded Life Expectancy Set-
    Aside, which the Lender shall use as Loan Advances to pay the LESA Property Charges. The
    Borrower shall remain responsible to pay all other Property Charges.

    2.10.3. The Lender shall set aside from the Principal Limit the amount indicated on the
    Payment Plan. The Lender shall use the amounts set aside to make timely payments of the
    LESA Property Charges listed in Section 2.10.2. The amounts set aside shall not exceed the
    projected LESA Property Charges that will be required over the life expectancy of the
    youngest Borrower and shall be calculated in accordance with the formula established by the
    Secretary. Amounts set aside shall not be treated as Loan Advances and shall not bear
    interest except to the extent actually disbursed by the Lender. During a Deferral Period, no
    amounts from the set-aside will be available for an Eligible Non-Borrowing Spouse.

    2.10.4. The Lender is required to perform an annual analysis of the Fully Funded Life
    Expectancy Set-Aside to determine whether the funds are sufficient to make required
    distributions for the next year. If at any time the amounts remaining in the set-aside are
    insufficient to pay the LESA Property Charges when due or when there are no funds
    remaining in the set-aside, within 15 calendar days of the analysis the Lender shall notify the
    Borrower that there are insufficient or no funds remaining and that the Borrower is
    responsible for the timely payment of all the Property Charges, including the LESA Property
    Charges, throughout the remaining life of the HECM. The Lender shall convert any
    remaining funds in the set-aside to a line of credit.

    2.10.5. If the Borrower fails to pay any Property Charges the Borrower is required to pay,
    including any LESA Property Charges in accordance with Section 2.10.4, the Lender shall
    pay the Property Charges as a Loan Advance as required under Section 2.16; however, such



Last Revised:   10/31/2023                                                                             8
    election shall not preclude the Lender from taking action due to the Borrower’s failure to pay
    Property Charges under this Section.

    2.10.6. The Borrower may not cancel the Fully Funded Life Expectancy Set-Aside.

To be used for Partially Funded Life Expectancy Set-Aside:

    2.10.1. The Borrower shall pay all Property Charges and shall provide evidence of payment
    to the Lender when required by the Lender.

    2.10.2. The Borrower is required to have a Partially Funded Life Expectancy Set-Aside,
    which the Lender shall use to provide semi-annual disbursements, in the amount indicated on
    the Payment Plan, to the Borrower. These funds must be used to pay the LESA Property
    Charges.

    2.10.3. The Lender shall set aside from the Principal Limit the amount indicated on the
    Payment Plan. The Lender shall use the amounts set aside to make semi-annual
    disbursements to the Borrower to be used for timely payments of the LESA Property
    Charges. The first semi-annual payment date will be disbursed six months from the date of
    loan closing. The amounts set aside shall not exceed the projected LESA Property Charges
    that will be required over the life expectancy of the youngest Borrower and shall be
    calculated in accordance with the formula established by the Secretary. Amounts set aside
    shall not be treated as Loan Advances and shall not bear interest except to the extent actually
    disbursed by the Lender. During a Deferral Period, no amounts from the set-aside will be
    available for an Eligible Non-Borrowing Spouse.

    2.10.4. The Lender is required to perform an annual analysis of the Partially Funded Life
    Expectancy Set-Aside to determine whether the funds are sufficient to make required
    distributions for the next year. If at any time the amounts remaining in the set-aside are
    insufficient to pay the semi-annual disbursements or when there are no funds remaining in
    the set-aside, within 15 calendar days of the analysis the Lender shall notify the Borrower
    that there are insufficient or no funds remaining and that the Borrower will no longer receive
    semi-annual disbursements and continues to be responsible for the timely payment of all
    LESA Property Charges. The Lender shall convert any remaining funds in the set-aside to a
    line of credit, unless such funds are retained under Subsection 2.10.5.

    2.10.5. If the Borrower fails to timely pay any LESA Property Charges and there are funds
    remaining in the set-aside, the Lender shall immediately suspend future semi-annual
    payments, if any, and must use any funds remaining in the set-aside to directly pay the full
    amount owed to the taxing authority or/and insurance provider. Semi-annual disbursements
    are suspended indefinitely unless and until the Borrower repays the full amount of funds
    advanced from the set-aside. Any remaining funds in the set-aside must be used to pay future
    LESA Property Charges if the Borrower fails to timely pay them.

    2.10.6. If the Borrower fails to timely pay the LESA Property Charges and there are no
    remaining funds in the set-aside, the Lender shall pay the LESA Property Charges as a Loan
    Advance as required under Section 2.16; however, such election shall not preclude the



Last Revised:   10/31/2023                                                                            9
    Lender from taking action due to the Borrower’s failure to pay Property Charges under this
    Section.

    2.10.7. The Borrower may not cancel the Partially Funded Life Expectancy Set-Aside.

To be used for all other Borrowers:

    2.10.1. Except as provided herein, the Borrower shall pay all Property Charges and shall
    provide evidence of payment to the Lender when required by the Lender.

    2.10.2. The Borrower may elect to require the Lender to use Loan Advances to pay certain
    Property Charges consisting of taxes, hazard insurance premiums, flood insurance premiums,
    ground rents, and any other assessments that may be required by local or State Law if
    indicated on the Payment Plan (collectively, the “LA Property Charges”). Borrower may not
    cancel this election.

    2.10.3. If the Borrower has made the election under Subsection 2.10.2 and the Borrower is
    receiving monthly payments, the Lender shall withhold amounts from each monthly payment
    and use the amounts withheld to make timely payments of the LA Property Charges. The
    amounts withheld shall be calculated as provided in Subsection 2.10.5. Amounts withheld
    from monthly payments shall not be treated as Loan Advances and shall not bear interest
    except to the extent actually disbursed by the Lender.

    2.10.4. If the Borrower has made the election under Subsection 2.10.2, the Lender shall
    withhold from each monthly payment an amount to pay (a) taxes and special assessments
    levied or to be levied against the Property, (b) leasehold payments or ground rents on the
    Property, (c) premiums for fire, flood, and other hazard insurance required by the Security
    Instrument, (d) any other assessments that may be required by local or State Law. Each
    monthly withholding for items (a), (b), (c), and (d) shall equal one-twelfth (1/12") of the
    annual amounts, as reasonably estimated by the Lender. The full annual amount for each item
    shall be paid by the Lender before an item would become delinquent. The Lender shall treat
    amounts for items (a), (b), and (c), and (d) as Loan Advances adding to the Principal Balance
    when paid. If at any time the withholding for item (a), (b), (c), or (d) exceeds the amount of
    actual LA Property Charges, the Lender shall pay the excess withholding to the Borrower
    and add it to the Principal Balance. If the total of the withholding for item (a), (b), (c), or (d)
    is insufficient to pay the item when due, the amount necessary to make up the deficiency on
    or before the date the item becomes due shall be paid as a Loan Advance in the manner
    provided under Section 2.16.

    2.10.5. If the Borrower has made the election under Subsection 2.10.2 and the Borrower is
    not receiving monthly payments, the Lender shall make Loan Advances under the line of
    credit payment option as needed to make timely payments of LA Property Charges, provided
    that no such Loan Advance shall exceed the amount permitted by Section 2.6.1.

    2.10.6. The Lender shall immediately notify any the Borrower who has made the election
    under Subsection 2.10.2 whenever the Lender determines that amounts available from
    monthly payments or line of credit payments will be insufficient to pay the LA Property
    Charges.


Last Revised:   10/31/2023                                                                            10
    2.10.7. If the Borrower who has made the election under Subsection 2.10.2 fails to timely pay
    any other Property Charges, the Lender shall pay the Property Charges as a Loan Advance as
    required under Section 2.16; however, the Lender’s payment of the Property Charges as a
    Loan Advance shall not preclude the Lender from taking action due to the Borrower’s failure
    to pay Property Charges under this Section.

    2.10.8. If a Borrower who has not made the election under Subsection 2.10.2 establishes a
    pattern of missed payments for LA Property Charges, the Lender may establish procedures to
    pay the LA Property Charges from the Borrower's funds as if the Borrower made such an
    election.

    2.10.9. If the Borrower who has not made the election under Subsection 2.10.2 fails to pay
    any Property Charges in a timely manner, and such Property Charges are not paid under
    Subsection 2.10.8 above, the Lender shall pay the Property Charges as a Loan Advance as
    required under Section 2.16.

2.11. Insurance and Condemnation Proceeds. If insurance or condemnation proceeds are paid to
the Lender, the Principal Balance shall be reduced by the amount of the proceeds not applied to
restoration or repair of the damaged Property and the available loan funds shall be recalculated.
At the same time, the Principal Limit also shall be reduced by the amount of the proceeds applied
to reduce the Principal Balance.

2.12. Interest

    2.12.1. Interest shall be calculated as provided in the Loan Documents.

    2.12.2. Interest shall accrue daily and be added to the Principal Balance as a Loan Advance at
    the end of each month.

    2.12.3. Interest shall continue to accrue as provided in 2.12.2 during any Deferral Period.

2.13. Mortgage Insurance Premium (MIP); Monthly Charge.

    2.13.1. Monthly MIP shall be calculated as provided by the Secretary. If the Security
    Instrument is held by the Secretary or if the Secretary makes Loan Advances secured by the
    Second Security Instrument, a monthly charge shall be due to the Secretary and shall be
    calculated in the same manner as MIP.

    2.13.2. The full amount of monthly MIP or monthly charge, including any portion of the MIP
    retained by a Lender under 24 C.F.R. 206.109, shall be considered to be a Loan Advance to
    the Borrower on the later of the first day of the month or the day the Lender pays the MIP to
    the Secretary, if any MIP is due to the Secretary. In the event that the Note becomes due and
    payable, or the Note is prepaid in full after the first day of the month, the Lender may add the
    accrued MIP to the Principal Balance or the Secretary may add the accrued monthly charge to
    the Principal Balance.

    2.13.3. In the event of a Deferral Period, the monthly MIP will continue to accrue and the
    Lender may add the accrued MIP to the Principal Balance.


Last Revised:   10/31/2023                                                                         11
2.14. Manner of Payment. Only a Borrower has a right to receive Loan Advances. Borrowers
shall choose to receive by either electronic funds transfer to a bank account designated by all
Borrowers or by check mailed to an address designated by all Borrowers, except where all
Borrowers agree that payment should be made directly to a third party for the benefit of the
Borrowers. Borrowers may change the manner of payment by notifying the Lender.

2.15. Protection of Property.

    2.15.1. If the Borrower vacates or abandons the Property, or if the Borrower is in default
    under the Security Instrument, then the Lender may make reasonable expenditures to protect
    and preserve the Property and these expenditures will be considered Loan Advances as
    required under Section 2.16.

    2.15.2. If the Borrower fails to pay governmental or municipal charges, fines or impositions
    that are not included in Section 2.10 or if there is a legal proceeding that may significantly
    affect the Lender's rights in the Property (such as a proceeding in bankruptcy, for
    condemnation or to enforce laws or regulations), then the Lender may do and pay whatever is
    necessary to protect the value of the Property and the Lender's rights in the Property. These
    expenditures will be considered Loan Advances as required under Section 2.16.

    2.15.3. During a Deferral Period, if there are governmental or municipal charges, fines, or
    impositions that are not included in Section 2.10 or if there 1s a legal proceeding that may
    significantly affect the Lender's rights in the Property (such as a proceeding in bankruptcy, for
    condemnation or to enforce laws or regulations), then the Lender may do and pay whatever is
    necessary to protect the value of the Property and the Lender's rights in the Property. These
    expenditures will be considered Loan Advances as required under Section 2.16. If obligations
    of the Security Instrument are not satisfied during the Deferral Period, the Deferral Period will
    immediately cease and the HECM will be immediately due in full.

2.16. Unscheduled Payments. Loan Advances made pursuant to Sections 2.3.4, 2.4, 2.9.2, 2.9.3,
[2.10.5/2.10.4, 2.10.6]*, and 2.15 shall be made from a line of credit under Section 2.6 or 2.7 to
the extent possible. If no line of credit sufficient to make the Loan Advances exists, any future
monthly payments must be recalculated in accordance with Subsection 2.5.3 or 2.5.4 to create a
line of credit sufficient to make the Loan Advances.

Article 3 - Late Charge

3.1. Amount Due. The Lender shall pay a late charge to the Borrower for any late payment. If the
Lender does not mail or electronically transfer a scheduled monthly payment to the Borrower on
the first business day of the month or mail or electronically transfer a line of credit payment to
the Borrower within 5 business days of the date the Lender received the request, the late charge
shall be 10 percent (10%) of the entire amount that should have been paid to the Borrower for
that month or as a result of that request. For each additional day that the Lender fails to make
payment, the Lender shall pay interest on the late payment at the interest rate stated in the Loan
Documents. If the Loan Documents provide for an adjustable interest rate, the rate in effect when

? Fully Funded and Partially Funded Life Expectancy Set-Aside use 2.10.5; All other Borrowers use 2.10.4, 2.10.6.




Last Revised:   10/31/2023                                                                                          12
the late charge first accrues shall be used. In no event shall the total late charge and interest
exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). Any late charge shall be paid from the Lender's funds and
shall not be added to the unpaid Principal Balance.

3.2. Waiver. The Secretary may waive a late charge where the Secretary determines that the late
payment resulted from circumstances beyond the Lender's control and that no act or omission of
the Lender contributed to the late payment. At the time the Lender requests a waiver, the Lender
shall inform the Borrower that a waiver of late charge has been requested from the Secretary and
that the late charge will be sent to the Borrower if the waiver is denied. If the Secretary denies
the waiver, the Lender shall pay to the Borrower the late charge and interest that accrued from
the date the payment was late until the date the waiver was requested.

Article 4 - Termination of Lender's Obligation to Make Loan Advances

4.1. Loan Due and Payable. The Lender shall have no obligation to make Loan Advances,
including those under Section 2.10, 1f the Lender has notified the Borrower that immediate
payment in full to the Lender is required under one or more of the Loan Documents unless and
until the notice is rescinded by the Lender.

4.2. Deferral Period of Loan Due and Payable Status. Where the last surviving Borrower dies and
an Eligible Non-Borrowing Spouse met and continues to meet all requirements established by
the Secretary, the due and payable status will be deferred until the Property is no longer the
Principal Residence of an Eligible Non-Borrowing Spouse, an Eligible Non-Borrowing Spouse
fails to ensure all other requirements established by the Secretary are met, or an Eligible Non-
Borrowing Spouse dies, whichever occurs first. During the Deferral Period, the Lender shall
have no obligation to make Loan Advances but the Lender may not require immediate payment
in full until the end of the Deferral Period. The Lender may continue to add to the outstanding
Principal Balance the amounts that accrue in accordance with Subsections 2.3.2, 2.3.3, 2.12.3,
and 2.13.3. The Lender shall notify an Eligible Non-Borrowing Spouse that the due and payable
status of the Loan is in a Deferral Period only for the amount of time that an Eligible Non-
Borrowing Spouse continues to meet all requirements established by the Secretary and the
Property continues to be the Principal Residence of an Eligible Non-Borrowing Spouse. Once the
Deferral Period ends, the HECM is immediately due and payable. The Deferral Period is not
available to any Ineligible Non-Borrowing Spouse. The Deferral Period will terminate or become
unavailable to an Eligible Non-Borrowing Spouse at the time he or she becomes ineligible.

4.3. Loan Advances by Secretary. If the Security Instrument has been assigned to the Secretary or
the Secretary notifies the Lender and the Borrower that Loan Advances are secured by the Second
Security Instrument, the Lender shall have no further obligation to make Loan Advances under
this Loan Agreement, unless the Secretary accepts later reimbursement by the Lender for all Loan
Advances made, earned or disbursed by the Secretary. The Secretary may establish procedures for
handling requests for payments and changes in payment options during the interval between the
Lender's notification of intent to assign the Security Instrument to the Secretary and completion of
the assignment. The Borrower shall be informed of such procedures by the Lender and/or the
Secretary, and the Borrower shall comply with such procedures.




Last Revised:   10/31/2023                                                                        13
4.4. Lien Status Jeopardized. The Lender shall have no obligation to make further Loan Advances
if the Lender or the Secretary determines that the lien status of the Security Instrument or the
Second Security Instrument is jeopardized under State Laws as described in Paragraph 14(A) of
the Security Instrument or Second Security Instrument and the lien status is not extended in
accordance with Paragraph 14(A).

4.5. Bankruptcy. The Lender shall have no obligation to make further Loan Advances on or
following the date that a petition for bankruptcy of the Borrower is filed.

4.6. Mandatory Loan Advances. Notwithstanding anything in Sections 4.1 through 4.4, all Loan
Advances under Sections 2.10 (Property Charges), 2.12 (interest), 2.13 (MIP, monthly charge or
annual MIP adjustment), 2.15 (protection of Property) or 2.3.3 (servicing fee) shall be considered
mandatory Loan Advances by the Lender.

4.7. Prepayment in Full. The Lender shall not make Loan Advances if the Borrower has paid the
Note in full (or the Second Note, if the Secretary has assumed the Lender's rights and obligations
under Article 5).

Article 5 - HUD Obligation

The Secretary has no obligations under this Loan Agreement unless and until a certificate of
insurance is issued by the Secretary. Where a certificate of insurance has been issued, if the
Lender has no further obligation to make payments to the Borrower because of Section 4.3, the
Secretary shall assume the rights and obligations of the Lender under this Loan Agreement,
except the Secretary shall not assume any obligation of paying flood, fire, and other hazard
insurance from Loan Advances. If the Secretary makes Loan Advances to the Borrower under
the Second Security Instrument, the portion of the Principal Limit available for Loan Advances
shall be the difference between the current Principal Limit and the combined Principal
Balances on the Security Instrument less accrued interest and the Second Security Instrument.

Article 6 - Miscellaneous

6.1. Forbearance Not a Waiver. Any forbearance by the Lender in exercising any right or remedy
shall not be a waiver of or preclude the exercise of any right or remedy.

6.2. Successors and Assigns Bounds; Joint and Several Liability; Co-Signers. The covenants and
agreements of this Loan Agreement shall bind and benefit the successors and assigns of the
Lender. An assignment made in accordance with the regulations of the Secretary shall fully
relieve the Lender of its obligations under this Loan Agreement. The Borrower may not assign
any rights or obligations under this Loan Agreement. The Borrower's covenants and agreements
shall be joint and several.

Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein, upon the death of the last surviving Borrower,
the Borrower’s successors and assigns will be bound to perform the Borrower’s obligations
under this Loan Agreement, the and Lender shall be entitled to add to the outstanding Principal
Balance the amounts that accrue in accordance with Subsections 2.3.2, 2.3.3, 2.12.3, and 2.13.3.




Last Revised:   10/31/2023                                                                         14
6.3. Borrower Certifications. The Borrower shall complete and provide to the Lender on an
annual basis a certification, in a form prescribed by the Lender, stating whether the Property
remains the Borrower’s Principal Residence and, if applicable, the Principal Residence of the
Borrower’s Eligible Non-Borrowing Spouse. Where a Borrower has identified an Eligible Non-
Borrowing Spouse, the Borrower shall also complete and provide to the Lender on an annual
basis an Eligible Non-Borrowing Spouse certification, in a form prescribed by the Lender,
certifying that all requirements for the application of a Deferral Period continue to apply and
continue to be met. During a Deferral Period, the Borrower’s Principal Residency annual
certifications, required by this Section, must continue to be completed and provided to the
Lender by the Eligible Non-Borrowing Spouse.

6.4. Notices. Any notice to the Borrower provided for in this Loan Agreement shall be given by
delivering it or by mailing it by first class mail unless applicable law requires use of another
method. The notice shall be directed to the property address shown in the Security Instrument or
any other address all Borrowers jointly designate. Any notice to an Eligible Non-Borrowing
Spouse shall be given by delivering it or by mailing it by first class mail unless applicable law
requires use of another method. The notice shall be directed to the property address shown in the
Security Instrument or any other address all Borrowers and Eligible Non-Borrowing Spouse, if
applicable, jointly designate. Any notice to the Lender shall be given by first class mail to the
Lender's address stated herein or any address the Lender designates by notice to the Borrower.
Any notice to the Secretary shall be given by first class mail to the HUD National Servicing
Center or any other place designated by the Secretary. Any notice provided for in this Loan
Agreement shall be deemed to have been given to the Borrower, the Lender or the Secretary
when given as provided in this Section.

6.5. Governing Law; Severability. This Loan Agreement shall be governed by Federal law and
the law of the jurisdiction in which the Property is located. The Lender in this Loan Agreement
must comply with the Fair Housing Act, 42 U.S.C. §§3601 — 3619, which prohibits
discrimination on the basis of race, color, religion, sex, handicap familial status, or national
origin. In the event that any provision or clause of this Loan Agreement conflicts with applicable
law, such conflict shall not affect other provisions of this Loan Agreement which can be given
effect without the conflicting provision. To this end the provisions of this Loan Agreement are
declared to be severable.

6.6. Copies. The Lender, Borrower, and the Secretary shall each receive one original executed
copy of this Loan Agreement when acknowledged by the Secretary.

6.7. When Agreement Becomes Binding. This Loan Agreement shall bind the Lender and
Borrower when both the Lender and Borrower have signed.

6.8. Third-Party Beneficiary. Except as set forth in Article 5 and Section 4.3 for the Secretary
and except as set forth in Section 4.2 only for an Eligible Non-Borrowing Spouse in this Loan
Agreement, this Agreement does not and is not intended to confer any rights or remedies upon
any person other than the parties. The Borrower agrees that it 1s not a third-party beneficiary to
the Contract of Insurance between the Secretary and Lender.




Last Revised:   10/31/2023                                                                           15
BY SIGNING BELOW the parties accept and agree to the terms contained in this Loan
Agreement and the exhibits.


Borrower Signature (SEAL):

Date:




Borrower Signature (SEAL):

Date:




Name of Lender:



‘ Lender will need to include this definition if there will be a Fully Funded Life Expectancy Set-Aside.
4 Lender will need to include this definition if a Life Expectancy Set-Aside is not required.
Lender will need to include this definition if there will be a Life Expectancy Set-Aside.
'’ Lender must select the applicable set of Payment of Property Charge provisions from the three options available for Section 2.10.




Last Revised:     10/31/2023                                                                                                           16
