           rN                                                     BUSINESS & COMMUNITY SERVICES
                                                                                       150   BEAVERCREEK     ROAD
                                                                                     OREGON CiTy, OR 97045
Cc   LAC   KAMAS                                                                             WWW.CLACKAMAS.US / BCS

      COUNTY                                                                SARAH ECKMAN, INTERIM DIRECTOR

June 9, 2022

Board of County Commissioners
Clackamas County

  Approval of a Contract with Sirsi Corporation dba SirsiDynix for SirsiDynix Products and Services.
                    Total value is $785,615.86. County General Funds are involved.
 Purpose/Outcome | Provides ongoing Integrated Library Systems to the Libraries in Clackamas
                       County (LINCC)
 Dollar Amount         Maximum contract value is $785,615.86 through June 30, 2027
 and Fiscal Impact
 Funding Source        General Fund
 Duration              This contract shall be in effect through June 30, 2027
 Previous Board        None
 Action/Review
 Strategic Plan        1. Aligns with BCS Library Support Services Performance Clackamas purpose to
 Alignment             provide integrated systems, shared operational support and ongoing collaboration
                       services to libraries in Clackamas County (LINCC) so they can efficiently and
                       effectively provide library services and resources to their patrons and successfully
                       cooperate as a Library District.
                       2. Build public trust through good government by ensuring County policies and
                       decision, service delivery, and Board deliberations will be equitable, inclusive and
                       transparent.
 Counsel Review        5/23/2022, ARN
 Procurement           (Please check yes or no for procurement review. If the answer is “no,” please
 Review                provide an explanation.)
                           1. Was the item processed through Procurement? yes Xl no O


 Contact Person        Joshua Wolfe, Interim Library Network Manager — BCS/Library Support Systems —
                       503-723-4889
 Contract No.          5480

BACKGROUND: Business & Community Service’s (BCS) Library Support Services (Library Network) supplies
the Integrated Library System (ILS) for the Libraries in Clackamas County (LINCC) through Sirsi Corp dba
SirsiDynix. This system manages the library catalog, check-in/out system, and generally allows libraries to
operate. With the formation of the Library District in 2008, Library Support Services (Library Network) is
required through Intergovernmental Agreements (IGAs) with the cities to supply the “Database management
services including creating/acquiring MARC format bibliographic records” and “automated library system and
related telecommunications and technical support”. The ILS is the system that provides these core functions.
The original contract with Sirsi Gorporation was finalized in September 2007.


PROCUREMENT       PROCESS:
This is a continuation of contract finalized in 2007, to secure services, maintenance and subscriptions for the
efficient use of existing equipment, this procurement is exempt from the formal procurement process per LCRB
C-047-0288 Class Special Procurements; Definitions (15) Efficient Utilization of Existing Equipment or Supplies.
RECOMMENDATION:           Staff respectfully recommends approval of this contract with Sirsi Corporation dba
SirsiDynix for Integrated Library Systems maintenance and support services.
Respectfully submitted,

Sy, Colmar
Sarah Eckman
Interim Director
Business & Community Services
DocuSign Envelope ID: 266E9603-7B33-412A-8D4A-C90944B5959C




               A                                     CLACKAMAS COUNTY
             CLACKAMAS                          GOODS AND SERVICES CONTRACT
                                                             Contract #5480


             This Goods and Services Contract (this “Contract’”) is entered into between Sirsi Corporation dba
             SirsiDynix (“Contractor”), and Clackamas County, a political subdivisions of the State of Oregon
             (“County”) on behalf of Business and Community Services, Library Network for the purposes of
             providing service, maintenance and subscriptions for Sirsi products.

             1.         TERM

             This Contract shall become effective upon signature of both parties and shall remain in effect until June
             30, 2027 This Contract and any amendments to this Contract will not be effective until approved in
             writing by an authorized representative of the Board of County Commissioners of Clackamas County.
             This Contract supersedes and cancels any prior contracts between the parties hereto for similar services.

             IL.        SCOPE OF WORK

             Contractor shall provide the goods or services described in Contractor’s quote #112350, attached and
             hereby incorporated by reference as Exhibit “A.” This Contract consists of the following documents
             which are listed in descending order of precedence and are attached and incorporated by reference, this
             Contract, Exhibit “A”. Unless explicitly agreed to by the parties in this Contract, any additional terms and
             conditions that may be contained in Exhibit A are void. Work shall be performed in accordance with a
             schedule approved by the County. The Contractor shall meet the highest standards prevalent in the
             industry or business most closely involved in providing the appropriate goods or services. The County’s
             Representative for this contract is: Joshua Wolfe.

             III.       COMPENSATION

             1.     PAYMENT. The County agrees to compensate the Contractor on a fixed fee basis on an annual
                    basis as detailed in the schedule below:

                                      Year |                   Estimated Year       Estimated      Estimated       Estimated
                                                                                    Year 3         Year 4          Year 5

            SirsiDynix                6,000                        5,000            5,150          5,300           5,450
            Products
            SirsiDynix                1,330                        -                -              -               -
            Services
            Discount                  (1,000)                      -                -              -               -

            Active Products           147,705.82                   149,499.41       149,962.86     153,694.39      157,523.38
            Total
            Total                     154,035.82                   154,499.41       155,112.86     158,994.39      162,973.38




                    The total Contract compensation shall not exceed $785,615.86.

                    Any price changes due to third parties shall only be changed via amendment to this Contract.

                                                                  Page |
DocuSign Envelope ID: 266E9603-7B33-412A-8D4A-C90944B5959C




             2.     TRAVEL EXPENSE REIMBURSEMENT. Authorized: [_] Yes x] No
                     If travel expense reimbursement is authorized in this Contract, such expenses shall only be
                     reimbursed at the rates in the County Contractor Travel Reimbursement Policy, hereby incorporated
                     by reference, in effect at the time of the expense is incurred.

             3.     INVOICES. Invoices submitted for payment in connection with this Contract shall be properly
                    documented and shall indicate pertinent County contract and/or purchase order numbers. All charges
                    shall be billed monthly (unless a different payment period is outlined in Exhibit A) and will be paid
                    net thirty (30) days from receipt of invoice and shall be subject to Oregon Revised Statute (“ORS”)
                    293.462. If Contractor fails to present invoices in proper form within sixty (60) calendar days after
                    the end of the month in which the services were rendered, Contractor waives any rights to present
                    such invoice thereafter and to receive payment therefor. Invoices shall be submitted to the County
                    Representative at: deckerson@lincc.org


             4.     CONTRACTOR AND COUNTY                 CONTACTS.
                              Contractor                                                        County
                  Administrator: Linda Bone                              Administrator: Joshua Wolfe
                  Phone: 800-288-8020 x 5642                             Phone: 503-723-4889
                  Email: linda.bone@sirsidynix.com                       Email: JWolfe@clackamas.us



             IV.        CONTRACT        PROVISIONS

             1.     ACCESS TO RECORDS. Contractor shall maintain books, records, documents, and other evidence
                    and accounting procedures and practices sufficient to reflect properly all costs of whatever nature
                    claimed to have been incurred and anticipated to be incurred in the performance of this Contract.
                    County and their duly authorized representatives shall have access to the books, documents, papers,
                    and records of Contractor which are directly pertinent to this Contract for the purpose of making
                    audit, examination, excerpts, and transcripts. County agrees to reimburse Contractor for its
                    reasonable expenses in connection with such audits where such audits are performed more than once
                    per year. Such books and records shall be maintained by Contractor for a minimum of six (6) years,
                    or such longer period as may be required by applicable law, following final payment and termination
                    of this Contract, or until the conclusion of any audit, controversy or litigation arising out of or related
                    to this Contract, whichever date is later.

                    AVAILABILITY OF FUNDS. County certifies that sufficient funds are available and authorized for
                    expenditure to finance costs of this Contract within its current annual appropriation or expenditure
                    limitation, provided, however, that continuation of this Contract, or any extension, after the end of the
                    fiscal period in which it is written, 1s contingent on a new appropriation or limitation for each
                    succeeding fiscal period sufficient in amount, in the exercise of the County’s reasonable
                    administrative discretion, to continue to make payments under this Contract.

                    CAPTIONS. The captions or headings in this Contract are for convenience only and in no way
                    define, limit, or describe the scope or intent of any provisions of this Contract.

                    COMPLIANCE WITH APPLICABLE LAW. Contractor shall comply with all federal, state,
                    county, and local laws, ordinances, and regulations applicable to the work to be done under this
                    Contract. Contractor specifically agrees to comply with all applicable requirements of federal and
                                                                     Page 2
DocuSign Envelope ID: 266E9603-7B33-412A-8D4A-C90944B5959C




                  state civil rights and rehabilitation statutes, rules, and regulations. Contractor shall also comply with
                  the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (Pub. L. No. 101-336), Title VI of the Civil Rights Act
                  of 1964, Section V of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, ORS 659A. 142, and all regulations and
                  administrative rules established pursuant to those laws. Contractor further agrees to make payments
                  promptly when due, to all persons supplying to such Contractor, labor or materials for the prosecution
                  of the work provided in this Contract; pay all contributions or amounts due the Industrial Accident
                  Funds from such Contractor responsibilities incurred in the performance of this Contract; not permit
                  any lien or claim to be filed or prosecuted against the County on account of any labor or material
                  furnished; pay to the Department of Revenue all sums withheld from employees pursuant to ORS
                  316.167. If Contractor fails or refuses to make any such payments required herein, the appropriate
                  County official may pay such claim. Any payment of a claim in the manner authorized in this section
                  shall not relieve the Contractor or Contractor’s surety from obligation with respect to unpaid claims.
                  Contractor shall promptly pay any person or entity that furnishes medical care to Contractor’s
                  employees those sums which Contractor agreed to pay for such services and all money Contractor
                  collected or deducted from employee’s wages to provide such services.

             5.   EXECUTION AND COUNTERPARTS. This Contract may be executed in several counterparts,
                  each of which shall be an original, all of which shall constitute but one and the same instrument.

             6.   GOVERNING LAW. This Contract shall be governed and construed in accordance with the laws of
                  the State of Oregon without regard to principles of conflicts of law. Any claim, action, or suit
                  between County and Contractor that arises out of or relates to the performance of this Contract shall
                  be brought and conducted solely and exclusively within the Circuit Court for Clackamas County, for
                  the State of Oregon. Provided, however, that if any such claim, action, or suit may be brought in a
                  federal forum, it shall be brought and conducted solely and exclusively within the United States
                  District Court for the District of Oregon.

             7.   HAZARD COMMUNICATION. Contractor shall notify County prior to using products containing
                  hazardous chemicals to which County employees may be exposed, which includes any hazardous,
                  toxic, or dangerous substance, waste, or material that is the subject of environmental protection legal
                  requirements or that becomes regulated under any applicable local, state or federal law, including but
                  not limited to the items listed in the United States Department of Transportation Hazardous Materials
                  Table (49 CFR §172.101) or designated as hazardous substances by Oregon Administrative Rules,
                  Chapter 437, or the United States Environmental Protection Agency (40 CFR Part 302), and any
                  amendments thereto. Upon County’s request, Contractor shall immediately provide Safety Data
                  Sheets for the products subject to this provision.

             8.   RESPONSIBILITY FOR DAMAGES; INDEMNITY. Contractor shall be responsible for all
                  damage to property, injury to persons, and loss, expense, inconvenience, and delay which may be
                  caused by, or result from, the conduct of work, or from any act, omission, or neglect of Contractor, its
                  subcontractors, agents, or employees. The Contractor agrees to indemnify, hold harmless and defend
                  the County, and their officers, elected officials, agents and employees from and against all claims and
                  actions, and all expenses incidental to the investigation and defense thereof, arising out of or based
                  upon damage or injuries to persons or property caused by the errors, omissions, fault or negligence of
                  the Contractor or the Contractor's employees, subcontractors, or agents.

                  However, neither Contractor nor any attorney engaged by Contractor shall defend the claim in the
                  name of District or Clackamas County (“County”), purport to act as legal representative of District or
                  County, or settle any claim on behalf of District or County, without the approval of the Clackamas
                  County Counsel’s Office. District or County may assume their own defense and settlement at their
                  election and expense.

             9.   INDEPENDENT         CONTRACTOR         STATUS. The service(s) to be rendered under this Contract are
                                                                   Page 3
DocuSign Envelope ID: 266E9603-7B33-412A-8D4A-C90944B5959C




                 those of an independent contractor. Although the County reserves the right to determine (and
                 modify) the delivery schedule for the Work to be performed and to evaluate the quality of the
                 completed performance, County cannot and will not control the means or manner of Contractor’s
                 performance. Contractor is responsible for determining the appropriate means and manner of
                 performing the work. Contractor is not to be considered an agent or employee of County for any
                 purpose, including, but not limited to: (A) The Contractor will be solely responsible for payment of
                 any Federal or State taxes required as a result of this Contract; (B) This Contract is not intended to
                 entitle the Contractor to any benefits generally granted to the County employees, including, but not
                 limited to, vacation, holiday and sick leave, other leaves with pay, tenure, medical and dental
                 coverage, life and disability insurance, overtime, Social Security, Workers' Compensation,
                 unemployment compensation, or retirement; and (C) If the Contractor has the assistance of other
                 persons in the performance of this Contract, and the Contractor is a subject employer, the Contractor
                 shall qualify and remain qualified for the term of this Contract as an insured employer under ORS
                 Chapter 656.

             10. INSURANCE. Insurance policies, which cannot be excess to a self-insurance program, are to be
                 issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the State of Oregon. Contractor shall
                 provide insurance as indicated below:
                      A.       COMMERCIAL GENERAL LIABILITY
                      The Contractor agrees to furnish the County evidence of commercial general liability insurance
                      with a combined single limit of not less than $1,000,000 for each claim, incident, or occurrence,
                      with an aggregate limit of $2,000,000 for bodily injury and property damage for the protection of
                      the County, its officers, elected officials, agents, and employees against liability for damages
                      because of personal injury, bodily injury, death or damage to property, including loss of use
                      thereof, in any way related to this Contract. The general aggregate shall apply separately to this
                      project / location. The County, at its option, may require a complete copy of the above policy.

                     B.       AUTOMOBILE LIABILITY
                     The Contractor agrees to furnish the County evidence of business automobile liability insurance
                     with a combined single limit of not less than $1,000,000 for bodily injury and property damage for
                     the protection of the County, its officers, elected officials, agents, and employees against liability
                     for damages because of bodily injury, death or damage to property, including loss of use thereof in
                     any way related to this Contract. The County, at its option, may require a complete copy of the
                     above policy.
                     C.       Contractor shall provide County a certificate of insurance naming the Clackamas County
                     and its officers, elected officials, agents, and employees as an additional insured. If Contractor’s
                     insurance policy does not include a blanket endorsement for additional insured status when/where
                     required by written contract (as required in this Contract), the insurance, shall include Clackamas
                     County and its officers, elected officials, agents, and employees as expressly scheduled additional
                     insured. Use CG 20 10 or its equivalent. Such insurance shall provide sixty (60) days written
                     notice to the County in the event of a cancellation or material change and include a statement that
                     no act on the part of the insured shall affect the coverage afforded to the County under this
                     insurance. This policy(s) shall be primary insurance with respect to the County. Any insurance or
                     self-insurance maintained by the County shall be excess and shall not contribute to it.
                     D.       If the Contractor has the assistance of other persons in the performance of this Contract,
                     and the Contractor is a subject employer, the Contractor agrees to qualify and remain qualified for
                     the term of this Contract as an insured employer under ORS 656. The Contractor shall maintain
                     employer’s liability insurance with limits of $100,000 for each accident, $100,000 per disease for
                     each employee, and $500,000 each minimum policy limit.
                     E.       If any other required liability insurance is arranged on a “claims made” basis, “tail”
                     coverage will be required at the completion of this Contract for a duration of thirty-six (36)
                     months or the maximum time period the Contractor’s insurer will provide “tail” coverage as
                     subscribed, whichever is greater, or continuous “claims made” liability coverage for thirty-six
                                                                 Page 4
DocuSign Envelope ID: 266E9603-7B33-412A-8D4A-C90944B5959C




                     (36) months following the contract completion. Continuous “claims made” coverage will be
                     acceptable in lieu of “tail” coverage, provided it’s retroactive date 1s on or before the effective
                     date of this Contract.
                     F.       There shall be no cancellation, material change, exhaustion of aggregate limits or intent
                     not to renew insurance coverage without 60 days written notice by the Contractor to the County.
                     This policy(s) shall be primary insurance with respect to the County. Any insurance or self-
                     insurance maintained by the County shall be excess and shall not contribute to it.
                     G.       Contractor shall require that all of its subcontractors of any tier provide insurance
                     coverage (including additional insured provisions) and limits identical to the insurance required
                     of the Contractor under this Contract, unless this requirement is expressly modified or waived by
                     the County.

             11. LIMITATION OF LIABILITIES. Except for liability arising under or related to Section 14 or
                 21(B), neither party shall be liable for (1) any indirect, incidental, consequential or special damages
                 under this Contract or (11) any damages of any sort arising solely from the termination of this Contact
                 in accordance with its terms. This Contract is expressly subject to the debt limitation of Oregon
                 counties set forth in Article XI, Section 10, of the Oregon Constitution, and is contingent upon funds
                 being appropriated therefore. Any provisions herein which would conflict with law are deemed
                 inoperative to that extent.

             12. NOTICES. Except as otherwise provided in this Contract, any required notices between the parties
                 shall be given in writing by personal delivery, email, or mailing the same, to the Contract
                 Administrators identified in Article II, Section 4. If notice 1s sent to County, a copy shall also be sent
                 to: Clackamas County Procurement, 2051 Kaen Road, Oregon City, OR 97045, or
                 procurement@clackamas.us. Any communication or notice so addressed and mailed shall be deemed
                 to be given five (5) days after mailing, and immediately upon personal delivery, or within 2 hours
                 after the email is sent during County’s normal business hours (Monday — Thursday, 7:00 a.m. to 6:00
                 p.m.) (as recorded on the device from which the sender sent the email), unless the sender receives an
                 automated message or other indication that the email has not been delivered.

                 Any notice required or permitted to be sent under this Contract shall be delivered by hand, by
                 overnight courier, by email to SirsiDynix at legal(@sirsidynix.com, or by registered mail, return
                 receipt requested, to the address of the parties set forth in this Contract or to such other address of the
                 parties designated in writing in accordance with this subsection.


                 Except as otherwise expressly provided in this Contract, any communications between the parties
                 hereto or notices to be given hereunder shall be given in writing by personal delivery, facsimile, or
                 mailing the same, postage prepaid, to Contractor or County at the address or number set forth on the
                 signature page of this Contract, or to such other addresses or numbers as either party may hereafter
                 indicate. Any communication or notice so addressed and mailed shall be deemed to be given five (5)
                 days after mailing. Any such communication or notice delivered by facsimile shall be deemed to be
                 given when receipt of transmission is generated by the transmitting machine. To be effective against
                 County, such facsimile transmission must be confirmed by telephone notice to County’s supervising
                 representative. Any communication or notice by personal delivery shall be deemed to be given when
                 actually delivered.

             13. OWNERSHIP        OF WORK PRODUCT.

                 All work product of Contractor that results from this Contract (the “Work Product’) is the exclusive
                 property of County. County and Contractor intend that such Work Product be deemed “work made
                 for hire” of which County shall be deemed the author. If for any reason the Work Product is not

                                                                  Page 5
DocuSign Envelope ID: 266E9603-7B33-412A-8D4A-C90944B5959C




                 deemed “work made for hire,” Contractor hereby irrevocably assigns to County all of its right, title,
                 and interest in and to any and all of the Work Product, whether arising from copyright, patent,
                 trademark or trade secret, or any other state or federal intellectual property law or doctrine. Contractor
                 shall execute such further documents and instruments as County may reasonably request in order to
                 fully vest such rights in County. Contractor forever waives any and all rights relating to the Work
                 Product, including without limitation, any and all rights arising under 17 USC § 106A or any other
                 rights of identification of authorship or rights of approval, restriction or limitation on use or
                 subsequent modifications. Notwithstanding the above, County shall have no rights in any pre-existing
                 Contractor intellectual property provided to County by Contractor in the performance of this Contract
                 except to copy, use and re-use any such Contractor intellectual property for County use only as
                 allowed by this Contract.




             14. REPRESENTATIONS AND WARRANTIES. Contractor represents and warrants to County that
                 (1) Contractor has the power and authority to enter into and perform this Contract; (2) this Contract,
                 when executed and delivered, shall be a valid and binding obligation of Contractor enforceable in
                 accordance with its terms; and (3) Contractor shall at all times during the term of this Contract, be
                 qualified, professionally competent, and duly licensed to perform the Work. The warranties set forth
                 in this section are in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other warranties provided.

                 A.   Performance Warranty. Contractor warrants that the goods provided to the County shall
                      consistently perform according to the performance characteristics described in the Scope of
                      Work.

                 B.   Service Warranty. Contractor warrants that the goods and services provided herein to the
                      District, if any, will be delivered in a workmanlike manner and in accordance with the highest
                      professional standards. The County agrees to provide Contractor reasonable access to the goods
                      for purposes of repair or replacement under this Service Warranty. Failure of Contractor to
                      promptly correct problems pursuant to this Service Warranty shall be deemed a material breach of
                      this Contract.

             15. SURVIVAL. All rights and obligations shall cease upon termination or expiration of this Contract,
                 except for the rights and obligations set forth in Article [V, Sections], 6, 8, 11, 13, 14, 15, 16, 18, 21,
                 22, 23, 27, 32 and all other terms and conditions which by their context are intended to survive
                 termination of this Contract.

             16. SEVERABILITY. If any term or provision of this Contract is declared by a court of competent
                 jurisdiction to be illegal or in conflict with any law, the validity of the remaining terms and provisions
                 shall not be affected, and the rights and obligations of the parties shall be construed and enforced as if
                 the Contract did not contain the particular term or provision held to be invalid.


             17. SUBCONTRACTS AND ASSIGNMENTS. Contractor shall not enter into any subcontracts for any
                 of the work required by this Contract, or assign or transfer any of its interest in this Contract by
                 operation of law or otherwise, without obtaining prior written approval from the County, except
                 SirsiDynix may assign this Contract to a successor in interest without obtaining prior written approval
                 from the County. In addition to any provisions the County may require, Contractor shall include in
                 any permitted subcontract under this Contract a requirement that the subcontractor be bound by this
                 section and Sections 1, 8, 13, 15, and 26 as if the subcontractor were the Contractor. County’s
                 consent to any subcontract shall not relieve Contractor of any of its duties or obligations under this
                 Contract.

                                                                  Page 6
DocuSign Envelope ID: 266E9603-7B33-412A-8D4A-C90944B5959C




             18. SUCCESSORS IN INTEREST. The provisions of this Contract shall be binding upon and shall
                 inure to the benefit of the parties hereto, and their respective authorized successors and assigns.

             19. TAX COMPLIANCE CERTIFICATION. Contractor must, throughout the duration of this Contract
                 and any extensions, comply with all tax laws of this state and all applicable tax laws of any political
                 subdivision of this state. Any violation of this section shall constitute a material breach of this
                 Contract. Further, any violation of Contractor’s warranty in this Contract that Contractor has complied
                 with the tax laws of this state and the applicable tax laws of any political subdivision of this state also
                 shall constitute a material breach of this Contract. Any violation shall entitle County to terminate this
                 Contract, to pursue and recover any and all damages that arise from the breach and the termination of
                 this Contract, and to pursue any or all of the remedies available under this Contract, at law, or in equity,
                 including but not limited to: (A) Termination of this Contract, in whole or in part; (B) Exercise of the
                 right of setoff, and withholding of amounts otherwise due and owing to Contractor, in an amount
                 equal to County’s setoff right, without penalty; and (C) Initiation of an action or proceeding for
                 damages, specific performance, declaratory or injunctive relief. County shall be entitled to recover
                 any and all damages suffered as the result of Contractor’s breach of this Contract, including but not
                 limited to direct, indirect, incidental and consequential damages, costs of cure, and costs incurred in
                 securing replacement performance. These remedies are cumulative to the extent the remedies are not
                 inconsistent, and County may pursue any remedy or remedies singly, collectively, successively, or in
                 any order whatsoever.

                 The Contractor represents and warrants that, for a period of no fewer than six calendar years
                 preceding the effective date of this Contract, has faithfully complied with: (A) All tax laws of this
                 state, including but not limited to ORS 305.620 and ORS chapters 316, 317, and 318; (B) Any tax
                 provisions imposed by a political subdivision of this state that applied to Contractor, to Contractor’s
                 property, operations, receipts, or income, or to Contractor’s performance of or compensation for any
                 work performed by Contractor; (C) Any tax provisions imposed by a political subdivision of this state
                 that applied to Contractor, or to goods, services, or property, whether tangible or intangible, provided
                 by Contractor; and (D) Any rules, regulations, charter provisions, or ordinances that implemented or
                 enforced any of the foregoing tax laws or provisions.

             20. TERMINATION. This Contract may be terminated for the following reasons: (A) This Contract
                 may be terminated at any time by mutual consent of the parties, or by the County for convenience
                 upon sixty (60) days’ written notice to the Contractor; (B) County may terminate this Contract
                 effective upon delivery of notice to Contractor, or at such later date as may be established by the
                 County, if (1) federal or state laws, rules, regulations, or guidelines are modified, changed, or
                 interpreted in such a way that either the work under this Contract is prohibited or the County are
                 prohibited from paying for such work from the planned funding source; or (i1) any license or
                 certificate required by law or regulation to be held by the Contractor to provide the services required
                 by this Contract 1s for any reason denied, revoked, or not renewed; (C) This Contract may also be
                 immediately terminated by the County for default (including breach of Contract) if (1) Contractor fails
                 to provide services or materials called for by this Contract within the time specified herein or any
                 extension thereof; or (11) Contractor fails to perform any of the other provisions of this Contract or so
                 fails to pursue the work as to endanger performance of this Contract in accordance with its terms, and
                 after receipt of notice from the County, fails to correct such failure within ten (10) business days; or
                 (D) If sufficient funds are not provided in future approved budgets of the County (or from applicable
                 federal, state, or other sources) to permit the County in the exercise of its reasonable administrative
                 discretion to continue this Contract, or if the program for which this Contract was executed is
                 abolished, County may terminate this Contract without further liability by giving Contractor not less
                 than thirty (30) days’ notice.

             21. REMEDIES. (A) In the event of termination pursuant to Section 20(A), (B)(1), or (D), Contractor’s
                 sole remedy shall be payment for the goods and services delivered and accepted by the County, less
                                                                   Page 7
DocuSign Envelope ID: 266E9603-7B33-412A-8D4A-C90944B5959C




                 previous amounts paid and any claim(s) which the County has against Contractor. If previous
                 amounts paid to Contractor exceed the amount due to Contractor under Section 21(A), Contractor
                 shall pay any excess to County on demand. (B) In the event of termination pursuant to Sections
                 20(B)(i1) or 20(C), the County shall have any remedy available to it in law or equity. If it is
                 determined for any reason that Contractor was not in default under Sections 20(B)(11) or 20(C), the
                 rights and obligations of the parties shall be the same as if the Contract was terminated pursuant to
                 Section 20(A). (C) Upon receiving a notice of termination of this Contract, Contractor shall
                 immediately cease all activities under this Contract, unless County expressly directs otherwise in such
                 notice of termination. Upon termination of this Contract, Contractor shall deliver to County all
                 documents, information, works-in-progress and other property that are or would be deliverables had
                 the Contract work been completed. Upon County’s request, Contractor shall surrender to anyone
                 County designates, all documents, research or objects or other tangible things needed to complete the
                 work.

             22. NO ATTORNEY FEES. In the event any arbitration, action or proceeding, including any
                 bankruptcy proceeding, 1s instituted to enforce any term of this Contract, each party shall be
                 responsible for its own attorneys’ fees and expenses.

             23. NO THIRD PARTY BENEFICIARIES. County and Contractor are the only parties to this Contract
                 and are the only parties entitled to enforce its terms. Nothing in this Contract gives, is intended to
                 give, or shall be construed to give or provide any benefit or right, whether directly, indirectly or
                 otherwise, to third persons unless such third persons are individually identified by name herein and
                 expressly described as intended beneficiaries of the terms of this Contract.

             24. TIME IS OF THE ESSENCE. Contractor agrees that time is of the essence under this Contract.

             25. FOREIGN CONTRACTOR. If the Contractor is not domiciled in or registered to do business in the
                 State of Oregon, Contractor shall promptly provide to the Oregon Department of Revenue and the
                 Secretary of State, Corporate Division, all information required by those agencies relative to this
                 Contract. The Contractor shall demonstrate its legal capacity to perform these services in the State of
                 Oregon prior to entering into this Contract.

             26. FORCE MAJEURE. Neither County nor Contractor shall be held responsible for delay or default
                 caused by fire, terrorism, riot, acts of God, or war where such cause was beyond, respectively,
                 County’s or Contractor’s reasonable control. Contractor shall, however, make all reasonable efforts
                 to remove or eliminate such a cause of delay or default and shall upon the cessation of the cause,
                 diligently pursue performance of its obligations under this Contract.

             27. WAIVER. The failure of County to enforce any provision of this Contract shall not constitute a
                 waiver by County of that or any other provision.

             28. COMPLIANCE. Pursuant to the requirements of ORS 279B.020 and 279B.220 through 279B.235
                 and Article XI, Section 10, of the Oregon Constitution, the following terms and conditions are made a
                 part of this Contract: (A) Contractor shall: (1) Make payments promptly, as due, to all persons
                 supplying to the Contractor labor or materials for the prosecution of the work provided for in this
                 Contract; (11) Pay all contributions or amounts due the Industrial Accident Fund from such Contractor
                 or subcontractor incurred in the performance of this Contract; (111) Not permit any lien or claim to be
                 filed or prosecuted against the County on account of any labor or material furnished. (B) If the
                 Contractor fails, neglects or refuses to make prompt payment of any claim for labor or services
                 furnished to the Contractor or a subcontractor by any person in connection with this Contract as such
                 claim becomes due, the proper officer representing the County may pay such claim to the person
                 furnishing the labor or services and charge the amount of the payment against funds due or to become
                 due the Contractor by reason of this Contract. (C) The Contractor shall pay employees for work in
                                                                 Page 8
DocuSign Envelope ID: 266E9603-7B33-412A-8D4A-C90944B5959C




                 accordance with ORS 279B.020 and ORS 279B.235, which is incorporated herein by this reference.
                 All subject employers working under the contract are either employers that will comply with ORS
                 656.017 or employers that are exempt under ORS 656.126. The Contractor shall comply with the
                 prohibitions set forth in ORS 652.220, compliance of which is a material element of this Contract and
                 failure to comply is a material breach that entitles County to exercise any rights and remedies
                 available under this Contract including, but not limited to, termination for default. (D) The Contractor
                 shall promptly, as due, make payment to any person or copartnership, association or corporation
                 furnishing medical, surgical and hospital care or other needed care and attention incident to sickness
                 and injury to the employees of the Contractor, of all sums which the Contractor agrees to pay for such
                 services and all moneys and sums which the Contractor collected or deducted from the wages of the
                 Contractor's employees pursuant to any law, contract or agreement for the purpose of providing or
                 paying for such services.

             29. DELIVERY. All deliveries shall be F.O.B. destination with all transportation and handing charges
                 paid by the Contractor, unless specified otherwise in this Contract. Responsibility and liability for
                 loss or damage shall remain with the Contractor until final inspection and acceptance, when
                 responsibility shall pass to the County except as to latent defects, fraud and Contractor’s warranty
                 obligations.

             30. INSPECTIONS. Goods and services furnished under this Contract will be subject to inspection and
                 test by the County at times and places determined by the County. If the County finds goods and
                 services furnished to be incomplete or not in compliance with the Contract, the County, at its sole
                 discretion, may either reject the goods and services, require Contractor to correct any defects without
                 charge, or negotiate with Contractor to sell the goods and services to the County at a reduced price,
                 whichever the County deems equitable under the circumstances. If Contractor is unable or refuses to
                 cure any defects within a time deemed reasonable by the County, the County may reject the goods
                 and services and cancel the Contract in whole or in part. Nothing in this paragraph shall in any way
                 affect or limit the County’s rights as a Buyer, including the rights and remedies relating to rejection
                 under ORS 72.6020 and revocation of acceptance under ORS 72.6080.

             31. Confidential Information. Contractor acknowledges County 1s subject to the Oregon Public Records
                 Law, Oregon Revised Statutes (“ORS”) Chapter 192 et. seg., and any other applicable state or federal
                 law. Contractor asserts that certain information (the “Confidential Information’) contained in Exhibit
                 A is exempt from disclosure under one or more exceptions including, but not limited to, trade secrets
                 or confidential submissions. County’s disclosure of Confidential Information, in whole or in part, will
                 not be a breach of this Contract if such disclosure was pursuant to a request under the Oregon Public
                 Records Law, or any other state or federal law, or if such disclosure was compelled by deposition,
                 interrogatory, request for documents, subpoena, civil investigative demand, or similar processes. If
                 County is subject to such a disclosure order or receives from a third party any public records request
                 for the disclosure of Confidential Information, County shall notify Contractor within a reasonable
                 period of time of the request. Contractor is exclusively responsible for defending Contractor’s
                 position concerning the confidentiality of the requested information. County is not required to assist
                 Contractor in opposing disclosure of Confidential Information, nor is County required to provide a
                 legal opinion as to whether the Confidential Information 1s protected under ORS Chapter 192, ef. seq.,
                 or other applicable state or federal law.


             32. MERGER. THIS CONTRACT CONSTITUTES THE ENTIRE AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE
                 PARTIES WITH RESPECT TO THE SUBJECT MATTER REFERENCED THEREIN. THERE
                 ARE NO UNDERSTANDINGS, AGREEMENTS, OR REPRESENTATIONS, ORAL OR
                 WRITTEN, NOT SPECIFIED HEREIN REGARDING THIS CONTRACT. NO AMENDMENT,
                 CONSENT, OR WAIVER OF TERMS OF THIS CONTRACT SHALL BIND EITHER PARTY
                 UNLESS IN WRITING AND SIGNED BY ALL PARTIES. ANY SUCH AMENDMENT,
                                                                 Page 9
DocuSign Envelope ID: 266E9603-7B33-412A-8D4A-C90944B5959C




                 CONSENT, OR WAIVER SHALL BE EFFECTIVE ONLY IN THE SPECIFIC INSTANCE AND
                 FOR THE SPECIFIC PURPOSE GIVEN. CONTRACTOR, BY THE SIGNATURE HERETO OF
                 ITS AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE, ACKNOWLEDGES HAVING READ AND
                 UNDERSTOOD THIS CONTRACT AND CONTRACTOR AGREES TO BE BOUND BY ITS
                 TERMS AND CONDITIONS.




                                                             SIGNATURES FOLLOW




             By their signatures below, the parties to this Contract agree to the terms, conditions, and content
             expressed herein.

              Sirsi Corporation dba SirsiDynix                                    Clackamas County
              3300 North Ashton Blvd STE 500
              Lehi,   UT    84043    DocuSigned by:

                                                                          | 14:44         PDT
                                    Scott Wortlingtiw- 25-2022
                                     BDDODFOE60CF45B...
              Authorized Signature                              Date              Chair                       Date
               Scott       worthington                    General   Counsel

              Name / Title (Printed)

              770690-87                                                       Recording Secretary
              Oregon Business Registry #

              FBC/DE                                                          APPROVED AS TO FORM
              Entity Type / State of Formation
                                                                                  Andrew             jeune
                                                                                  Naylor             Sasa
                                                                                  County Counsel               Date




                                                                        Page 10
DocuSign Envelope ID: 266E9603-7B33-412A-8D4A-C90944B5959C




                                                        EXHIBIT A
                                                    CONTRACTORS QUOTE




                                                             Page 11
DocuSign Envelope ID: 266E9603-7B33-412A-8D4A-C90944B5959C

      Quote for LINCC (Libranes in Clackamas County)                                                                               Quote Number 112350

      SirsiDynix Technology Center
      3300 N. Ashton Boulevard,
      Suite 500
      Lehi, UT 84043
      Phone: 800-288-8020



                                                                SirsiDynix


                                                                QUOTE




          Quote 112350 for:


          LINCC (Libraries in Clackamas County)
          LINCC - LTA


         Quote valid until:                 July 26, 2022
         Prepared by:                       Stacy Betts,
                                            Senior Sales Director, New Account Development




      This Quote is hereby fully incorporated into the current Agreement executed between SirsiDynix and Customer, if any. The above information is
      a trade secret, proprietary and confidential and is only for use by the library named above and not to be released.

      Copyright 2022 Sirsi Corporation - All Rights Reserved                                                                         e& SirsiDynix
      Page 1 of 10
DocuSign Envelope ID: 266E9603-7B33-412A-8D4A-C90944B5959C

      Quote for LINCC       (Libranes   in Clackamas         County)                                                                                                        Juote   Number   112350




      Purchase Details
      All prices are in U.S. dollars ($) and are exclusive of taxes unless otherwise noted.
       COMPONENT                                                    Year 1                     Estimated                  Estimated                  Estimated               Estimated
                                                                                                 Year 2                     Year 3                     Year 4                  Year 5

       SirsiDynix Products                                                      6,000                     5,000                        5,150                    5,300                5,450

       SirsiDynix Services                                                      1,330                             -                            -                        -                    -

       Discount                                                               (1,000)                             .                            -                        -                    -

       Active Products Total                                           147,705.82              149,499.41                     149,962.86              153,694.39              157,523.38

       Total                                                        154,035.82                154,499.41                      155,112.86             158,994.39               162,973.38

      Active Products




                                                             BLUEcloud Analytics, Annual Subscription

                                                             BLUEcloud Mobile, Annual Subscription

                                                             BLUEcloud MobileCirc, Annual Subscription

                                                             BLUEcloud Visibility+, Annual Subscription, Tier 10

                                                             Hardware Maintenance for 4 Port Dialogic Card

                                                             Microsoft SQL Server Base License

                                                             Platinum Services Package - Premier

                                                         Platinum Services - Web Services Gateway for 3rd Party
                                                         Apps - included with Platinum Premier subscription

                                                             SIP2 License when purchased with Bibliotheca, 3M,
                                                             OverDrive or EnvisionWare products

                                                             SirsiDynix Enterprise, SaaS Annual Subscription

                                                             SirsiDynix Enterprise SaaS Test System, Annual
                                                             Subscription




      This Quote is hereby fully incorpor           ae into the     current Agreement executed between                  SirsiDynix and Customer,            if any. The above information is
      a trade   secret.   proprietary   and   confidential    and   is only    for   use by the library   named       above    and   not   to be released

      Copynght
         pyng 2022 Sirs Corporation
                          WOT       - AUAll Rights
                                              TI   Reserved                                                                                                                   y SirsiDynix
                                                                                                                                                                             ee) sirsi   ix
      Page 2 of 10
DocuSign Envelope ID: 266E9603-7B33-412A-8D4A-C90944B5959C



                                         SirsiDynix eRC Connector for OverDrive - Annual
                                         Subscription

                                         SirsiDynix eRC Connector for OverDrive - Annual
                                         Subscription

                                         SirsiDynix eResource Central Gateway Services - Annual
                                         Subscription

                                         SirsiDynix eResource Central Gateway Services - Annual
                                         Subscription

                                         SirsiDynix Symphony Data Control, Annual Subscription
                                         [Data Control Package]

                                         SirsiDynix Symphony SaaS 9xx, Per User

                                         SirsiDynix Symphony SaaS Acquisitions

                                         SirsiDynix Symphony SaaS Core

                                         SirsiDynix Symphony SaaS Electronic Data Interchange
                                         (EDI)

                                         SirsiDynix Symphony SaaS OutReach

                                         SirsiDynix Symphony SaaS ReferenceLIBRARIAN

                                         SirsiDynix Symphony SaaS Serials

                                         SirsiDynix Symphony SaaS SmartPORT, Unlimited Users

                                         SirsiDynix Symphony SaaS Test System

                                         SirsiDynix Symphony SaaS Universal SIP2

                                         SirsiDynix Symphony SaaS VPN Subscription

                                         SirsiDynix Symphony SaaS VPN Subscription - Additional
                                         Site

                                         SirsiDynix Web Services SDK for Libraries Internal Use,
                                         Annual Subscription

                                         Symphony Web Services, Basic

                                         Syndetics Unbound Base Package, Annual Subscription

                                         Telephone Messaging v3.0 Maintenance, SW 4-lines

                                         Training - Instructor-Led Value Package, Yearly Subscription

                                         Training - Instructor-Led Value Package, Yearly Subscription




                                                                                                        e&   SirsiDynix
DocuSign Envelope ID: 266E9603-7B33-412A-8D4A-C90944B5959C

      Quote for LINCC (Libraries in Clackamas County)                                                                                     Quote Number      112350




      Initial Term:    Five (5) Years

      Initial Term Annual Price Increase Cap for SirsiDynix Products/Services:                        0% in year 2 followed by 2.9% until Term
      renewal

      The Initial Term and the Initial Term Annual Price Increase Cap set forth above shall apply to Active Products and
      new purchased Products/Services.


      Customer's usage is subject to limitations that can be found in the Terms and Conditions section at the end of the Quote.


      SirsiDynix reserves the right to adjust Initial Term pricing for Third Party/integrated products/services if a Third Party vendor increases pricing
      for Third Party/integrated products/services.


     Any applicable discount shall be applied on final payment. Any and all pre-printed terms and conditions on Customer's Purchase Order(s)
      submitted to SirsiDynix are hereby rejected and shall be superseded by the current Master Agreement,        unless such additional terms are
      statutorily required of the Customer.

      This Purchase Details section may not include pre-existing obligations for ongoing Products not listed in the Quote.




      This Quote is hereby fully incorporated into the current Agreement executed between SirsiDynix and Customer, if any. The above information is
      a trade secret, proprietary and confidential and is only for use by the library named above and not to be released.

      Copyright 2022 Sirsi Corporation - All Rights Reserved                                                                                 er] SirsiDynix”
      Page 4 of 10
DocuSign Envelope ID: 266E9603-7B33-412A-8D4A-C90944B5959C

      Quote for LINCC (Libraries in Clackamas County)                                                                              Quote Number    112350




      Detailed Pricing
     All prices are in U.S. dollars ($) and are exclusive of taxes unless otherwise noted.

       COMPONENT                                                                                                  Qty            Total Price
                                                                                                                                    Year 1




          SirsiDynix eRC Connector for OverDrive Magazines, Annual Subscription

          SirsiDynix SMS Notification for Symphony SaaS, Annual Subscription - 50K                                       1
          Message Package




           SirsiDynix eRC Additional Partner Setup

           SirsiDynix SMS       Notification Software Installation                                                       1




           Project Management for all products in this Quote                                                             1

           SymSMS-1101         Symphony SMS          Notifications, SELF-PACED                                           1




          New   Products    Discount




      This Quote is hereby fully incorporated into the current Agreement executed between SirsiDynix and Customer, if any. The above information is
      a trade secret, proprietary and confidential and is only for use by the library named above and not to be released.

      Copyright 2022 Sirsi Corporation - All Rights Reserved                                                                         &    SirsiDynix’

      Page 5 of 10
DocuSign Envelope ID: 266E9603-7B33-412A-8D4A-C90944B5959C

      Quote for LINCC (Libraries in Clackamas County)                                                                              Quote Number   112350




      Component Descriptions
      Each description below relates to a quantity of one for the component.                  There may be more than one in this Quote.


       SirsiDynix Products
          SirsiDynix eRC Connector for OverDrive Magazines, Annual Subscription

          Provides access through SirsiDynix eResource Central Gateway Services to the approved content of one OverDrive
          Magazines main account.
          It does not include any 3rd Party fees which may be required by the Partner to use the content being accessed.
          This connector requires SirsiDynix Enterprise at version 5.0.2 or higher.



          SirsiDynix SMS Notification for Symphony SaaS, Annual Subscription - 50K Message Package

          Subscription to the SMS Notification feature requires your ILS system to be on SirsiDynix Symphony 3.4.1 Patch
          Cluster 1 or above. Up to 50,000 messages included per year. Messages not used at annual renewal will be forfeit.
          You may change the subscribed package to increase or decrease the number of messages at annual renewal time.
          You may also purchase active top-up package(s) of messages to make up the difference if you have used up the
          subscribed allocation.



       SirsiDynix Services
          Product Delivery

          SirsiDynix eRC Additional Partner Setup

          Includes configuration of one SirsiDynix eResource Central Partner.



          SirsiDynix SMS Notification Software Installation



          Project Management




      This Quote is hereby fully incorporated into the current Agreement executed between SirsiDynix and Customer, if any. The above information is
      a trade secret, proprietary and confidential and is only for use by the library named above and not to be released.

     Cc opyrigight 2022 Sirsi
                          irsi C Corporation
                                         tion         ights R Reserve d
                                              - All Rights                                                                           er] SirsiDynix
                                                                                                                                          itsi    ix’

      Page 6 of 10
DocuSign Envelope ID: 266E9603-7B33-412A-8D4A-C90944B5959C

      Quote for LINCC (Libraries in Clackamas County)                                                                              Quote Number   112350


          Project Management includes the services of a Project Manager. The Project Manager is your primary point of
          contact during the implementation. You will work with your project manager to plan timeframes, schedule resources
          from the professional services team, and coordinate with other departments at SirsiDynix to deliver products and
          services outlined in this quote.

          Depending on the type of implementation, the Project Manager will do the following:
               - Act as your primary SirsiDynix contact during your implementation
               - Identify customer needs and key tasks to be accomplished by both the customer and SirsiDynix to ensure a
               successful implementation
               - Organize meetings with you and appropriate SirsiDynix staff to kick off your implementation project
               - Work with SirsiDynix global operations staff to develop, communicate, and manage the overall
               implementation schedule
               - Bring key SirsiDynix staff onto the project to ensure proper resources are available to meet critical
               milestones of your schedule
               - Report to you regularly via phone and email status reports to keep everyone apprised of project progress
               - Monitor quality control checks at critical intervals in your project
               - Assist with the transition from Implementation phase to Customer Support

          SymSMS-1101               Symphony SMS Notifications, SELF-PACED

          Learn to set up and send SMS                       notifications in batch or individually via SirsiDynix Symphony. This training is
          available in English only.




      This Quote is hereby fully incorporated into the current Agreement executed between SirsiDynix and Customer, if any. The above information is
      a trade secret, proprietary and confidential and is only for use by the library named above and not to be released.

     Cc opyrigight 2022 Sirsi irsi C Corporation
                                             tion         ights R Reserve d
                                                  - All Rights                                                                       Q}    we      a
                                                                                                                                          SirsiDynix

      Page 7 of 10
DocuSign Envelope ID: 266E9603-7B33-412A-8D4A-C90944B5959C

      Quote for LINCC (Libraries in Clackamas County)                                                                              Quote Number   112350




      Terms and Conditions
          Current Contract License Limits:
          Up to 7,410,000 annually circulated items.
          Up to 750,000 titles.
          Up to 250 Staff Users.

          SirsiDynix Professional Services performed by way of remote network access require ssh (Unix/Linux), Remote
          Desktop (Windows) or unattended Logmein Rescue (Windows) access for the duration of the project. The library
          may limit connectivity to the SirsiDynix Corporate IP address or implement a Cisco AnyConnect VPN tunnel.
          Other remote connectivity options may incur additional fees, onsite travel fees or void the ability of SirsiDynix to
          perform the project. A full description can be found in the Access Requirement for Support Guide on our
          customer support website.

          Maintenance must be ordered for all copies of the Software and for all elements of the Software which are used
          conjunctively by Customer. Customer's System shall remain within two (2) previously released software versions
          of the most recent version of the software at all times or an additional maintenance surcharge service charge
          will be added to the maintenance renewal.

          Customer shall not integrate products offered by third parties into Software, Subscriptions or Subscription
          Software without additional license from SirsiDynix.

          SirsiDynix shall have the right to aggregate and retain non-personally identifiable data.


       Payment Terms

          The term of any quoted products is for no less than the Initial Term and shall renew for the length of this agreement.
          Subsequent years' Maintenance and Subscription fees are to be paid annually in advance. Following the first year
          of System operation, Maintenance and Subscription fees will be subject to annual increases as defined in this
          contract. Unless otherwise specifically stated in writing, products and/or services purchased at promotional prices or
          with promotional discounts do not qualify for such discounts or limitations on price increases for subsequent years.


          SirsiDynix Products and Services
          *   100% due upon delivery of the first of any quoted SirsiDynix Products and Services

          Any reference to license metrics and/or licensed amounts included in this quote shall be applicable only to the
          Products and/or services mentioned in this quote.               This document and any software or professional services
          associated with this document are hereby fully incorporated into the current Agreement executed between
          SirsiDynix and Customer. Any and all pre-printed terms and conditions on Customer's Purchase Order(s)
          submitted to SirsiDynix are hereby rejected and shall be




      This Quote is hereby fully incorporated into the current Agreement executed between SirsiDynix and Customer, if any. The above information is
      a trade secret, proprietary and confidential and is only for use by the library named above and not to be released.

     Cc opyrigight 2022 Sirsi
                          irsi C Corporation
                                         tion         ights R Reserve d
                                              - All Rights                                                                           er] SirsiDynix
                                                                                                                                          tect    int

      Page 8 of 10
DocuSign Envelope ID: 266E9603-7B33-412A-8D4A-C90944B5959C

      Quote for LINCC (Libraries in Clackamas County)                                                                              Quote Number   112350

          superseded by the this Agreement,                     unless such additional terms are statutorily required of the Customer.       In the
          event of a conflict, the terms, payment terms, discounts, product lists and/or statement of work contained within this
          document shall take precedence.                     In the event Customer desires or requires updated terms and conditions for the
          continuing business relationship with SirsiDynix, please contact your regional Sales Representative.




      This Quote is hereby fully incorporated into the current Agreement executed between SirsiDynix and Customer, if any. The above information is
      a trade secret, proprietary and confidential and is only for use by the library named above and not to be released.

     Cc opyrigight 2022 Sirsi
                          irsi C Corporation
                                         tion         ights R Reserve d
                                              - All Rights                                                                           er] SirsiDynix
                                                                                                                                          tect    int

      Page 9 of 10
