                                                       ANALYSIS

                                      Item 73: Bureau of Labor and Industries
                                          Civil Rights Division Performance



Analyst:    Ben Ruef

Request:     Acknowledge receipt of the report on the Civil Rights Division performance.

Analysis: The Bureau of Labor and Industries (BOLI) submitted a report on the performance of the Civil
Rights Division required by a budget note in the agency’s budget bill, SB 5515 (2023).

The BOLI Civil Rights Division is responsible for enforcing Oregon's civil rights laws, prohibiting
discrimination in employment, housing, public accommodations, and other areas based on protected
characteristics like race, religion, sex, sexual orientation, national origin, marital status, disability, and
age. Through investigations into filed complaints, the Division determines potential violations, seeking
resolution via mediation, legal action, or other corrective measures if discrimination is found. The
Division also engages in educational outreach efforts, providing training and resources to educate
communities, businesses, and individuals about their rights and responsibilities under Oregon's civil
rights laws, while advocating for equal opportunity and diversity in workplaces and communities
throughout the state.

Workload
Workload for the Division has historically been measured using two data points, number of inquiries and
number of cases filed. Since 2016, this workload data has remained relatively stable with notable
increases in 2018 and 2019 followed by a decrease in 2020.

The “number of inquiries” is a combined               55,000              Civil Rights Workload
count of all of the contacts BOLI receives,           FCO
via phone or email. The report submitted
by BOLI on the Civil Rights Division’s                45,000   a.
performance indicates an increase in
workload characterized by “number of          40,000
                                                     2016  2017         2018         2019         2020        2021     2022
questionnaires.” It is not clear at this time
                                                          m Civil Rights - Inquiries      m Civil Rights - Cases Filed
how the number of questionnaires impacts
the Division’s overall workload when compared to the number of inquires and number of cases filed.

The questionnaire is commonly the first step in the civil rights complaint filing process which is filled out
by the complainant. Each questionnaire is assigned to a staff member for review to determine whether
the allegations may be within the statutory jurisdiction of the Division to investigate. Every single
questionnaire is reviewed and responded to by an investigator. The investigator then determines the
course of action which can lead to a case being filed.

Given the increasing number of questionnaires data introduced in BOLI’s report along with an increasing
backlog there appears to be a bottleneck in this section of the civil rights complaint process.                Currently,
there are a total of four civil rights investigators committed to this intake work.

 Legislative Fiscal Office                                       Joint Interim Committee on Ways and Means — January 2024
The number of filed civil rights cases has remained relatively steady since 2016. However, there has
been a significant increase in the number of open cases over the past six years, pointing towards a
backlog in case investigations. The number of open civil rights cases has almost doubled from 667 in
2018 to 1,247 in 2023. This backlog is primarily attributed to staffing issues related to recruitment,
retention, and allocation, as well as inefficiencies in business processes. Currently, there are 31 civil
rights investigators committed to this work, six of which are dedicated to housing complaints only.

Staffing Growth and Challenges
The BOLI Civil Rights Division has grown substantially in terms of staffing since 2019. The Division’s
position count has grown 56% since 2019, adding 17 new positions over the course of two biennia. Out
of these 17 positions, only seven can be applied to civil rights cases experiencing backlog issues. This is
due to eight positions dedicated through legislative action to housing cases which only makes up 6% of
case investigations. Two of these positions are held vacant due to lack of federal funding.

Despite the fact that BOLI has seven additional positions to address the growing civil rights case backlog,
minimal progress has been made reducing the backlog due to workload capacity issues from high
turnover and failed recruiting in these positions.

The agency competes for intake and investigator candidates with other organizations in Oregon that pay
substantially higher wages for similar positions. At the lower end of the pay scale, many organizations
offer wages 16% to 63% higher than BOLI for similarly classified positions. This wage gap is leading to
failed recruitments and lengthy vacancies. Furthermore, it’s common for BOLI staff to leave these
positions after a short time for higher paying positions elsewhere, further exacerbating the issue due to
the cost of recruitment and training these individuals.

Operational Enhancements
The Division has initiated new procedures to determine the level of engagement desired by
complainants when interacting with BOLI. These procedures aim to accommodate varying levels of
engagement, recognizing that some complainants might only wish to have a letter sent to their
employer or may choose not to pursue complaints at all. This approach allows for more efficient
allocation of resources by the Division.

BOLI has collaborated with an external consultant specializing in optimizing the intake process for law
firms. The resulting report highlights the need for additional financial investment in staff and technology
as the primary solution to address the intake backlog effectively.

The agency is collaborating with the Department of Administrative Services to align the Division's work
with suitable positions. This evaluation aims to achieve two main objectives: ensuring an adequate
number of positions to meet growing service demands and accurately classifying roles for the
recruitment of qualified candidates. Through this collaboration, the Division is strategizing how to
reorganize and reclassify current positions to better match the workload. This involves identifying
underutilized positions and exploring ways to transform them into roles that better serve both the
Division and Oregon's populace. Additionally, the process includes considering alternative classifications
for existing positions that may remain mostly unchanged but are currently categorized inadequately to
reflect the required scope of work.

BOLI is also seeking investment from the Legislature to modernize the agency’s outdated database to
further reduce errors and find efficiencies through automation.

 Legislative Fiscal Office                               Joint Interim Committee on Ways and Means — January 2024
Recommendation:              The Legislative Fiscal Office recommends that the Joint Interim Committee on Ways
and Means acknowledge receipt of the report.




 Legislative Fiscal Office                                    Joint Interim Committee on Ways and Means — January 2024
                                           73
                         Bureau     of Labor and       Industries
                                         Chase


Request: Report on specific performance aspects of the Bureau of Labor and Industries’
Civil Rights Division per the Senate Bill 5515 (2023) budget note.

Recommendation: Acknowledge receipt of the report.

Discussion: Pursuant to a Senate Bill 5515 (2023) budget note, the Bureau of Labor and
Industries (BOLI) was directed to provide a report on specific performance aspects of
the Civil Rights Division (CRD) including an explanation of recruitment and retention
difficulties; impact of unfilled positions; investigation backlog; impact of new staff and
training; and the expedited investigation procedure.

According to the report, CRD’s primary recruitment and retention challenge is that the
salary for a civil rights investigator is not commensurate with the level of expertise
required to effectively resolve complex disputes with significant implications for Oregon
workers and businesses. Similar investigatory employment opportunities are available
with higher-pay accompanied by more manageable caseloads at other state agencies
and throughout the public sector, making those entities a more attractive employment
alternative. To mitigate the compensation challenges impacting recruitment and
retention, BOLI has been working with the Department of Administrative Services to
better align the civil rights investigator position descriptions and classifications with the
complex investigatory work performed.

The compensation issues also contribute to near-constant turnover in CRD. This near-
constant turnover in staff combined with the time required for new employees to
function at their full potential creates additional challenges for CRD managers, staff,
and BOLI's limited human resource capacity. These ongoing challenges have been
exacerbated by a nearly 100 percent increase in civil rights questionnaires filed with
BOLI between fiscal years 2020 and 2023.

There are thousands of Oregonians waiting approximately six months for their
complaint to be drafted, leaving only six months for investigators to investigate, given
the statutory one-year allowed for investigation. To address the staffing challenges and
increasing workload, BOLI has prioritized changes to its antiquated case management
system and complaint portal making the process of drafting complaints more efficient.
CRD has also started new procedures that help identify what level of engagement a
complainant desires from their contact with BOLI, which will allow the CRD to allocate
resources accordingly. BOLI also engaged an outside consultant to identify best
practices associated with intake.




Department of Administrative Services       73-|                             January 12, 2024
                                                                      =u                   CHRISTINA E. STEPHENSON
                                                                      = LABOR &
                                                                      = INDUSTRIES
Senator Elizabeth Steiner, Co-Chair
Representative Tawna Sanchez, Co-Chair
Interim Joint Committee on Ways and Means
900 Court Street NE
H-178 State Capitol
Salem, OR 97301


Dear Co-Chairs:



Nature of the Request

The Bureau of Labor and Industries respectfully submits the attached report (Attachment A) on performance
aspects of the Bureau’s Civil Rights Division, in accordance with a Budget Note associated with Enrolled
Senate Bill 5515 (2023).



Agency Action

In response to the Budget Note, the Bureau gathered and analyzed various data elements to demonstrate the
underlying challenges associated with recruiting and retaining Civil Rights Investigators, and the corresponding
impact these structural challenges have on providing timely relief to Oregon workers and Oregon businesses.
Specifically, the Budget Note directed the Bureau to provide: 1) An explanation of the specific challenges
associated with recruiting Civil Rights Investigators; 2) An explanation of the impact of unfilled positions on the
timeliness within which the Bureau processes Civil Rights complaints; 3) An update on the progress of
reducing the Civil Rights backlog; 4) A description of how new investigators are integrated into the Civil Rights
Division, including the training and guidance provided to those new investigators; and 5) A description of the
recently implemented procedure for expediting a subset of investigations. In addition to responding directly to
the Committee’s inquiries, the Bureau has attached a report from a consultant who specializes in streamlining
the intake process for law firms. The consultant's report concludes that the only solution to the Civil Rights
intake backlog that the Bureau is not currently undertaking, is additional financial investment in both staff and
technology.

The Division’s primary recruiting and retention challenge is that the salary for a Civil Rights Investigator is not
commensurate with the volume of work and level of expertise required to effectively resolve complex disputes
that have significant implications for Oregon workers and Oregon businesses. The Bureau has become a
training ground for private and public sector investigator positions that pay more and require a smaller scope of
expertise. AS BOLI’s report details, these higher-paying positions, that come with more manageable caseloads,
exist at all levels of the public sector, including at other state agencies. Absent a change in the compensation
provided to Civil Rights Investigators at the state’s sole Civil Rights agency serving both private- and public-
sector Oregonians, these recruiting and retention challenges will likely continue.

To address these compensation challenges, the Bureau has engaged with the Department of Administrative
Services to better align its Civil Rights position descriptions with the complex investigatory work performed.
The Bureau looks forward to working with the Legislative Assembly when that process is complete. Future
                                                                                                            i




                                        oregon.gov/boli                   (971) 245-3844
9   Portland » Salem » Eugene       @   Help@boli.oregon.gov              Ore. Relay TTY: 711
legislative support will play a critical role in the Bureau’s ability to work towards our shared goal of eradicating
harassment and discrimination from all Oregon workplaces, our housing market and our places of public
accommodation.

In part because of the above-described compensation issues, the Civil Rights Division has near-constant
turnover. This turnover leads to more work for the Bureau, as limited managerial staff must consistently train
and monitor new employees, limited human resource capacity is utilized to re-fill positions and the investigators
that do remain must carry additional cases to account for the lost productivity. These recruiting and retention
challenges have been exacerbated by a nearly 100% increase in Civil Rights questionnaires filed with the
Bureau between FY 2020 and FY 2023. To address these human resource challenges and an increasing
workload, the Bureau has prioritized changes to its antiquated case management system and complaint portal,
and has implemented process changes to better align the investigation with the complaint and the desires of
the complainant. In addition, the Bureau engaged an outside consultant to identify best practices associated
with intake. The consultant’s report (Attachment B) is attached below.

With the exception of the last two biennia, the resources available to the Civil Rights Division have been
consistently cut since the 1980s, at the same time Oregon experienced a remarkable population boom — a
boom that is reflected in the number of Oregon workers and Oregon employers served by the agency.
Effectively, the agency is now half the size it was 30 years ago. It will take significant and sustained investment
for the Bureau to meet the Oregonians’ record need for Civil Rights enforcement.



Action Requested

The Bureau requests acknowledgment of the receipt of the attached report.



Legislation Affected
None



Sincerely,



    oom
Christina Stephenson
Commissioner, Bureau of Labor and Industries




Enc: As stated




                                         oregon.gov/boli                  (971) 245-3844
9   Portland » Salem » Eugene       @    Help@boli.oregon.gov             Ore. Relay TTY: 711
                                    AttachmentA: CRD        Budget Note Report

                                   By: Oregon Bureau of Labor and Industries

                                                 December 4, 2023

        1. Recruitment and Retention       Difficulties: Further details on the specific
        challenges faced in recruiting qualified applicants for Civil Rights Investigator
        positions including reasons for multiple failed recruitments and the steps being
        taken to address this issue. Further details on specific retention issues including
        pay disparity and updates on the current Department of Administrative Services
        classification and compensation study.

        Overview of recruitment and retention difficulties

        The Division's recruiting and retention challenges manifest themselves in several ways,
        but two examples are particularly illustrative. First, the Bureau experiences significant
        difficulty recruiting qualified candidates for Civil Rights Investigator 1 (intake) positions,
        and second, the Bureau experiences retention issues with the Civil Rights Investigator 2
        classification that are primarily based on pay disparity.

        Civil Rights Investigator 1 (Intake) Positions

        The Civil Rights Investigator 1 position is among the most difficult to recruit for because
        the position pays much less than comparable positions.

        The Civil Rights Investigator 1 (CRI1 or "intake") is the lower level of the two
        investigator classifications. The CRI1 is a salary range 21 on the state salary scale, with
        a monthly salary ranging from $3,790 ($45,480/year) to $5,771 ($69,252/year)1 Salary
        range 21 begins only 5% higher than the salary of an Administrative Specialist 2 (salary
        range 20). This structure effectively limits interested candidates                     to   those   whose
        experience does not align with the demands of the position.

        Civil Rights intake work is intense and challenging — it requires expert-level knowledge
        of more than 50 different state and federal protected classes that may be the basis for a
        complaint filed with the Division. Not only must intake staff be intimately familiar with
        hundreds    of state and   federal   laws,   covering   more   than   50 different protected        classes
        and changing yearly, but these staff members must also be able to identify possible
        bases for complaints when given unclear or inconsistent information from members of
        the public, who likely have no familiarity with what laws may apply to their particular
        situation. This skill set is learned through extensive experience or advanced education.
        Comparatively, under the same collective bargaining agreement, paralegals are
        designated as salary range 26 ($4776-$7,327/month; $57 ,312-$87,924/year).

        It is nearly impossible to fill a position that requires the skills of a paralegal when the
        salary offered is at least 20% less than a paralegal makes outside of the agency.
        Consequently, when CRI1 positions are filled, they are frequently filled at a level that is
        not commensurate with the work. This results in a workload increase as more mistakes


                                     @   oregon.gov/boli                  '   (971) 245-3844
@ Portland - Salem - Eugene              Help@boli.oregon.gov                 Ore. Relay TTY: 711

                                                                                                    Attachment A
                                                                                                     Page 1 of 10
                                                                                                Page 2


         take time to correct, and the increased workload makes the positions even less
         desirable for recruitment and retention. Additionally, the errors that occur due to the
         relatively low classification and a higher level of work slow down the claim processing
         time. If the incorrect violations are drafted in the complaint, the investigator must redo
         the work that should have already occurred.

          In FY23, the Division attempted to fill Civil Rights Investigator 1 vacancies twice. Both
         recruitments failed due to a lack of qualified candidates. As described above, the
         applicants for the position did not have the required skill sets to succeed in the role as
         they were predominantly looking for their first "professional" position.

        In the first recruitment, the highest-scoring candidate at the written assessment stage
        was a massage therapist with no relevant experience, with a score of 65/100 total
        points. For reference, successful candidates generally score in the 85-95% range on the
        written assessment. The second recruitment similarly had underqualified candidates,
        despite updated questions for applicants geared toward legal, writing, and other related
        experience. One recent law school graduate applied but accepted another position
        before moving forward in the application process. The next highest-scoring candidate
        was a high school volleyball coach with no relevant experience. This recruitment also
        failed due to a lack of qualified candidates. Following the two failed recruitments, a
        former BOLI employee who had worked in the Division's intake unit expressed interest
        in returning to work part-time. Due to the difficulty filling this position, that person was
        hired to fill a temporary position in May 2023.



         Civil Rights Investigator 2 (Investigator) Positions

         The Civil Rights Investigator 2 position is among the most difficult to retain because
         people often leave the position for higher pay after gaining experience at BOLI.
         The Civil Rights Investigator 2 (CRI2 or "investigator") is the higher level of the two
         investigator classifications. In addition to identifying 50+ state and federal protected
         characteristics and laws that change yearly, investigators must apply those laws to facts
         that surface from various sources. Due to the low salary compared to the skill set
         required for this position, turnover of investigative staff has continually impacted the
         success of the Division. Investigators tend to move on to higher-paying but otherwise
         similar roles after gaining experience in the Division.

        The salary-skill discrepancy has been magnified increasingly as other entities, including
        other State of Oregon agencies, are provided with resources to support this critical
        work. Further, as other entities have placed more emphasis on establishing internal
        investigatory capacity for their workplaces, there are more opportunities available
        outside the Division to perform the same functions effectively with a higher salary and
        with a much smaller scope of work. Most other entities with similar positions focus only
        on internal civil rights investigations. That means the number of potential complaints


                                       oregon.gov/boli            '   (971) 245-3844
9   Portland + Salern « Eugene     ©   Help@boli.oregon.gov           Ore. Relay TTY: 711



                                                                                            Page 2 of 10
                                                                                                     Page 3


        and cases is limited to the number of employees or customers of that particular entity
        and to the more limited number of laws that apply in those instances. This narrower
        scope, coupled with notable salary differences, makes it exceptionally difficult to retain
        skilled investigators because they can find higher pay and decreased caseloads at other
        places of employment.

        The lack of ability to recruit and retain investigators means that retained investigators
        are beleaguered, picking up the slack of revolving positions. In addition, the training for
        investigators takes many months, so a person in a position will not be productive at the
        expected rate until they are fully trained. Effectively, this Division is only partially staffed,
        even when all positions are filled.

        Inadequate Staffing of Other Positions

        The agency's lack of adequate human resource capacity has also strained the Division.
        For example, one mid-level Human Resources professional was tasked with supporting
        the needs of approximately 150 employees. For the organization's size, it is estimated
        that the agency needs four HR professionals. This lack of capacity has meant that
        recruitment is a lengthy process, as only one individual was working to complete the
        many recruiting functions for new positions in CRD and across the agency. New
        positions are even more challenging to fill with limited human resources capacity as
        they must go through a position description process with DAS that can be lengthy.
        Further, previous disinvestment in human resources capacity has contributed to an
        environment in which not all employees felt welcome and supported, resulting in turmoil
        and turnover.

         DAS    Class/Comp Analysis

        In light of the above, the Bureau has engaged with the Department of Administrative
        Services to better align the work of the Division with the appropriate positions. This
        process utilizes DAS' Class and Compensation expertise to holistically evaluate the
        needs of the Division and the positions that can support that work. The goal of this
        process is twofold: having a sufficient number of positions to meet the continually
        increasing demand for services and appropriately classifying positions so qualified
        candidates can fill them. Through this engagement with DAS, the Division is currently
        determining how best to reorganize and reclassify existing positions to suit the scope
        and volume of work better. This process has involved identifying positions that may not
        currently be used to their highest potential and assessing how those positions could be
        evolved into roles that will better serve the Division and the people of Oregon. The
        process has also involved considering different classifications for existing positions that
        will predominantly remain unchanged but are currently classified in a way that does not
        accurately encompass the work that must be performed.




                                        oregon.gov/boli              rf   (971) 245-3844
9   Portland + Salem + Eugene       ©   Help@boli.oregon.gov              Ore. Relay TTY: 711

                                                                                                Attachment A :
                                                                                                 Page 3 of 10
                                                                                                             Page 4


        Salaries of Comparable        Positions

         Intake:

             e     Oregon Bureau of Labor and Industries: $45,480/year to $69,252/year
             e     OHSU Civil Rights Intake Specialist: $74,194 to $118,539 (as of 9/9/23)
             e     State of Oregon paralegal: $57,312-$87,928/year

         Investigator:

             e     Oregon Bureau of Labor and Industries: $57,312-$87 ,928/year
             e     City of Portland ADA/Civil         Rights  Complaints  Investigator:    $70,220.80-
                   $116,792.00/year (as of 5/22/23)
             e     City of Portland Risk Specialist: $70,211-$116,792/year (as of 10/3/22)
             e     Oregon Department of Education Civil Rights Specialist: $67,884-$104,256/year
                   (as of 10/4/23)
             e     Multnomah County Workplace Investigator: $72,173.41-$108,261.31/year (as of
                   10/3/22)
             e     Oregon Health Authority Civil Rights Investigator: $66,708-$98,376/year (as of
                   10/26/20)
             e     Washington County Employment Investigator: $90,421.80 - $115,354.92/year (as
                   of 10/9/22)
         Manager:

             e     Washington County Civil Rights Officer: $103,263.36-$131,746.44/year (as of
                   10/9/23)
                   TRIMET Civil Rights Manager: $89,803.00-$134,705.00/year (as of 12/9/22)

        Administrator:

             e     OHSU     Office  of  Civil   Rights           Investigations      Director:      $131,372.80   -
                   $223,308.80/year (as of 9/9/23)



        2. Impact of Unfilled Positions: Provide an explanation regarding the impact of
        the   unfilled  Civil  Rights   Investigator  positions  on    the  completion    of
        investigations. This should include data on actual investigator labor hours to date
        over a six-year period and workload (cases). Include information on strategies
        being employed to mitigate the effects of these vacancies.
        Current Vacancies

        Due to marginally increased HR capacity and this year's intense focus on filling
        positions immediately to address the workload, there is currently only one vacant Civil
        Rights Investigator 2 position. With the intake backlog and need for reorganization, the



                                          oregon.gov/boli                   '     (971) 245-3844
9   Portland + Salem » Eugene         ©   Help@boli.oregon.gov                    Ore. Relay TTY: 711


                                                                                                        Page 4 of 10
                                                                                                                     Page 5


        position itself may remain vacant while the budget the position represents is deployed to
        backlog reduction.

        There is one vacant Civil Rights Investigator 1 position. As noted above, this position is
        currently offset by a temporary employee, so the position is effectively not vacant.

        However, as mentioned above, due to the near-constant turnover and the time needed
        for new employees to perform at their full potential, this Division is never fully staffed,
        even when all positions are filled. Having no vacancies at any given time is not, on its
        own,    indicative      of the   challenges   with   recruitment   and       retention.   Over     the    last three
        years, before the most recent failed recruitments, the Division has hired four separate
        people to fill a single Civil Rights Investigator 1 vacancy in the intake unit. Two of the
        individuals who were hired remained employed with the Division for less than one
        month each before finding employment elsewhere.

        Turnover has also been a chronic challenge for the Civil Rights Investigator 2
        classification, as employees frequently move on to higher-paying positions once they
        gain experience. For instance, Multnomah County's Protected Class Complaint
        Investigation Unit, which was just created in 2019, comprises four investigators and a
        manager, all of whom are former BOLI Civil Rights Investigators. Former BOLI
        employees have also accepted positions with Oregon Health Authority, the City of
        Portland, Washington County, and Oregon Health & Science University (salaries
        referenced above for comparison). Sixty percent of investigators currently employed
        with the Division have been hired within the last four years—the Division on average,
        turns over four investigator positions per year.
        Even beyond the investigator classifications, the Division, while able to fill positions, is
        constantly faced with vacancies.      The Division is similarly new to BOLI, with 62% of
        Civil Rights Division employees being hired within the last four years. One hundred
        percent of managers have been hired to their positions within the previous four years.
        The Division has had three different administrators during this same timeframe,
        including seven months with no administrator and three years with two separate interim
        administrators. The Division has also hired five different investigations managers for two
        positions within the last four years, including a four-month period where both positions
        were vacant, a 20-month period where one employee was both an investigations
        manager and the interim administrator, and a 16-month period where one employee
        was both the chief prosecutor and interim administrator.

        Similarly, while the positions may be filled, the Division is regularly unable to hire the top
        candidate because they decline offers of employment due to the offered salary. For
        example, of the 15 investigators hired within the last four years, seven were not the top
        candidate at the end of their recruitment and were hired only after the leading candidate
        declined the offer. This issue also persists in other work units in the Division — while
        recruiting for an administrative staff position, seven candidates declined offers, and the




                                              oregon.gov/boli                    '   (971) 245-3844
9   Portland + Salem » Eugene             ©   Help@boli.oregon.gov                   Ore. Relay TTY: 711



                                                                                                                 Page 5 of 10
                                                                                                                                    Page 6


        eventual successful candidate,             who     was       hired   less       than   one     year           ago,    has     now
        accepted a different position.

         Labor Hours

        The amount of time needed to investigate each case varies, with some requiring two
        hours or less of work and many requiring 50 or more hours of work. To investigate all
        cases fully, investigators would need to work approximately 3,700 hours per year, which
        is nearly double the actual working hours available (2080 work hours — 80 to account for
        estimated vacation and sick leave).

        Figure 1, below, compiles intake-related data over the past six years.         The table
        identifies the number of questionnaires received, the number of intake staff reviewing
        those questionnaires, the number of questionnaires the intake staff can process, as well
        as the remainder of questionnaires creating the intake backlog.
         Figure 1: Intake

         Fiscal    | Questionnaires | Intake               Potential Number of                       Number            unable to
        Year                              Staff            Intakes per year                          process each year!
                                                           (4 hours/intake and                       cumulative amount
                                                           10 intakes/week)                          unable to process
        2018         2381                 2                2080                                      301          /     301
        2019         2604                 2                2080                                      524          /     825
        2020         2554                 2                2080                                      474          /    1299
        2021         3009                 3                3120                                      111.     /        1400
        2022         3748                 3                3120                                      628          /    2028
        2023         4968                 3                3120                                      1848         /    3876


        Figure 2, below, compiles investigation-related data over the past six years. The table
        identifies the number of cases closed, the number of investigators processing those
        cases, the average number of hours spent investigating those cases, as well as the
        number of additional hours it would require to conduct a “complete” investigation.
         Figure 2: Investigation

        Fiscal     | Cases       Investigators           | Avg. Hours               Hours less than a
        Year         Closed                                per Case                 “complete”!
                                                           (2000                    investigation for
                                                           hours/year)              each case


        ' “Complete” is defined as an average of 40 hours to interview Complainant, Respondent, witnesses,
        review documentary evidence, subpoena evidence, and write a dismissal or substantial evidence
        determination. The Division would need approximately double the investigators for all filed cases to
        obtain a “complete” investigation.



                                              oregon.gov/boli                       '     (971) 245-3844
9   Portland + Salem » Eugene         ©       Help@boli.oregon.gov                        Ore. Relay TTY: 711


                                                                                                                             Page 6 of 10
                                                                                                             Page 7


        2018         1786          17                    19                  21
        2019         1850          17                    18                  22
        2020         1355          18                    26.5                13.5
        2021         1755          17                    19                  21
        2022         1732          19                    22                  18
        2023         2069          23                    22                  18
        Mitigating effects of vacancies

        As indicated in Figures 1 and 2, the Bureau's current position authority is not meeting
        the demand. Historically, the Bureau has managed a shortage of Civil Rights
        Investigator 1 positions by running an intake backlog and the shortage of Civil Rights
        Investigator 2 positions by conducting "less-than-complete” investigations. Thus, while it
        is important to address both turnover and vacancies, it is useful to remember that they
        occur in a broader context of high turnover and unsustainable caseloads.

        As mentioned above, there is one Civil Rights Investigator 2 vacancy. Investigators are
        assigned approximately 90-100 cases per year, meaning that there will be an additional
        4-5 cases assigned to each investigator due to the vacancy. One strategy that will
        mitigate the effect of this vacancy and contribute to more efficiency is the
        reimplementation of the expedited investigation procedure described below; this is
        intended to reduce the time needed to investigate cases in which there is not likely
        evidence of the alleged violations.
        After two failed recruitments and the general hiring difficulties described above, the
        effects of the vacant Civil Rights Investigator 1 have been mitigated by hiring a
        temporary employee to help work through the backlog of questionnaires. The Division
        also engaged with an outside consultant, described below, to assist with streamlining
        the intake process to better meet the demand.


        3. Investigation        Backlog:    Update     on      progress   of reducing     the civil rights    case
        backlog.

        The investigation process for cases filed with the Civil Rights Division effectively has two
        phases: intake and investigation. The backlog explained to the legislature in 2023 was
        primarily related to intake. There are thousands of Oregonians waiting approximately six
        months for their complaint to be drafted, leaving a scant six months for investigators to
        investigate, given the statutory one-year allowed for investigation.

        To initiate the process, a member of the public submits a "questionnaire" identifying the
        discrimination they believe they have experienced. Each questionnaire is assigned to a
        staff member for review to determine whether the allegations may be within the
        statutory jurisdiction of the Division to investigate. Every single questionnaire is
        reviewed and responded to by an investigator (to address the backlog, this now
        includes both levels of civil rights investigators). When a questionnaire identifies issues


                                                   ,    boli
                                        ‘S) oregon.gov/boli                  (   (971)
                                                                                  971) 245-3844
9   Portland - Salem + Eugene                Help@boli.oregon.gov                Ore. Relay TTY: 711

                                                                                                       Attachment A .
                                                                                                        Page 7 of 10
                                                                                                 Page 8


        over which the Division may have jurisdiction, the intake investigator must contact the
        submitter to collect any additional information necessary and then draft a formal
        complaint of discrimination that will be the basis of the investigation.

        The intake backlog has ballooned over the years, as demonstrated in Figure 1. In
        FY2020, the Division received approximately 2500 questionnaires. In three short years,
        this number has doubled, with approximately 5000 questionnaires received in FY2023.
        Over the past several years, the backlog has increased each year.
        To address the backlog, this administration has taken several steps. First, we prioritized
        changes to the outdated database and complaint portal. By the beginning of next year,
        drafting complaints will be more efficient and should take less time. We are seeking
        additional investments from the legislature for improving this end-of-life database to
        further reduce errors and manual data entry that takes enormous amounts of staff time.
        The Division has also started new procedures that help identify what level of
        engagement a Complainant desires from their contact with BOLI; some Complainants
        simply want to have a letter sent to their employer and some decide they don't want to
        pursue complaints at all, the new procedures allow the Division to allocate resources
        accordingly.

        In addition, the Civil Rights Division has engaged with an outside consultant who
        specializes in streamlining the intake process for law firms to generate the attached
        report. See Attachment B. The process resulted in a determination that the only
        solution to the intake backlog that the Division is not currently undertaking, is additional
        financial investment in staff and technology.

        Finally, as noted above, BOLI is engaging in a holistic process with DAS to identify how
        to support the work of the Division through restructuring the positions within the
        Division.

        Simply put, if the Legislatively Assembly intends for an intake process that is thorough,
        accurate, and timely, and for each complaint filed with the Bureau to be fully
        investigated, it can only achieve those goals by investing in the work of the Division and
        providing additional resources needed to meet the public's demand for services.



        4. Impact of New Staff and Training: Describe how new investigative staff are
        integrated into the Civil Rights Division, including the training and guidance
        provided to new investigators to expedite their transition and enhance their
        investigative skills.

        New investigative staff have a six-month onboarding period designed to orient them into
        their new roles while introducing them to all the necessary skills and knowledge. New
        investigators begin with intake assignments to familiarize themselves with the many
        laws the Division enforces, use the database, and work with the public on their civil
        rights claims. As investigators become more familiar with the body of work, they slowly


                                      oregon.gov/boli             '   (971) 245-3844
9   Portland « Salem + Eugene     ©   Help@boli.oregon.gov            Ore. Relay TTY: 711

                                                                                            Attachment A .
                                                                                             Page 8 of 10
                                                                                                Page 9


        transition to receiving fewer intake assignments and more investigations. This usually
        takes a month or two, but the length of time varies based on the new employee's needs
        and existing experience.

        As investigators transition into the role of primarily conducting investigations, they will
        be assigned new cases and transferred cases from other investigators in various stages
        of the investigation process. This allows the new investigator to experience cases with
        different requirements, as well as team up with a more seasoned investigator who is
        personally familiar with the case and can provide support and guidance on how to
        conduct the investigation.

        At the end of six months, which coincides with the trial service period, a new
        investigator will have completed all stages of the investigation process, written different
        types of factual determinations, and had hands-on experience conducting investigations
        alongside more senior staff. The result is experienced, well-rounded investigators
        appropriately prepared to investigate most cases.



         5. Expedited Investigation Procedure:     Detail on the recently implemented
         procedure for expedited investigation of non-meritorious cases and its expected
         impact on investigation timelines including data or examples showcasing the
         anticipated improvements resulting from this change.

        With management approval, the expedited investigation or triage procedure allows
        investigators to assess the evidence in a case and spend less time investigating cases
        that cannot be effectively investigated in light of the Division's limited resources. This
        procedure was in place for many years, during which time the Division consistently met
        or exceeded key performance measures related to length of investigation. In late 2019,
        this procedure was eliminated. Figure 3, below, shows this procedure has effect on
        investigation times, as they have continued to increase since early 2020. The table
        identifies the average length of an investigation and the percent of those investigations
        completed within 180 days.
         Figure 3: Average      length of investigations

        Fiscal           Avg.                “% Of
        Year             Investigation       Investigations
                         Length (Days)       Completed in
                                             <180 days
         2017            137                 74%
         2018            128                 75%
         2019            131                 76%
         2020            171                 64%
         2021            223                 38%
         2022            225                 32%


fo) Portland « Salem « Eugene        @   oregon.gov/boli         '   (971) 245-3844
                                         Help@boli.oregon.gov        Ore. Relay TTY: 711

                                                                                           Attachment A .
                                                                                            Page 9 of 10
                                                                                                  Page 10


         This procedure was reintroduced in mid-2023. Data that reflects the anticipated
         changes in lengths of investigations is not available at this time. This is to be expected
         due to the cyclical nature of the workload — it takes approximately one year to start
         seeing the effects of procedural changes because all cases that were open at the time
         of the change must filter out of the system so that data reflects, effectively, a fresh cycle.
         However, it is clear from historical data that the expedited investigation and triage
         procedure positively influences the time needed to conduct investigations. It allows the
         Division to focus resources on the cases that need them the most and where the
         Division can be most effective.

        Further, the legislature has changed the KPM for length of investigation to include a
        tiered metric, requiring 40% of cases to be completed within 180 days, 65% of cases
        completed within 240 days, and 100% of cases completed within 365 days. This
        updated KPM is meant to acknowledge the importance of this work that is being done.
        Investigations should not be measured by quantity but by quality. While it is of utmost
        importance to complete investigations in a timely manner, what is "timely" is different for
        every case, and it is a disservice to the people of Oregon to prioritize speed over
        accuracy when we are investigating their allegations of discrimination and retaliation.
        The tiered length of investigation KPM gives investigators flexibility to have cases open
        longer when they need more time to gather the information necessary to make an
        informed and accurate determination while still incentivizing the closure of cases for
        which extensive investigation is not required.


         Conclusions

         The resources of the Division have been consistently cut since the 1980s, leaving the
         agency about half of its previous size. Over the past three biennia, however, the
         legislature has gradually increased its investment in the agency. It will take significant,
         sustained investment for BOLI to meet Oregonians’ record needs. BOLI is the state's
         sole civil rights agency serving the entire population of Oregon. In addition, the
         legislature has given Oregonians rights that can only be enforced through BOLI. In
         order to ensure that the laws passed by the legislature are enforced and that bad actors
         do not have a competitive advantage in this state, BOLI will continue to need investment
         by the legislature.




                                        oregon.gov/boli             '   (971) 245-3844
9   Portland + Salern « Eugene      ©   Help@boli.oregon.gov            Ore. Relay TTY: 711


                                                                                              Page 10 of 10
Oregon Bureau of Labor and Industries,
Civil Rights Division Intake Process
Initial Assessment Report
John E. Grant
Agile Attorney Consulting
August 22, 2023


Overview
In June 2023, | conducted a brief initial assessment of the Oregon Bureau of Labor and
Industries Civil Rights Division intake process, with an eye towards understanding the
scope and nature of the intake backlogs. This assessment consisted of conversations
with Leila Wall, a review of intake team data provided by the division, a team
retrospective with the intake team and other stakeholders within the Civil Rights
Division, and observations during a 2-day Kanban Process Improvement training with
members of the Civil Rights Division.


Retrospective Findings
The team retrospective consisted of semi-anonymous' answers to the three
questions of an Agile retrospective: What is going well that we should keep doing?
What is not going well that we should stop or change? and What should we try that
is new or different? Each participant developed individual answers to each question
(taken in turn) over a 2-3 minute independent work period in order to encourage
individual ideation and broaden discussion. The team then spent 15-20 minutes
grouping and discussing each answer to find commonalities and uncover more
detail about common answers.


Below is my summary and interpretation of the answers to each question.



' Participants in the room knew which people made comments or observations, but identifying information
was internationally not preserved in meeting artifacts




                                                                                            Attachment B
                                                                                             Page 1 of 10
Question 1: What is going well that we should keep doing / preserve?


Team members identified a supportive work environment, good communication,
positive team dynamics, and a lack of micromanagement. People were generally
happy with their work-life balance through flexible hours and remote work options.
One team member praised the “stick-to-it-ivness” of the team, especially through
the elevated case loads and turbulence of the pandemic.


The team was also generally positive about the shift towards new technologies,
such as electronic filing and the use of DocuSign for signatures (although
technology challenges also came up later). Other initiatives, including changes to
the intake questionnaire and the Survey Monkey project, showed promising
progress.


Question 2: What is not going well that we should stop or change?


Despite the positives concerning communication identified above, the team felt
that the communication remained a challenge. Several comments reflected a
feeling that the division's work was overly siloed across different functions, leading
to a perceived hierarchy among the civil rights division teams. Individual
contributors expressed a desire for more involvement in management
decision-making and clearer internal communication about these decisions. Team
members also identified a need for clearer job duties, policies, and workflow
procedures, both within individual teams and as cases flow from one team to the
next.


One particular answer — “too many touches” — received a lot of discussion and
agreement that process inefficiency overall is a significant problem. Similar answers
included “lack of clear policies and procedures,       Wa
                                                            too many emails,”   We
                                                                                     “unclear job
duties,   Wat.
                 too much human error,” and “insufficient new employee training.”


Several comments reflected           a ‘traumatized workforce’ still recovering from the
pandemic's impact, its influx of new questionnaires and cases, and the continuing
backlog. The team generally felt that key roles were still understaffed, both in




                                                                                            Attachment B
                                                                                             Page 2 of 10
management and for individual contributors. This led to “stress because | can never
get everything done.”


The team identified specific workflow problems caused by insufficient detail being
captured by the (then-current) intake questionnaire and only limited information
being provided to complainants regarding the basis and process for the CRD to
perform an investigation. This has frequently led to a need for multiple
back-and-forth conversations between CRD staff (both      intake and investigators) and
the complainant, where each round of communication adds time and overhead to
the overall process. The team was hopeful that planned changes to the intake
questionnaire would help, but believed that many more improvements were
needed to improve the amount of information they receive from complainants,
automated information that could flow back to a complainant regarding the status
of their matter,   and the information available to the public about the complaint
process in general.


The shift to electronic case file management and the Impact database elicited
mixed feelings. Some staff missed paper files, while others had complaints about
the Impact database. One team member also reported that internet connection
issues during remote work were affecting efficiency.


Question 3: What should we try (or continue) that is new or different?


Many of the suggestions for improvements reflected a need for better
communication with individuals filing questionnaires or complaints. Team
members suggested using automated emails to communicate filing status and
substantive information to complainants, improving the roadmap to communicate
the overall process, and providing additional navigation and substantive
information on the BOLI website.


The team again highlighted the need for more staff, especially in the intake team.
They also proposed more cross-division meetings and team-building efforts to
address perceived silos within the division.




                                                                             Attachment B
                                                                              Page 3 of 10
The team recommended several technological enhancements, such as continuing
to improve the questionnaire on the website, improving the Impact database, and
creating an online portal for complainants to check their complaint status.


One other suggestion that elicited discussion was to allow some complainants to
draft their own complaints to free up staff for more advanced investigatory work.




Intake Team Data Analysis

Based on data provided by the Civil Rights Division management,’ it is clear that
demand for Division resources since the start of 2022 has exceeded the capacity of
those resources. This is especially stark for the intake team.


Intake Backlog Growth
The three month rolling average of new questionnaires received grew from 296 in
February 2022 to 413 in May 2023, a 40% increase. During that time, an average of
69 questionnaires were added to the backlog each month, despite a successful
push to reduce the backlog by 195 cases in October and November 2022.


The backlog grew despite a 35% increase in the three month rolling average of
questionnaires assigned to an intake team member over the same time period
(from 228 questionnaires assigned to 307). Taken independently, the intake team’s
increased productivity should be considered a substantial success; the rolling
average reached 428 during the late-2022 backlog production push. Unfortunately,
this success is masked by the unrelenting growth in demand as represented by new
questionnaires received.




2 See Appendix A




                                                                              Attachment B
                                                                               Page 4 of 10
                                Initial Disposition of questionnaires received


                                                          Initial Processing of Questionnaires Received
 1400                                                                                                                                                                         200%



                                                                                                                                                                              180%
 1200

                                                                                                                                                                              160%


 1000
                                                                                                                                                                              140%




                                                                                                                                                                              120%



                                          e                                                     :                       5                                                     100%

  600
                                                                                                                                                                              80%




                                                                                                                                                                              60%9
  400




                                                                                                                                                                              20%




        12/21   1/22   2/22     3/22     4/22      5/22       6/22   7/22      8/22      9/22       10/22     11/22     12/22      1/23       2/23       3/23   4/23   5/23

                          —®—    Questionnaires Received       —®—   Questionnaires Assigned                Backlog Growth      e*@-+-+   Percent Assigned




Ramifications of the Backlog Growth
Based on interviews with intake team members and managers, the excess growth
in demand (in the form of new questionnaires submitted) relative to capacity leads
to several suboptimal outcomes.


1. Processing questionnaires in an “out of order” manner.


In an ideal situation, the intake team would process questionnaires in a first-in,
first-out (FIFO) order, i.e. questionnaires would be processed in the order in which
they are received. This would provide maximum fairness to people submitting
questionnaires, and would help create consistency in the period between when
questionnaires are received and when they are processed.


For a variety of reasons — including statute of limitations concerns — the large
backlog creates some incentive for the intake team to give preference to




                                                                                                                                                                   Attachment B
                                                                                                                                                                    Page 5 of 10
questionnaires with older instances of alleged misconduct. Not only does this
require additional processing time to determine how to prioritize cases (as opposed
to a FIFO approach), it can create a situation where people who procrastinate filing
their questionnaires get faster response times than those who make timely filings.


2. Ballooning Wait Times for Newly Received Questionnaires


While the data set reviewed does not contain processing time ona
per-questionnaire basis, we can use Little’s Law’ to predict how growth in the
backlog leads to growth in the total wait time. According to Little’s Law, the average
wait time (W) for a unit of work in a system is equal to the average number of items
in queue for that system (L) — I.e. the backlog — divided by the average arrival rate
of new items into the system (A).




Even without knowing the actual wait times for the CRD intake team to process
questionnaires, we can calculate the average wait time for a single questionnaire to
be roughly 10 times longer in May 2023 (approximately 86 days) than it was in
December 2021 (approximately 8 days).*

Recommended               Next Steps
Based on the feedback from the team retrospective, conversations with team
members, and a preliminary analysis of available data, | offer the following
recommendations for the Civil Rights Division to improve (or in some cases continue to
improve) its processing of questionnaires and subsequent complaints:




3     .      pos   .      spose   0


4 The backlog size (L) in December 2021 was 87 questionnaires and the arrival rate (A) was 323
questionnaires per month, which puts calculated wait time (W) at .27 months (~8 days). The backlog size
(L) in May 2023 was 1,247 questionnaires and the arrival rate (A) was 433 questionnaires per month,
which puts calculated wait time (W) at 2.88 months (~86 days).




                                                                                            Attachment B
                                                                                             Page 6 of 10
(1) Continue the strategy of right-sizing the Intake team to manage the growing
workload of new questionnaires.


Although the Intake Team has made laudable strides in its productivity in the face of a
growing number of questionnaires, it is unrealistic to expect that the current backlog
can be managed without adding additional members to the team.

(2) Continue efforts to improve the questionnaire submission form and process,
but do so with an eye towards improving user experience and education.


Based on initial feedback from intake team members, the recent changes to the intake
questionnaire form on the BOLI website to encourage complainants to provide more
information when submitting questionnaires has helped improve the quality of initial
questionnaire submissions. Anecdotally, intake team members report that this
improved quality means that they need to spend less time engaging in back-and-forth
communications with complainants to gather sufficient information to make a
determination whether to draft a formal complaint.


Based on a preliminary review of the revised intake questionnaire, however, | have
some concerns that the design, functionality, and usability of the new form may create
barriers to access that could discourage people with otherwise valid complaints from
completing the questionnaire process. The Bureau should consider engaging the
services of a Usability, User Experience, or Interaction Design professional to conduct a
heuristic evaluation? of the online intake questionnaire and recommend
improvements.


Ultimately, the division will need to make policy decisions® that balance public
accessibility with the need to improve the quality of information contained within
questionnaire submissions prior to devoting intake team resources to processing the
questionnaire. Once a policy is developed and implemented, the agency can use
accessible design and user experience principles to increase accessibility in a way that
doesn't overburden its intake and investigation resources.

° “Heuristic evaluation is a process where experts use rules of thumb to measure the usability of user
interfaces in independent walkthroughs and report issues. Evaluators use established heuristics (e.g.,
Nielsen-Molich’s) and reveal insights that can help design teams enhance product usability from early in
development.” see httos://Awww. interaction-design.org/literature/topics/heuristic-evaluation
® This is consistent with the “make policies explicit” prong of the Kanban Method.




                                                                                              Attachment B
                                                                                               Page 7 of 10
(3) Implement a kanban-based workflow management system (or ticketing
system) to manage and track the status of cases through the intake and
complaint processes.

Modern support teams have increasingly turned to kanban-based visual management
systems like Kanbanize, Jira, ServiceNow, etc.’ to track work progress, visualize
dependencies, capture workflow data, and accelerate the delivery of customer value.
These tools can also help support teams track and triage different case types, create
and manage service level agreements (SLAs) for predicting time-to completion of work
stages, and enhance communication among team members and across teams.


Once established and tested, a well-designed ticketing system would also serve to push
Status updates to complainants (people who have submitted a questionnaire or are in
the investigation process), potentially reducing the need for BOLI personnel to respond
to status requests (which were identified in the team retrospective as a source of
low-value-added work).


Ultimately, a well thought-out ticketing system could form the backbone of a broader
dispute resolution management system, similar in concept to the British Columbia Civil
Resolution Tribunal® (the gold-standard for collaborative online dispute resolution
implementations).


(4) Continue to utilize the Kanban Method (and related Lean and Agile methods)
to engage in process and operations improvement.


Regardless of when or whether the intake and investigation teams are able to adopt a
kanban-based workflow management system, the Division can still use the tenets and
teachings of the Kanban method to continue to make systemic improvements.
Specifically, the Division should continue efforts to document and improve internal
workflow policies and procedures, to limit in-progress work to the actual carrying
capacities of its teams, to use data to measure and encourage the flow of work through

” Some ticketing systems like Jira and Azure DevOps are designed around technology development
teams, others like ServiceNow or ZenDesk are designed for customer service and support applications.
Still others (Kanbanize, KanbanZone, Asana) are more general purpose. Part of any transition to a
kanban-based system would be requirements definition and system selection.
8 See https://civilresolutionbc.ca/. The Civil Resolution Tribunal currently provides self-help information
and dispute resolution services for homeowner association disputes (known as “strata disputes” in
Canada), small claims, and certain motor vehicle accidents.




                                                                                                 Attachment B
                                                                                                  Page 8 of 10
its processes and systems, and to engage in collaborative efforts to increase flow and
accelerate the appropriate resolution of complaints.




                                                                              Attachment B
                                                                               Page 9 of 10
Appendix A: CRD Intake Data December 2021 to May 2023

intake data

questionnaires received 12/21-5/23                    6251
“6/20-11/21                                           4888
questionnaires assigned 12/21-5/23                    4998
"6/20-11/21                                           4440
cases opened 12/21-5/23                               2572
“6/20-11/21                                           2432
complaints drafted, not returned 12/21-5/23           1026
“6/20-11/21                                            810
Signed complaints received 12/21-5/23                 1500
“6/20/11/21                                           1800




monthly stats                                 12/21           1/22         2/22         3/22          4/22          5/22          6/22         7/22          8/22          9/22         10/22          11/22          12/22           1/23            2/23            3/23          4/23         5/23          total
qrec                                                   323           279          285          338           323           305           362          288           383           329           354             336           344            357             399             456           351          433            6245
QA                                                     236           202          245          371           324           225           140          139           256           234           418             595           271            280             142             294           246          380            4998
difference (what turns into backlog)                    87            77           40           -33            -1           80           222          149           127            95            64            -259            73             77             257             162           105           53            1247

NJ letters sent                                        137           233          137          155           147            66           100          139           103           103           169            236            244            202             116             100           107          191
complaints drafted                                     155           139          125          252           218           136           131          118           154           172           166            156            153            155             113             131           146          101
complaints revised                                       10           21           20           28            27             18           22            13            13           24             16             is             is             17             10               13           23            12
total activities                                       302           393          282          435           392           220           253          270           270           299           351            407            412            374             239             244           276          304

signed complaints received                              52            72           93           95           146            84           103           78            69            77            77              76            30                87           76              64            66           95            1500
cases opened                                            87            52           88          171           115           161           157           87            62            93            62              80           109                37          142             248           100          122




individual data (anonymous)                   intake1    intake2    intake3    invest.1    invest2    invest3    invest4    investS    invest6    invest7    invest8                                   invest9        invest10        invest11        investi2        invest 13
complaints drafted since 12/1/21                     572        586        601          83         21         62         22         73         91         35         53                                          34              39              29              63            15
NJ letters sent since 12/1/21                          672           379          558           84            10           188            41          107            86            25            24              35              14              11              73            39




                                                                                                                                           10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Attachment B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Page 10 of 10
