Housing Stability Council
MEETING MATERIALS PACKET




                                        Canopy Apts.
                                         Portland, Or



              June 7, 2024
          9:00 a.m. – 2:00 p.m.
  Oregon Housing & Community Services
                Webinar
                                                                AGENDA
Council Members:                              June 07, 2024 9:00 a.m. – 2:00 p.m.
Claire Hall, Chair                         Oregon Housing and Community Services
Sami Jo Difuntorum                            725 Summer St NE, Salem OR 97301
Mary Ferrell
Maggie Harris
Mary Li
                                                        Webinar Mtg Only
Erin Meechan                               Public register in advance for this webinar
Javier Mena
Kristy Rodriguez                         *Please note the new public hearing process
Sharon Nickleberry Rogers


                                                                                                     SWHP
    TIME                                             TOPIC                                                               ACTION
                                                                                                    Priority
    9:00        Meeting Called to Order                                                                                  Call Roll

    9:05        Report of the Chair                                                                                      Briefing

    9:15        Report of the Director                                                                                   Briefing

                Homeownership Division (pg. 04)
                Keeble Giscombe, Director of Homeownership Division
    9:30             •      Public Hearing Comments in accordance with ORS 456.561                                       Decision
                     •      Homeownership Development Project Approvals: Jessica
                            MacKinnon
                Affordable Rental Housing Division (pg. 08)
                Natasha Detweiler-Daby, Director of Affordable Rental Housing Division

                     •      Public Hearing Comments in accordance with ORS 456.561
                                                                                                                         Decision
                     •      Transactions: Tai Dunson-Strane, Assistant Director Production
                                o Ollie Court
    10:00
                     •      PuSH Seller’s Tax Credit introduction: Love Jonson, Planning &                               Briefing
                            Policy Analyst; Rick Ruzicka, Assistant Director of ARH Planning &
                            Policy
                     •      HUD PRICE Grant: Brit McClean, Planning & Policy Analyst; Rick
                            Ruzicka, Assistant Director of ARH Planning & Policy
    11:30                                         15 min Break
                Disaster Recovery & Resilience (pg. 24)
                     Ryan Flynn, Assistant Director, Disaster Recovery & Resilience
    11:45            •      Public Hearing Comments in accordance with ORS 456.561                                       Decision
                     •      Royal Oaks Funding Approval: Ryan Flynn, Assistant Director,
                            Disaster Recovery & Resilience
                Housing Stabilization Division (pg. 29)
                Liz Weber, Interim Director of Housing Stabilization Division
    12:15                                                                                                                Briefing
                     •      Water Program Closeout Report: Hilda Rodriguez, Water
                            Assistance Specialist; Joy Aldrich, Energy Services Business Analyst
                Government Relations
    12:45       Amy Nehl, Director                                                                                       Briefing
                     •      Budget Process Overview: Presentation only

    2:00        Meeting Adjourned

 The Housing Stability Council will provide public hearing time in accordance with ORS 456.561. Council’s review of loan, grant or
                other funding award proposals under this section shall be held at a public hearing of the council.
A public hearing is a formal proceeding held in order to receive testimony from all interested parties, including the general public,
        on a proposed issue or action. A public hearing is open to the public but is regarding a specific proposal/project.
            All times listed on this agenda are approximate and subject to change. Agenda items may also be taken out of order and
               addressed at different times than listed. The agenda may be amended by the Council at the time of the meeting.
                                                                AGENDA
Council Members:                             June 07, 2024 9:00 a.m. – 2:00 p.m.
Claire Hall, Chair                        Oregon Housing and Community Services
Sami Jo Difuntorum                           725 Summer St NE, Salem OR 97301
Mary Ferrell
Maggie Harris
Mary Li
                                                       Webinar Mtg Only
Erin Meechan                              Public register in advance for this webinar
Javier Mena
Kristy Rodriguez                        *Please note the new public hearing process
Sharon Nickleberry Rogers




The Housing Stability Council helps to lead OHCS to meet the housing and services needs of low-
and moderate-income Oregonians. The Housing Stability Council works to establish and support
OHCS’ strategic direction, foster constructive
partnerships across the state, set policy and issue
funding decisions, and overall lend their unique
expertise to the policy and program development                                     Statewide Housing
of the agency.
                                                                                    Plan Policy
The 2019-2023 Statewide Housing Plan outlines six
policy priorities that focuses OHCS’ investments to                                 Priorities
ensure all Oregonians have the opportunity to
pursue prosperity and live from poverty.
                                                                                              Equity & Racial Justice



                                                                                              Homelessness



                                                                                              Permanent Supportive Housing



                                                                                              Affordable Rental Housing
   For more information about the Housing Stability Council
  or the Statewide Housing Plan, please visit Oregon Housing
              and Community Services online at
   https://www.oregon.gov/ohcs/OSHC/Pages/index.aspx                                          Homeownership



                                                                                              Rural Communities




 The Housing Stability Council will provide public hearing time in accordance with ORS 456.561. Council’s review of loan, grant or
                other funding award proposals under this section shall be held at a public hearing of the council.
A public hearing is a formal proceeding held in order to receive testimony from all interested parties, including the general public,
        on a proposed issue or action. A public hearing is open to the public but is regarding a specific proposal/project.
           All times listed on this agenda are approximate and subject to change. Agenda items may also be taken out of order and
               addressed at different times than listed. The agenda may be amended by the Council at the time of the meeting.
DATE:         June 7, 2024

TO:           Housing Stability Council
              Andrea Bell, Executive Director

FROM:         Jessica MacKinnon, Senior Homeownership Development Program Analyst
              Talia Kahn-Kravis, Assistant Director of Homeownership Programs
              Keeble Giscombe, Director of Homeownership

SUBJECT:      NOFA #2024-HOD LIFT & LIFT Supplemental Funding Recommendations



Motion: Approve 3 projects recommended by staff for NOFA #2024-HOD including $6,398,127
in LIFT Homeownership funds (Article XIQ Bonds) and $1,001,873 LIFT Supplemental funds
(general funds).

Summary: The Homeownership Division has completed another round of scoring for the 2024
Homeownership Development Notice of Funding Availability (NOFA) and recommends
awarding the following projects:

                                                          Set-Aside
 Project               Awardee                  Units                   Recommended Award
                                                          Eligibility
 Abbey Lot                                                              $1,398,127 LIFT
                       Self Enhancement, Inc      8         Equity
 Townhomes                                                              $201,873 Supplemental
                       Bend-Redmond
 Timber Cottages                                 13         Equity      +$800,000 Supplemental
                       Habitat for Humanity
 Woodhaven
                       Thistle & Nest            38                     $5,000,000 LIFT
 Community Housing 3
                                                                        $6,398,127 LIFT
                       Total                     59      66% Equity
                                                                        $1,001,873 Supplemental

Background
The objective of the LIFT Homeownership Program is to build new affordable homes for low-
income households. With a focus on increasing housing supply, LIFT funds can only be used for
new construction, and homes must be ready for sale within 36 months of receiving a funding
reservation. Applicants may be awarded LIFT funding up to the value of the land plus site
work/infrastructure or $200,000, whichever is lower.




                                    June 7, 2024 HSC Material                                     4
LIFT Supplemental is a more flexible funding source awarded in addition to LIFT in situations
where LIFT is not enough to support the required affordability. Due to the limited availability of
these funds, LIFT Supplemental funding is only available to rural, emerging, and small
developers, and those with a commitment to equity demonstrated through the scoring criteria
up to $800,000 per entity.

On May 3, 2024, Housing Stability Council awarded 10 projects a total of $19,415,606 LIFT and
$3,570,000 LIFT Supplemental.

Equity in the NOFA
During the May meeting, Housing Stability Council members expressed interest in further
understanding the equity lens with which OHCS reviews applications.

Equity and Engagement is one of six categories that applicants must achieve a minimum score
in order to proceed and the determining factor in whether applicants are eligible for LIFT
Supplemental funding under the commitment to equity eligibility. Scoring criteria under this
category are designed to ensure that applicants take an equitable approach to all or most
stages of development, home sales, and beyond. Specifically, the criteria consider the
following:
    • Organizational Equity, Diversity, and Inclusion: OHCS considers whether applicants take
       an equitable approach to their own internal processes. Scorers consider whether the
       overall community and any specific target communities are equitably or substantially
       represented by the staff and board and confirms that DEI policies are implemented and
       evaluated for success. OHCS will continue to hold the awardee accountable to these
       policies through quarterly progress reports.
    • Identifying Target Communities: OHCS ensures that a target community beyond low-
       income households is defined and that the applicant has a firm understanding of the
       community’s needs. Additionally, OHCS evaluates whether the applicant has
       demonstrated a history of serving this community and other BIPOC households.
    • Community Centered Design: OHCS determines to what extent applicants engaged with
       the target community or neighborhood during the development of their project, if
       participants were compensated, and how that community feedback was included in the
       final design of the project. This seeks to ensure that homes benefit the community in
       which it is built while also meeting the needs of the homebuyers.
    • MWESB: OHCS reviews any policies addressing the hiring of Minority, Women Owned,
       Emerging Small Business and Service-Disabled Veteran Business Enterprises to ensure
       that applicants have sufficient marketing and outreach to these firms so that they will
       be successful in meeting regional MWESB goals.
    • Homebuyer Outreach: OHCS evaluates methods of reaching out to and selecting
       homebuyers that is both equitable and follows fair housing requirements. Scorers look


                                     June 7, 2024 HSC Material                                  5
       for strategies such as multilingual outreach channels, community connections, and
       partnerships with Culturally Specific Organizations, as well as other creative strategies.
   •   Homebuyer Support: OHCS seeks to understand the level of support that the applicant
       provides, whether through its own services or through partnerships. Scorers look for a
       menu of supportive services both pre- and post-purchase, paying special attention to
       whether or not that support is flexible or tailored to homebuyers of the target
       community.

Equity and Engagement is the most substantial section of the application and requires
applicants to provide a significant amount of information about their processes. This section
also required the most thorough review from scorers. In order to receive LIFT Supplemental
under the Equity category, applicants must demonstrate sufficient processes and consideration
in all of these categories.

Recommendations
After careful review and collaboration among scorers and applicants, the Homeownership
Division is pleased to present the following recommended projects for LIFT and LIFT
supplemental funding.

Abbey Lot Townhomes – Self Enhancement, Inc
Self Enhancement, Inc (SEI) is a culturally specific organization seeking to make a lasting impact
on the historically displaced community affected by the rapid gentrification in Portland. As part
of a larger effort to reconnect African American families to the Albina District after a long
history of exclusion and displacement, these homes and the supporting outreach strategy seek
to bring those whose families have been displaced back to this neighborhood. The
development will provide 8 3-bedroom townhomes with front porches and private outdoor
space. Homes will be solar-ready, feature native landscaping and irrigation reduction
techniques, and all units will align with Portland’s vistability standards. Homeowners in this
development will have access to services through SEI’s Community and Family Programming
including energy assistance, domestic violence prevention and support, housing assistance, and
parenting support, and children of the homeowners will have access to SEI’s in-school services.
The total project cost is $6,702,725. OHCS recommends awarding the project $1,398,127 LIFT
and $201,873 LIFT Supplemental.

Timber Cottages – Bend-Redmond Habitat for Humanity
Between 2020 and 2024, the median home price in Deschutes County has increased from
$411,000 to $670,000. The increase in cost alone is more than the typical Habitat for Humanity
homeowner can afford. This development will provide 13 single-family cottage homes in
Redmond near both schools and services for less than $200,000. The development will include
both 2- and 3-bedroom homes and vary between one and two stories to address different


                                     June 7, 2024 HSC Material                                      6
needs including aging in place and accessibility needs. Each home will include all-electric energy
efficient design, solar panels and native, drought-resistant xeriscaping. In 2023, Bend-Redmond
HfH hired a CEO with a strong comment to incorporate equity, diversity, and inclusion in all
levels of the organization. One such activity includes community listening sessions to identify
housing needs of their target communities. Community members attending these sessions
were paid for their time.
The total project cost is $5,976,450. OHCS awarded this project $1,450,000 LIFT on May 3, 2024
and recommends adding $800,000 LIFT Supplemental.

Woodhaven Community Housing 3 – Thistle & Nest
This 38-unit project is the third affordable phase and fifth and sixth overall phase of the much
larger Woodhaven development in Bend which includes a wealth of affordable and market-rate
housing. Thistle & Nest’s homes are sizeable 2- and 3-bedroom homes between 1,030 and
1,560 sq ft, solar-ready, and include a one-car garage and private outdoor storage. All units are
visitable, constructed to Earth Advantage Platinum standards, and contain fire-proof materials
and native xeriscaping. Homes will open to a shared open space to facilitate community-
building. During development, Thistle & Nest will partner with Heart of Oregon’s YouthBuild
program to provide job skills and education to disengaged youth between the ages of 16 and
24.
The total project cost is $18,353,851. OHCS recommends awarding the project $5,000,000 LIFT.

LIFT Pipeline
While the 2024 NOFA is a rolling NOFA, OHCS urged partners to fill out a pre-application in the
beginning of the year to help us understand the pipeline and cadence of expected projects. In
addition to the previous awards and these recommendations, OHCS anticipates up to an
additional 7 projects. Details are provided in the table below:

                                  LIFT General           LIFT Set-Aside      LIFT Supplemental
 Total Available Funding          $20,000,000             $20,000,000            $5,200,000
 Total Awarded                     $4,130,000             $15,285,606            $3,570,000
 Total Recommended                 $5,000,000              $1,398,127            $1,001,837
 Total Available                  $10,870,000              $3,316,267             $628,163
 Applications Received                 $0                      $0                    $0
 Pre-applications Received         $6,990,000             $12,168,000            $1,864,000




                                     June 7, 2024 HSC Material                                    7
Date: June 7, 2024
To:      Housing Stability Council Members;
         Andrea Bell, Executive Director

From: Hattie Iott, Housing Production Manager
      Tai Dunson-Strane, Assistant Director, Transactions
      Roberto Franco, Assistant Director, Development Resources
      Natasha Detweiler-Daby, Director, Affordable Rental Housing

Re:      Approval for Resolution #2024-06-07

Motion: Approve the Resolution #2024-06-07 recommendations for the following project:

BOND RECOMMENDED MOTION: Move to approve Pass-Through Revenue Bond Financing in
an amount up to and not to exceed $26,500,000 to Ollie Court Homes for Good LP for the
construction of Ollie Court, subject to the borrower meeting OHCS, US Bank, and Umpqua
Bank’s underwriting, closing criteria, and documentation satisfactory to legal counsel and
Treasurer approval for the bond sale.

At the upcoming Housing Stability Council meeting, we will be presenting one (1) transaction -4%
LIHTC/Conduit Bond and for Council approval.

The project included in the Resolution following this memo was approved by the OHCS Finance
Committee or is scheduled for an approval by the Finance Committee. In this memo we are
providing you with a high-level summary of the recommended project. More detailed
information regarding the project and the additional funding recommendation can be found in
the individual project summaries and Equity & Racial Justice (ERJ) project status reports included
as Exhibit B.

All projects are subject to underwriting and programmatic requirements established under the
Qualified Allocation Plan, General Policy and Guideline Manual (GPGM) and MWESB/SDVBE
Compliance Manual are eligible to be considered for funding. All applications proposed a
percentage target of MWESB contractors and subcontractors above the minimum standards set
forth in the OHCS MWESB Compliance Policy, and all have an Affirmatively Furthering Fair
Housing Marketing Plan including a Tenant Selection Plan that will market to those least likely


                                                  June 7, 2024 HSC Material                                                        8

   Oregon Housing and Community Services | 725 Summer St. NE Suite B, Salem, OR 97301-1266 | (503) 986-2000 | FAX (503) 986-2020
June 7, 2024
4% LIHTC/Conduit Bond Funding



to apply. All projects sponsored have signed our Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion (DEI)
Agreement and submit an Equity & Racial Justice (ERJ) project status report.

Funding Recommendation:
We are recommending funding reservation for one (1) project. This project will create 81 units
of new affordable housing. The recommendation is for an award totaling over $26 million.

Projects with Other OHCS Funding
 Project Name         County                    Total                 Sponsor
                                                Units                                                Underwriting
                                                                                                           Stage
 Ollie Court                Lane                   81               Homes for Good              Schedule Approval by
                                                                    Housing Agency              FC
                                                                                                         6/18/2024


                                         Total 81




See attached project summaries and Equity & Racial (ERJ) project status for additional
information.




                                                 June 7, 2024 HSC Material                                                          9

    Oregon Housing and Community Services | 725 Summer St. NE Suite B, Salem, OR 97301-1266 | (503) 986-2000 | FAX (503) 986-2020
                              STATE OF OREGON
                    OREGON HOUSING AND COMMUNITY SERVICES
                          HOUSING STABILITY COUNCIL

                                 RESOLUTION NO. 2024 – 06-07
                                  ADOPTED: JUNE 7TH, 2024

       A RESOLUTION OF THE HOUSING STABILITY COUNCIL APPROVING PASS-THROUGH
       REVENUE BONDS AND HOUSING PROGRAM FUNDING TO FINANCE THE PROJECTS
       DESCRIBED HEREIN, SUBJECT TO THE BORROWERS AND PROJECTS MEETING
       CERTAIN PROGRAM REQUIREMENTS, CLOSING AND OTHER CONDITIONS AS
       DESCRIBED HEREIN; AND AUTHORIZING AND DETERMINING OTHER MATTERS
       WITH RESPECT THERETO.



        WHEREAS, the State of Oregon (the “State”), acting by and through the State Treasurer
(the “Treasurer”) and the Oregon Housing and Community Service Department (the
“Department” and collectively with the State and the Treasurer, the “Issuer”), is authorized,
subject to Housing Stability Council (the “Council” or “HSC”) review and approval, pursuant to
Oregon Revised Statutes (“ORS”) Chapter 286A and ORS Sections 456.515 to 456.725, inclusive,
as amended (collectively, the “Act”) and Oregon Administrative Rules (“OAR”) Chapter 813,
Division 35 pertaining to the Department’s Pass-Through Revenue Bond Financing Program (the
“Conduit Bond Program”), to issue revenue bonds, notes and other obligations (collectively,
“Bonds”) and to loan the proceeds thereof to borrowers (“Borrowers”) in order to finance certain
costs associated with the acquisition, rehabilitation, development, construction, improvement,
furnishing and/or equipping of multifamily housing;

      WHEREAS, through the federal 4% Low-Income Housing Tax Credit Program (“LIHTC
Program”), the Department allocates tax credits (the “Credits”) in accordance with the Act and
OAR Chapter 813, Division 90 pertaining to the Department’s LIHTC Program;

       WHEREAS, through the Department’s various financing programs as authorized by the
Act and ORS Chapter 458 (collectively, “Housing Programs”), the Department, subject to the
Council’s review and approval, provides loans, grants and other financing pursuant to the Act,
ORS Chapter 458, applicable OARs and in conformance with Department policies (the “Housing
Program Funding”). The Conduit Bond Program, the LIHTC Program and the Housing
Programs are collectively referred to herein as the “Programs”; and

         WHEREAS, the Department’s Finance Committee (the “Committee” or “FC”) has
(i) approved the allocation of Credits, (ii) recommended to the Council the issuance of Bonds, and
(iii) approved or recommended providing the Housing Program Funding to finance each of the
affordable multifamily rental projects as listed on Exhibit A attached hereto (each an “FC-
Approved Project” and collectively, the “FC-Approved Projects”); and

        WHEREAS, Council desires to accept the recommendations of the Committee by
(i) approving the Bonds and directing the Department to request that the State Treasurer issue the
Bonds and (ii) further ratifying and/or approving providing the Housing Program Funding to
finance each of the FC-Approved Projects; and

RESOLUTION – PASS THROUGH REVENUE  BONDS
                              June 7, 2024 HSC  HOUSING PROGRAM FUNDING
                                            ANDMaterial                                   PAGE101
        WHEREAS, the further Council desires to (i) approve the Bonds and direct the
Department to request that the Treasurer issue the Bonds and (ii) further ratify and/or approve
providing the Housing Program Funding to finance each of the affordable multifamily rental
projects as listed on Exhibit B attached hereto (each a “Proposed Project” and collectively, the
“Proposed Projects”), in each case subject final approval of the Projects by the Committee,
including the allocation of Credits by the Committee to each of the Projects; and

       NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by the Council as follows:

        SECTION 1. HSC APPROVAL. The Council hereby acknowledges that it has reviewed
the information and materials included in Exhibit A and Exhibit B attached hereto describing the
Bonds and the Housing Program Funding, each FC-Approved Project and each Proposed Project
(each a “Project” and collectively, the “Projects”) and the financing of each of the Projects, and
hereby approves the issuance of the Bonds for the financing of each of the Projects, as described
therein. Subject, in the case of each Project, to the Borrower’s compliance with all legal and other
requirements of the Act and the applicable Programs and confirmation by the Department,
including final approval by the Committee in the case of each Proposed Project, that the conditions
described in Section 2 below have been satisfied, the Council finds that no further meeting or
action of the Council is needed for the Department to request and the Treasurer to proceed with
the issuance of the Bonds and for the Department to proceed with the financing of the Project.

        SECTION 2. CONDITIONS TO ISSUANCE, SALE AND DELIVERY OF BONDS. The Council
hereby approves the issuance, sale and delivery of the Bonds for each of the Projects. For each
Project, such approval is subject to any remaining final approval(s) that may be required by the
Committee (including the allocation of Credits to and final approval of each Proposed Project by
the Committee) and/or the Department’s Executive Director (or her designee), and further subject
to the Borrower meeting all requirements of the applicable Programs and satisfying all closing and
funding conditions, including:

               (A)    completion by the Department of all necessary due diligence related to the
       Project and the financing, consistent with applicable Program requirements, Department
       policies and practices;

              (B)     the absence of any material change to the Project or the financing following
       the adoption of this Resolution;

              (C)    confirmation that all legal and other requirements of the Act and the Conduit
       Bond Program for the issuance, sale and delivery of the Bonds have been satisfied, as
       determined by the Department, the Oregon Department of Justice and Bond Counsel; and

             (D)     confirmation that all legal and other requirements of the Act and the
       Programs have been satisfied, as determined by the Department and the Oregon
       Department of Justice.

        SECTION 3. COUNCIL REVIEW, APPROVAL AND PUBLIC MEETING. The Council hereby
acknowledges that it has reviewed the information and materials included in Exhibit A and in
Exhibit B attached hereto describing the Projects and the financing of each of the Projects,
including the Bonds, and conducted such additional review and made such additional inquiry, if
any, as it determined to be necessary or appropriate, in compliance with the Council’s obligations

RESOLUTION – PASS THROUGH REVENUE  BONDS
                              June 7, 2024 HSC  HOUSING PROGRAM FUNDING
                                            ANDMaterial                                     PAGE112
under ORS 456.561(3) and other relevant authority, to review, and to approve or disapprove the
financing of the Projects. The Council hereby further acknowledges that the adoption of this
Resolution and the HSC approval set forth herein has been made at a public meeting of the Council
as required by ORS 456.561(4) and other relevant authority, and that such meeting has been
conducted in accordance with applicable law, including any required advance public notice of such
meeting. Further, the Council acknowledges that in connection with the adoption of this
Resolution and the HSC approval set forth herein, opportunity has been provided to the public to
testify or otherwise provide public comment on the Projects and any other matters directly related
thereto.

        SECTION 4. EFFECTIVENESS; CONFLICTING RESOLUTIONS. This Resolution shall be
effective immediately upon its adoption. Any prior resolutions of or other previous actions by the
Council and any parts thereof that are in conflict with the terms of this Resolution shall be, and
they hereby are, rescinded, but only to the extent of such conflict.

                                 [Signature follows next page]




RESOLUTION – PASS THROUGH REVENUE  BONDS
                              June 7, 2024 HSC  HOUSING PROGRAM FUNDING
                                            ANDMaterial                                   PAGE123
                          CERTIFICATION OF RESOLUTION

       The undersigned does hereby certify that I am the duly appointed, qualified and acting
Chair of the Oregon Housing and Community Services Oregon Housing Stability Council (the
“Council”); that the foregoing is a true and complete copy of Resolution No. 2024-06-07 as
adopted by the Council at a meeting duly called and held in accordance with law on June 7th,
2024; and that the following members of the Council voted in favor of said Resolution:




the following members of the Council voted against said Resolution:




and the following members of the Council abstained from voting on said Resolution:




        In witness whereof, the undersigned has hereunto set her hand as of this 7th day of June
2024.


                                                      ___________________________________
                                                      Chair Claire Hall




RESOLUTION                           SJune 7, 2024 HSC
                                       IGNATURE    PAGEMaterial                              13
                                  EXHIBIT A

            N/A



                                  EXHIBIT B

                            PROPOSED PROJECT

   1- Ollie Court (FC – Meeting Schedule for 6/7/2024)




EXHIBIT B                    June 7, 2024 HSC Material   14
SUMMARY
         Project Name: Ollie Court
                  City:            Eugene                                                    County: Lane
        Sponsor Name: Homes for Good Housing Agency
   Management Agent: Pinehurst Management
                                                                                         Total Units:                        81
          Urban/Rural:                       Urban
                                                                          Total Affordable Units:               80
                                                                                                   3 1-BR at 50% AMI
                                                                                                   12 1-BR at 30% AMI
                                                                                  Units by Size & 37 2-BR at 50% AMI
  # Rent Assisted Units: 80
                                                                                    Affordability: 12 2-BR at 30% AMI
                                                                                                   16 3-BR at 50% AMI
                                                                                                   1 2-BR Unrestricted Mgr. Unit
         Cost Per Unit:                 $474,541                               Construction Type: New Construction
                                 4% LIHTC/Bond: 30 years
                                                                            # of Units with Non-
  Affordability Term(s):              LIFT: 30 years                                             0
                                                                            OHCS Requirements:

                     Funding Request                                                              Funding Use
         LIFT Request: $13,542,000                                                       Acquisition $0
                       $1,722,027 (annual                                              Construction $38,437,809
             4% LIHTC:
                       allocation)
        Conduit Bonds up to $26,500,000                                               Development $11,688,751
                                                                                                Total: $50,126,560



PROJECT DETAILS
                       Ollie Court is a new construction project that will provide 80 units of affordable
                       housing, plus one unrestricted manager’s unit across two buildings. The project will
                       be located in the city of Eugene in Lane County. The project will serve families and
                       individuals with 24 units for families earning less than 30% of the Area Median
  Project Description: Income (AMI) and 56 units for families earning less than 50% AMI. All 80 units will
                       receive site based rental assistance provided by the local housing authority.

                              Ollie Court and the 81 units are a stand-alone project and not subject to a master
                              plan development. Closing is anticipated to be in June 2024.


                                                       June 7, 2024 HSC Material                                                        15

        Oregon Housing and Community Services | 725 Summer St. NE Suite B, Salem, OR 97301-1266 | (503) 986-2000 | FAX (503) 986-2020
     Ollie Court – Housing Stability Council




                              Ollie Court has signed MOUs with Centro Latino Americano, Lane African American/Black
                              Student Success (AA/BSS), Honoring Our New Ethnic Youth (H.O.N.E.Y), Eugene-
                              Springfield NAACP, Early Childhood Cares, and Head Start of Lane County to provide
                              Resident and Early Learning Services.

                              Centro Latino Americano has a central role in the property development, providing
                              feedback on design elements, technical assistance around garden design and
                              implementation, and providing outreach to individuals and families they serve to bring
                              awareness to the housing opportunity provided by Ollie Court.

 Partnerships to Serve Ollie Court will provide community space free of charge to Centro Latino Americano to
Communities of Color: offer culturally specific programming to the community on topics such as small business
                              management and gardening.

                              Homes for Good has also partnered with Lane African American/Black Student Success
                              (AA/BSS) for the Ollie Court site, to offer early learning opportunities to improve
                              academic outcomes for African America/Black Students.

                              Honoring Our New Ethnic Youth (H.O.N.E.Y) will partner with Ollie Court in their mission
                              to support and advocate for Multiracial Persons by utilizing the community space for their
                              Culture Club.

                     Ollie Court has completed an Affirmative Fair Housing Marketing Plan for the
                     development. Ollie Court will work with the following Culturally Specific Organizations for
                     outreach and marketing to the target population for the project:
                     •       Centro Latino Americano)– Hispanic/Latinx
                     •       Lane African American/Black Student Success- African American/Black
                     •       Honoring Our New Ethnic Youth- Multiracial Persons
                     •       Early Childhood Cares – All Races
Reaching Underserved •       Head Start of Lane County – All Races
         Communities:
                              Per the signed MOU, Centro Latino Americano and the Eugene-Springfield NAACP will
                              support the project during the marketing and lease-up phase to ensure targeted outreach
                              is conducted to Latino/Latinx and African American/Black communities.

                              Marketing materials for Ollie Court will be available in English and Spanish, Ollie Court will
                              have Spanish speakers on staff, and will employ a language line to assist applicants
                              speaking languages other than English or Spanish.

       MWESB Target: Ollie Court’s General Contractor, Chambers Construction, has committed to meeting the
                              region 4/5 requirement of 20% participation.



                                                       June 7, 2024 HSC Material                                                      16

          Oregon Housing and Community Services | 725 Summer St. NE Suite B, Salem, OR 97301-1266 | (503) 986-2000 | FAX (503) 986-2020
      Ollie Court – Housing Stability Council




       Alignment with               -     Equity and Racial Justice
    Statewide Housing               -     Affordable Rental Housing
                Plan:
The LIFT program requires that all project sponsors sign a Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion (DEI) agreement and engage
MWESB organizations.

Upon Housing Stability Council approval of the established conduit bond funding limit, ultimate approval will be based
on conformance with OHCS underwriting standards and due diligence and is delegated to OHCS Finance Committee
and the Executive Director


                                                     Rendering: Project Layout




                                                        June 7, 2024 HSC Material                                                      17

           Oregon Housing and Community Services | 725 Summer St. NE Suite B, Salem, OR 97301-1266 | (503) 986-2000 | FAX (503) 986-2020
Ollie Court – Housing Stability Council




                                                June 7, 2024 HSC Material                                                      18

   Oregon Housing and Community Services | 725 Summer St. NE Suite B, Salem, OR 97301-1266 | (503) 986-2000 | FAX (503) 986-2020
Date: June 7, 2024
To:      Housing Stability Council
         Andrea Bell, Executive Director

From: Love Jonson, Operations & Policy Analyst
      Rick Ruzicka, Assistant Director of Planning & Policy
      Natasha Detweiler-Daby, Director Affordable Rental Housing

RE:      PuSH Seller’s Tax Credit Introduction - HB-2071 (2023)

OVERVIEW

During the June Housing Stability Council (HSC) meeting, staff will provide a broad overview of
HB-2071 (2023), which we are referring to as the Publicly Supporting Housing Seller’s Tax Credit
(or the PuSH Seller’s Tax Credit). The June meeting introduction will be used to inform HSC on
the bill requirements, update HSC on engagement to date, and provide the planned “next
steps” as we move toward implementation, hopefully in August, of this new tax credit.

HB-2071

HB-2071 was passed during the 2023 Legislative Session and provides 3 million dollars annually
in tax credits that may be used to help entice owners of expiring PuSH rental properties to sell
to buyers that would extend the affordability restrictions on the property. HB-2071 requires
that the affordability restriction extension be no less than 30 years if the PuSH Sellers Tax Credit
is used. The statute caps the amount of tax credit on a per property basis at a percentage of the
sell price (or appraised price whichever is less) with the duration of time the property has been
owned triggering different percentage caps.

The percentage caps in statute are:
          • A property owned for less than 5 years is not eligible for the tax credit
          • A property owned more than 5 years through year 10 may not exceed a credit of
             2.5% of the sale or the appraised price, whichever is less.
          • A property owned for more than 10 years may not exceed a credit of 5% of the
             sale or the appraised price, whichever is less.

The credit itself would be applied for by the buyer of the property who would agree to the
affordability restrictions should they be successful in purchasing the property but ultimately the




                                                  June 7, 2024 HSC Material                                                        19
   Oregon Housing and Community Services | 725 Summer St. NE Suite B, Salem, OR 97301-1266 | (503) 986-2000 | FAX (503) 986-2020
HB-2071 Introduction, June 7, 2024




credit would be used by the seller. There may be many interested purchasers of the property
and OHCS envisions the tax credit as a part of the applicant’s financial package which can be
used to match another offer or help achieve a robust capital stack in the purchasers attempt to
match the sellers asking price. Understanding this fluid process, it’s important that the
mechanism to apply for and receive this tax credit result in a quick turnaround allowing for the
purchaser to be competitive.

OHCS Engagement

As part of our engagement process, OHCS has met with affordable housing industry groups,
preservation groups and held a PuSH Seller’s Tax Credit forum. We’ve received excellent
feedback and are in the process of crafting that feedback into an actionable framework. Some
of the feedback that we have taken away from our meetings include, but are not limited to:
    • Keep the program/process simple.
    • Sales happen relatively quickly and there is usually lots of competition for the property.
        Finding a purchaser just to keep the property affordable might be very difficult and this
        tax credit is designed to expand that pool (be careful not to add strings that would
        minimize the use).
    • Alignment with our preservation funding model may not be necessary and/or even
        helpful.
    • Sellers are not always willing to provide tenant information to buyers.
    • We need to think through how we will handle purchases of multiple properties.
    • We’ll need regular touch points with the applicant as not all that receive the tax credit
        will end up purchasing the property.

In addition, we have learned through engagement that due to the structure of the resources
and tax credit as implemented in the bill, it is likely that any additional layers we place on these
funds beyond what is required in statute may result in an undersubscription. The 3 million
dollars are an annual cap and these dollars do not get rolled over.

Next Steps

OHCS has done multiple engagements with partners and are seeking Housing Stability Council
feedback on this new program resource, so that we can incorporate it into the
recommendation to bring to Housing Stability Council for adoption at the July meeting.

The following are our next steps as we attempt to open this program up in August of 2024.

     •    Incorporate feedback to share a final draft framework that will be distributed to
          partners for feedback – Early June




                                                  June 7, 2024 HSC Material                                                      20
     Oregon Housing and Community Services | 725 Summer St. NE Suite B, Salem, OR 97301-1266 | (503) 986-2000 | FAX (503) 986-2020
HB-2071 Introduction, June 7, 2024




     •    Meet with the Department of Revenue to discuss rules and program procedures
          (including how to handle multiple properties and some specific questions around the
          flexibility of the tax credit) - Mid-June
     •    Request additional partner feedback on the final draft framework - Mid June
     •    Present framework for approval to HSC - July
     •    Develop Forms, Manual and build out the application process in the ORCA – July
     •    Open Program through the ORCA Process – August




                                                  June 7, 2024 HSC Material                                                      21
     Oregon Housing and Community Services | 725 Summer St. NE Suite B, Salem, OR 97301-1266 | (503) 986-2000 | FAX (503) 986-2020
Date:       June 7, 2024

To:         Housing Stability Council Members
            Andrea Bell, Executive Director

From:       Brit McLean, Operations and Policy Analyst, Affordable Rental Housing Division
            Rick Ruzicka, Assistant Director of Affordable Rental Housing Planning & Policy
            Natasha Detweiler-Daby, Director, Affordable Rental Housing

Re:         Announcement: HUD PRICE Application and Public Comment Period


PRICE Main Grant Detail
Manufactured housing is the largest source of unsubsidized affordable housing in the country, making it a
crucial piece of the nation’s affordable housing stock, especially in rural communities. The median
household income of a manufactured housing unit owner is about half the median household income of
site-built homeowners. The U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) has issued the
Preservation and Reinvestment Initiative for Community Enhancement (PRICE) grant to preserve long-
term housing affordability for residents of manufactured housing or a manufactured housing community,
to redevelop, and to primarily benefit low- and moderate-income residents.

HUD’s PRICE grant makes $235 million available for states, tribes, and other entities for preservation
activities of manufactured housing stock. HUD has indicated that each grant recipient will receive at least
five million dollars. Applications for this funding opportunity are due to HUD by July 10, 2024.

OHCS Proposal Summary
Oregon Housing and Community Services Department (OHCS) intends to apply for the PRICE funding
opportunity. Grant funds would allow OHCS to continue to support low- and moderate-income
manufactured home residents and manufactured housing communities with critical investments in
repairs, infrastructure improvements, unit replacement, and transition to resident-ownership models.
OHCS intends to submit a request for a grant amount of $25 million.

OHCS will utilize grant funds in two current, oversubscribed program areas:
   1. The Homeownership Division has already successfully implemented a Manufactured Housing
      Replacement Fund. Through this program, staff received an overwhelming number of requests
      for manufactured home repair dollars, which were not prioritized during that offering. Using the
      same program infrastructure but shifting priority to the repair and rehabilitation of manufactured
      homes in Oregon, the PRICE grant will enable the Homeownership Division to implement the
      Modular Home Repair and Rehabilitation Program.
   2. Manufactured Dwelling Park Preservation resources will be administered through the Affordable
      Rental Housing Division’s new Oregon Centralized Application (ORCA), along with all other


                                                     June 7, 2024 HSC Material                                                        22

      Oregon Housing and Community Services | 725 Summer St. NE Suite B, Salem, OR 97301-1266 | (503) 986-2000 | FAX (503) 986-2020
 Announcement: HUD PRICE Grant Application and Public Comment Period | 6/7/24




        federal and state housing development funding sources. These programs remain in high demand
        with the need far outstripping available resources. OHCS has the programming infrastructure and
        external partnerships in place to put these funds to use immediately upon receipt pairing these
        federal dollars with ongoing state resources.

Public Comment Period
OHCS enjoys a robust and engaged network of external partners and staff with deep experience in the
manufactured housing space. The agency’s application is a reflection of the work the agency and external
partners have already engaged on with a shared vision for addressing the state’s most critical
manufactured housing needs.

There is significant statewide interest in the HUD PRICE grant opportunity. In addition to the external
collaboration included in the application, the agency’s Community Engagement Section of the Public
Affairs Division has assisted in crafting a robust stakeholder engagement plan in coordination with our
Homeownership and Affordable Rental Housing Divisions.

The agency will accept public comment on application materials from June 4th – June 20th, 2024. Staff will
host a hybrid in-person/virtual public hearing toward the end of the public comment period, on a date
and time to be determined. The agency will accept public comment via online survey, email, traditional
mail, and live during the public hearings. More information about the agency’s application and the public
engagement plan can be found on the PRICE Main Grant webpage.

Alignment With Statewide Housing Plan
Resources included in the PRICE grant application will be requested to further the following priorities as
outlined in the Statewide Housing Plan:
 1. Homeownership
 2. Homelessness
 3. Equity & Racial Justice

 The PRICE grant will accomplish advancing these priorities by doing the following:
 • Provide financial and program support to preserve manufactured homes and parks allowing
     Oregonians to ensure housing stability.
 • Keeping manufactured housing stock affordable, healthy, safe, and accessible for low- and
     moderate-income Oregonians by extending the life of their affordable home.
 • Advance equity and racial justice. According to a 2017 Oregon snapshot, manufactured homes
     house more elderly and BIPOC Oregonians than other types of homeownership. These resources will
     be utilized to ensure these current residents are able to remain housed.

Action Requested
Staff request Housing Stability Council input on the agency’s application.




                                                  June 7, 2024 HSC Material                                                      23

     Oregon Housing and Community Services | 725 Summer St. NE Suite B, Salem, OR 97301-1266 | (503) 986-2000 | FAX (503) 986-2020
DATE:         June 7, 2024

TO:           Housing Stability Council
              Andrea Bell, Executive Director

FROM:         Ryan Flynn, Director, Disaster Recovery & Resilience

SUBJECT:      Royal Oaks Mobil Manor: Purchase of Modular Housing Units
_____________________________________________________________________________
MOTION: Housing Stability Council approval for a grant of $12,200,000 from Disaster Recovery
& Resilience, together with $5,000,000 in Oregon Affordable Housing Tax Credits, to the
Housing Authority of Jackson County for the purchase of modular homes and to enable them
to access permanent loan financing at the Royal Oaks Mobil Manor. The grant will be funded
from remaining wildfire funding allocated to OHCS under HB 5006 and SB 5534.

Summary:
The rebuild of the Royal Oaks Mobil Manor is a critical piece of the agency strategy to assist
Jackson County recover from the significant loss of affordable homeownership inventory as a
result of the 2020 Labor Day Fires.

The Disaster Recovery & Resilience (DRR) division of OHCS respectfully requests Housing Stability
Council approval of a $12,200,000 grant for the Housing Authority of Jackson County to fill
funding gaps in the purchase of modular homes to be placed at the Royal Oaks Mobil Manor, and
$5,000,000 in Oregon Affordable Housing Tax Credits (OAHTC) to access affordable permanent
loan financing.

Background:
The 2020 Labor Day Fire event in Oregon included 21 fires that burned more than 1.2 million
acres and destroyed over 4,300 homes, including 18 manufactured housing parks in Jackson
County.

DRR staff have utilized state funding made available during the 2021 legislative session under HB
5006 and SB 5534 to finance a number of wildfire recovery projects, including the purchase and
redevelopment of destroyed manufactured housing parks and subsequent preservation of those
parks as permanently affordable.

                                     June 7, 2024 HSC Material                                24
June 7, 2024
DRR Royal Oaks Mobil Manor: Unit Replacement




Royal Oaks Mobile Manor was one of many manufactured housing parks destroyed in the
Almeda Fire. The site was purchased and redeveloped by the Housing Authority of Jackson
County (HAJC) with various sources of funding, including OHCS wildfire funding through the
Disaster Recovery and Resilience (DRR) division, a Preservation of Manufactured Dwelling Parks
(PMDP) grant from OHCS’ Affordable Rental Housing division and a direct allocation to HAJC
from the Oregon State Legislature.

OHCS originally purchased and placed modular homes on the Royal Oaks site from Pacific
Housing Partnerships, however upon placement in 2023, OHCS, with consultation from local
and state building experts, determined the units unfit for occupancy in their current form due
to systemic manufacturing defects and building code violations. OHCS initially sought to
rebuild/rehabilitate the units based on advice from consultants and industry standard practices.
However, through work with local partners, it was determined this approach would not fully
reassure community members that the prioritization of health and safety standards would be
met. Accordingly, OHCS and HAJC negotiated a proposal for their respective boards in which
OHCS will provide the funding to HAJC to buy new modular homes for the project.

HAJC has completed redevelopment of the infrastructure and is ready to place 118 new modular
homes in partnership with OHCS. This request is for approval to utilize $12.2 million in remaining
HB 5006 and SB 5534 state wildfire funds to fill a funding gap that remains on the purchase of
118 units. The units will be reserved for manufactured homeowners who lost their homes in the
Almeda Fire. First priority will be given to former residents of Royal Oaks so that they may return
to their pre-fire location, with the remaining homes made available to fire-impacted
manufactured homeowners in Jackson County. All units will be owned by households approved
for residency in the park. The land and infrastructure will be owned by the HAJC and will be
secured by a 60-year affordability covenant.

Equity and Racial Justice:

In order to ensure equitable access to wildfire recovery resources, DRR incorporates the following
requirements into policies and grant agreements:

            •    Equity and Racial Justice (ERJ) and Minority, Women, and Emerging Small Business
                 (MWESB) practices must be included in grant/loan agreements. These ERJ
                 requirements must also include reporting and performance tracking expectations.
            •    Project owners must utilize local partners, including culturally-specific
                 organizations, for outreach and engagement criteria using guidelines that are
                 designed to address the additional hurdles that disaster survivors face who are



                                                  June 7, 2024 HSC Material                                                        25

   Oregon Housing and Community Services | 725 Summer St. NE Suite B, Salem, OR 97301-1266 | (503) 986-2000 | FAX (503) 986-2020
June 7, 2024
DRR Royal Oaks Mobil Manor: Unit Replacement




                 people of color, have disabilities, are low and moderate income and/or face
                 language or citizenship barriers.
            •    Partner agencies must help participants obtain safe, secure, and permanent
                 housing as quickly as possible, and understand, eliminate, and/or compensate
                 immediate barriers to obtain and maintain housing.
            •    Partner agencies must proactively support program participants through Housing
                 Navigators, including coordinating with other organizations and service providers.
                 This includes incorporating individualized, culturally-specific, trauma-informed and
                 client-driven supports recognizing individuals are unique.
            •    Partner agencies must strive to offer or connect participants with a range of
                 treatment and support services that are voluntary, individualized, culturally
                 appropriate, and portable as the participant works toward meeting their
                 permanent housing solution.
            •    Partner agencies must provide interpretation and translation services upon
                 request, in addition to following DRR’s Language Access Plan
            •    No citizenship requirements in order to access program benefits.

In addition, DRR now has a Racial Equity Advisor on staff to ensure that all policies and programs
meet OHCS’ ERJ objectives, including utilization of the Racial Equity Analysis Tool in
program/policy design.




  SUMMARY
          Project Name: Royal Oaks Mobil Manor: Unit Replacement
                       City:               Medford                                   County:                   Jackson
        Sponsor Name: Housing Authority of Jackson County

           Urban/Rural :                       n/a                               Total Units                      118

                  Funding Request                                                      Funding Use
     Disaster Recovery                                                        Purchase of $12,200,000
           & Resilience                                                      modular units
                         $12,200,000
      Wildfire Funding
              Request:
                                                                                  Perm loan NA
                    OAHTC $5,000,000
                                                                                 conversion
                                                                                     Total: $12,200,000




                                                  June 7, 2024 HSC Material                                                        26

   Oregon Housing and Community Services | 725 Summer St. NE Suite B, Salem, OR 97301-1266 | (503) 986-2000 | FAX (503) 986-2020
June 7, 2024
DRR Royal Oaks Mobil Manor: Unit Replacement




  PROJECT DETAILS
                       Acquisition and installation of 118 modular housing units at the Royal
                       Oaks Mobil Manor. Funding provided by DRR will fill funding gaps in the
                       cost to purchase units. Incoming households will be prioritized in the
                       following order:
                           1) Manufactured homeowners who previously lived at Royal Oaks
                              Mobil Manor at the time of the disaster with income levels at or
                              below 80% Area Median Income (AMI). Exceptions for previous
                              homeowners returning to Royal Oaks with income levels up to
  Project Description:        120% AMI may be granted, provided that at least 60% of the park
                              spaces will be occupied by homeowner households at or below
                              80% AMI.
                           2) Previous manufactured homeowner households displaced by the
                              2020 Labor Day Fires with income levels at or below 80% AMI.

                                After the initial lease-up, park spaces that become available during the
                                affordability period, as a result of the transfer or sale of a home, must
                                be leased to incoming homeowner households at or below 80% AMI.
                                On the morning of September 8, 2020, the Alameda Fire swept through
                                the Rogue Valley, significantly impacting the communities of Talent,
                                Phoenix, Ashland and Medford. It was the most destructive wildfire in
                                Oregon’s recorded history, destroying 18 manufactured dwelling parks.
     How the project
                                Royal Oaks Mobil Manor was among those destroyed, displacing over
        serves OHCS’
                                140 households who lost everything. The loss of affordable
     Wildfire Disaster
                                homeownership options that manufactured housing brought to the
   Recovery priorities
                                region has been devastating and the completion of Royal Oaks Mobil
                                Manor will be the first step in restoring affordable homeownership
                                opportunities and a sense of community for those impacted
                                households.
      Alignment with                 •    Homeownership
   Statewide Housing                 •    Equity and Racial Justice
               Plan:                 •    Rural Communities




                                                 June 7, 2024 HSC Material                                                        27

  Oregon Housing and Community Services | 725 Summer St. NE Suite B, Salem, OR 97301-1266 | (503) 986-2000 | FAX (503) 986-2020
June 7, 2024
DRR Royal Oaks Mobil Manor: Unit Replacement




  Motion Requested: Housing Stability Council approval of $12,200,000 in grant funding for
  the purchase of modular units and $5,000,000 in OAHTC in order to access affordable
  permanent loan financing at the Royal Oaks Mobil Manor




                                                 June 7, 2024 HSC Material                                                        28

  Oregon Housing and Community Services | 725 Summer St. NE Suite B, Salem, OR 97301-1266 | (503) 986-2000 | FAX (503) 986-2020
Date: June 07, 2024

To:     Housing Stability Council Members
        Andrea Bell, Executive Director

From: Liz Weber, Interim Director, Housing Stabilization Division
      Jill Smith, Assistant Director, Energy Services Section
      Joy Aldrich, Energy Services Business Analyst
      Hilda Rodriguez, SHOW & Water Program Analyst

Re:     Low-Income Household Water Assistance (LIHWA) Program

Motion:           Housing Stability Council briefing on the close out report of the Low-
                  Income Household Water Assistance (LIHWA) Program.

Background
In July 2021, the Energy Services Section at OHCS received $7.76 million from the
Consolidated Appropriations Act (CAA) and $6.08 million from the American Rescue
Plan Act (ARPA). These funds were purposed to administer the Low-Income Household
Water Assistance (LIHWA) Program to eligible households, at or below 60% State
Median Income (SMI), for water and wastewater assistance. Although the CAA was
established for COVID relief, the federal funder did not require households to have a
COVID-specific event to determine eligibility for LIHWA assistance payments. Over
these last three years, we provided the Housing Stability Council with our initial
perspectives, necessary changes, and program updates. Program priorities centered on
continuity of services and overall arrearage reduction for longer term stability. Through
collaboration with the Community Action Agency (CAA) network, water and wastewater
utilities, and other community partners, Oregon has successfully implemented the
federal LIHWA Program in full over a 27-month period. After assisting several thousand
low-income households in desperate need of water and wastewater assistance, we
have identified a massive water burden that remains in place for the most vulnerable
households.

LIHWA Program Summary Report
The LIHWA Program officially ended March 31, 2024, and Oregon exhausted its entire
allocation! There were nearly 18,600 unique households served with over $10.63 million
of water and wastewater utility assistance. Of the 25,000 total payments provided, 15%
of them reestablished services or prevented disconnection, ensuring continuity of
services. The statewide average payment size was $552. Rather than using a payment
matrix with set assistance amounts determined by household size and income, the
LIHWA Program used a floor (minimum) and ceiling (maximum) approach. The flexibility


                                                 June 7, 2024 HSC Material                                                        29

  Oregon Housing and Community Services | 725 Summer St. NE Suite B, Salem, OR 97301-1266 | (503) 986-2000 | FAX (503) 986-2020
LIHWA Program Briefing – June 7, 2024

in this payment approach allowed the CAAs to assess individual household situations
and address their actual water burden.

The federal statute established eligible water and wastewater utilities as those that
service publicly- or privately-owned public water systems. CAAs were required to make
assistance payments directly to the owner or operator of these systems, limiting
household eligibility to direct-service account holders. Households who paid either their
landlords for utilities or third-party vendors for well and septic maintenance were not
eligible for LIHWA assistance, in most cases. Oregon has over 2,000 water and
wastewater utilities in addition to numerous companies who service wells and septic
systems. Of all these various utilities and other vendors, only 900 were determined
statutorily eligible because of their connection type and customer basis. The CAAs held
vendor agreements with 268 of these eligible vendors, which represented 13% of all
utilities and 28% of eligible utilities. There were an estimated 550,800 potentially eligible
low-income households served by these eligible utilities. As noted above, the LIHWA
Program was able to serve 18,600 unique households. This represents just 3.4% of
potentially eligible households, exemplifying the remaining massive water burden.

Analysis of LIHWA Program Implementation
One of the most highlighted factors—and a central issue—addressed throughout
planning, outreach, and implementation was the unpredictability of policies among
utilities. Diversity among utilities even within the same county was extremely notable.
Allowable duration permitted for arrearages, types of charges (both eligible and
ineligible) included on the bill, and disconnection policies and reconnection fees varied
vastly. Due to this, the statewide implementation of the LIHWA Program represented a
unique story.

Program Priorities. Coos and Curry Counties experienced the highest continuity of
services burden with their eligible households. Of the nearly 300 households served,
34% of the payments averted a disconnection or reconnected services. Surprisingly, no
more than 3% of the LIHWA payments made to households in the Portland-Metro
region ensured continuity of services. This phenomenon may have been caused due to
the City of Portland’s two-year moratorium and many surrounding utilities’ policies for
wastewater service disconnection.

Payment Summary. Using the payment floor-to-ceiling approach instead of a set matrix
depicted the potential for at least two matrices for future program iterations. Households
in the Portland-Metro region received an average payment of $1,000, while households
around the rest of the state received an average payment of $450. The most
households served resided in Lane County, as approximately 3,300 households
received an average payment of $400. Comparatively, approximately 1,700 households
in Multnomah County received the highest average payment of $1,300. There was over
$2 million of LIHWA assistance payments provided to support the 1,500 eligible
households who applied residing in the City of Portland’s service area. Comparatively,



                                                 June 7, 2024 HSC Material                                                      30

    Oregon Housing and Community Services | 725 Summer St. NE Suite B, Salem, OR 97301-1266 | (503) 986-2000 | FAX (503) 986-2020
LIHWA Program Briefing – June 7, 2024

there was $750,000 of LIHWA assistance payments provided to support the 2,500
eligible households who applied residing in the City of Salem’s service area.

Demographics. Across the state, the demographic details of those households who
provided information when applying for the LIHWA Program was diverse. Roughly 16%
of the households served identified as members of the BIPOC community and another
26% of the households identified as having Latinx ethnicity. Of all individuals served,
40% were less than 18 years of age and 18% were at least 60 years of age. Nearly 85%
of the households consisted of no more than four people. About 14% of the individuals
served were persons experiencing a disability. Just slightly more than half of the
households served with LIHWA assistance rented their dwellings. Even though the
income limit was at or below 60% SMI, 65% of all eligible households were at 35% SMI
or below.

Assessing and Recording the Lessons Learned
In alignment with project management and business analysis best practices, we
conducted a lessons learned process, both internally and with the CAA network, of the
overall planning, administration, and implementation of the LIHWA Program. Highlights
of the feedback received to date are as follows:

Communication. Collaboration among all partners, including with OHCS, was “fantastic”
and “there was a strong emphasis on open communication and a genuine commitment
to the success of the program.” “Agencies felt heard in areas that we could have input
on.” Early engagement and constant communication were essential, but it was irregular
at times and became “problematic” to cause further follow up and clarification. Changes
in processes included “unclear instruction or challenged approved processes.”

Implementation. Program implementation was a direct reflection of the planning and
engagement, providing many opportunities for “working closely with the water utilities
and building their trust.” “Uniform” intake processes and an alignment “with the [federal
energy assistance program] program year” would assist in implementation. “The fiscal
side of the program needs to be prepared to process and roll over funding” as “delays in
payments were a huge detriment” and “will create hesitancy in partnering with utilities
for future programs.”

Quality Assurance. Virtual monitoring worked but deviated from the approach used with
other familiar programs. Agencies developed formulas—that would “require payments to
be made for past due amounts along with the stability payment”—to calculate LIHWA
payment sizes that ensured both equal and equitable implementation. Lack of onsite
experience to understand each agency’s intake approach and multiple program
revisions created confusion.

Participation. The partner engagement meetings held during the program planning
stage along with CAA engagement with their local utilities was a fundamental part in
program success. “Additional financial support for administrative and program delivery
costs” was needed. Funding was “not equitable for all low-income households” due to
federal statutory requirements that limited eligibility to only certain utilities and account


                                                 June 7, 2024 HSC Material                                                      31

    Oregon Housing and Community Services | 725 Summer St. NE Suite B, Salem, OR 97301-1266 | (503) 986-2000 | FAX (503) 986-2020
LIHWA Program Briefing – June 7, 2024

types. Having to refuse “service to low-income clients based on their housing situation
was disheartening.”

Requirements. Having nearly similar requirements with [the federal energy assistance
program] made it easier to administer. “The conditions required to make this program a
success” due to “considerably more vendors” with “various billing systems” made it
difficult to meet program requirements. There is a need “to establish a funding stream
comparable to [the state energy assistance program]” and “state regulations on water”
similar to that of “the [Public Utilities Commission] PUC for electric” would be helpful.

Outlook for Future Water Assistance Programs in Oregon
There has been much movement and discussion surrounding continued water
assistance for low-income Oregonians. Energy Services Section staff communicated
regularly with the OHCS Communications team and the Oregon Legislative Policy and
Reporting Office (LPRO) related to Oregon House Bill 2010 (2023). This open
communication resulted in a low-income drinking water, wastewater, and stormwater
ratepayer assistance program report, which highlighted Oregon’s LIHWA Program
overall success as well as demonstrated the gaps due to federal statute and the
remaining water burden. Our regular congressional briefing in February of this year also
featured the LIHWA Program and its impact on low-income Oregonians. We have also
presented our included PowerPoint presentation on the LIHWA Implementation
Summary to both the Community Action Partnership of Oregon (CAPO) Board and the
CAA network in the last two months. On the federal level, we are currently closely
monitoring US Senate Bill 3830 and US House Bill 8032. Both bills would establish a
permanent federal LIHWA Program very similar to that which has just concluded.

Thank you for your time to review our summary. We appreciate your considerations and
perspectives surrounding the LIHWA Program and the future of water assistance for
low-income Oregonians.




                                                 June 7, 2024 HSC Material                                                      32

    Oregon Housing and Community Services | 725 Summer St. NE Suite B, Salem, OR 97301-1266 | (503) 986-2000 | FAX (503) 986-2020
