  sik



             ll                                                                                          COMMUNITY
                                                                                                         PLANNING
                                                                                                         DEVELOPMENT


                         Community Project Funding (CPF) Grant

                                     Frequently Asked Questions
                                                 Updated December 5, 2024




                                                   Table of Contents
Grant Program Basics
    1.            What is an Economic Development Initiative (EDI)/Community Project Funding (CPF) grant?
                  What should an organization do to be considered for a future CPF grant?
  Ww BwWwn




                  What types of projects do CPF grants typically fund?
                  What is an Authorized Representative ?
                  Where can organizations find additional information?

Award Process and Timeline
    1.            Where can current grantees find their project description and award amount?
                  Is there an application process for HUD funds?
  RWHN




                  How long does a grant take to process? When can grantees access funds?
                  How will HUD contact CPF grantees included in Congressional Record?
                  What is the grant’s effective start date? When can a project incur costs?
  NAN




                  When is the grant’s ending date?
                  How is a Community Project Funding grant “closed out?”
                  Who is my HUD grants representative ?
  WOO




         .        What are the reporting requirements?
    10. When can a grantee organization start drawing funds?
    11. How long will it take to receive reimbursement after grantees submit voucher requests?

Grant Package Submission Requirements
    1.            What forms are part of the grant package?
                  How do grantees submit grant materials?
  PwWhnr




                  How do grantees change the Authorized Representative?
                  How do grantees add a new Point of Contact?
                  Is there a required format or template for the narrative and budget?
  aun




                  Does the narrative have to match the original funding request submitted to a Congressional
                  member?
   7.             What details should the budget include?
   8.             How do grantees change the project scope or budget?
   9.             Is the SF-LLL required if the grantee does not take part in lobbying activities?
    10. Why do grantees need to register in SAM.gov?
    11. Can grantees review the Grant Agreement before submitting it in DRGR?
    12. How do CPF grants distinguish between a subrecipient and a contractor?
    13. Who can grantees contact for assistance with the grant package?
    14. What is the Action Plan?

Cost Eligibility
    1.   What costs are allowable under the CPF grant?
    2.   Can grantees include administrative costs in their budget?
    3.   What is considered a ‘soft cost’? What is considered a ‘hard cost’?
    4.   Can grantees use CPF funds to reimburse costs incurred before the Grant Agreement has been
         fully executed?
    5.   What are indirect costs and indirect cost rate?
    6.   Does the federally negotiated approved rate apply to capital projects?
    7.   Do CPF grant funds have a match requirement?

Grant Legal Compliance
    1.   What laws apply to CPF grants?
    2.   Are there “cross- cutting” requirements associated with CPF grants?
    3.   What are the grant’s procurement requirements?

    Environmental Review Requirement
    1. Please see the separate Environmental Review FAQ for detailed information.

    Section 3
    1.   What is Section 3, and does it apply?
    2.   Whois a “Section 3 Worker”?
    3.   What is a “Section 3 Business Concern”?
    4.   How does Section 3 differ from the Minority Business Enterprise/Women    Business Enterprise
         programs?
    5.   Where can grantees find additional information on Section 3?

    Build America, Buy America (BABA)
    1. Does Build America, Buy America (BABA) apply?

    Davis-Bacon and Related Acts (DBRA)
    1. Does Davis Bacon apply?

DRGR System
    1.   What is DRGR?
    2.   When and how will grantees login to DRGR?
    3.   Who should grantees contact if they haven’t received their DRGR login information when
         expected?
    4.   What are the DRGR administrator’s roles?
    5.   Why was the Authorized Representative given a DRGR administrator user account?
    6.   How do initial DRGR users request additional users accounts?
    7.   How many DRGR users should be associated with each grantee?
    8.   What should grantees do if they receive an error message that the organization name, UEI, or
         EIN in their grant package does not match the grantee profile?
    9.   How long does the grant package review process take?
     10. Can grantees request drawdowns in DRGR after they receive a fully executed grant agreement?
     11. What should users do if they cannot login to DRGR because of a ‘Duplicate Session’ error
         message?


Grant Program Basics
1.   What is an Economic Development Initiative (EDI)/Community Project Funding (CPF)
     grant?
         An Economic Development Initiative/Community Project Funding grant (commonly referred to
         as a ‘CPF grant’) is a congressionally-directed funding provision that provides investment ina
         wide variety of economic and community development projects. Congress explicitly directs
         funds to individual entities for a specified amount and purpose in annual appropriations
         legislation. Entities not named within annual appropriations legislation may not access CPF grant
         funds. Visit the CPF grant webpage for more information.

2.   What should an organization do to be considered for a future CPF grant?
         Potential grantees should inquire with their Congressional representative. Members of Congress
         select CPF grants recipients through a congressionally-directed application process and then
         write them into annual appropriations legislation. HUD does not facilitate the grant application
         process. HUD manages and administers the grants after they have been selected and approved
         by Congress. Potential grantees should review the most recent CPF Grant Guide to see if the
         grant and its requirements are a good fit for their organization.

3.   What types of projects do CPF grants typically fund?
         Grantees use CPF grants for a wide variety of economic and community development projects
         such as housing, homelessness prevention, workforce training, public facilities, public parks,
         resilience planning and other critical infrastructure and services. Congressional offices may have
         specific requirements for the types of projects they select for funding.

4.   What is an Authorized Representative?
         The Authorized Representative is the individual in your organization with signatory authority for
         the EDI/CPF grant. The Authorized Representative’s digital signature will be applied to all grant
         package forms submitted in DRGR.

         By default, HUD assigns the authorized contact person we receive from Congress as each grant’s
         Authorized Representative. Grantees can confirm who’s listed as their Authorized Representative
         in DRGR. Please see the below ‘DRGR System’ section for more information about Authorized
         Representatives and DRGR user accounts.

         Other members of the grantee organization who do not have signatory authority and will receive
         HUD communications about the grant are additional Points of Contact. Grantees can contact
         their HUD representative to add or remove Points of Contact.

5.   Where can grantees find additional information?
         The CPF grants webpage links to various webinars, trainings, and/or other resources to guide
         grantees through grant process. This includes a link to past trainings, which grantees also can
        access here. Grantees can refer to the laws and regulations that guide CPF grants as an
        additional resource.


Award     Process and Timeline
1.   Where can current grantees find their project description and award amount?
        Congress’s annual appropriation legislation includes a Joint Explanatory Statement (JES) listing
        the EDI/CPF grantees, project descriptions, and award amounts. See the links below.

                 o   FY2022: Fiscal Year 2022 Consolidated Appropriation Act (page 612)
                 o   FY2023: Fiscal Year 2023 Consolidated Appropriations Act (page 82)
                 o   FY2024: Fiscal Year 2024 Consolidated Appropriations Act (page 916)

     Is there a competitive application process for HUD funds?
        No, CPF grantees are not selected or identified through   a HUD-managed    competitive process.
        HUD will contact awardees identified by Congress with instructions on the next steps. HUD
        requires grantees to submit a package of grant materials before they can access funds.

     How long does a grant take to process? When can a grantee access funds?
        Grantees can expect 90-120 days before they can access funds after submitting a complete grant
        materials package. This timeline allows for grant package review and administrative processing.
        It does not account for the time grantees spend preparing the grant package. Special
        circumstances that require additional administrative procedures may extend the processing time
        frame.

        HUD requires grantees to submit a grant package in the DRGR system that includes: a project
        narrative, budget, and federal forms in which the grantees certify or acknowledge funding
        requirements. Once submitted, HUD will closely review the grant package and may request
        corrections. Once approved, the grant agreement will be fully executed. Then, grantees must
        submit   a DRGR Action Plan for review before they can request drawdowns. Grantees should
        refer to their award year CPF Grant Guide for more information.

     How will HUD contact CPF grantees after they have been included in Congressional
     Record?
        HUD’s Congressional Grants Division will send the Authorized Representative a grant award letter
        and the CPF Grant Guide at least 60 days after annual appropriations legislation adds new
        grantees to Congressional Record. If a grantee organization has not received a grant award letter,
        then they should contact their HUD grants representative.

     What is the grant’s effective start date? When can a project incur costs?
        For FY2022, the date after which eligible soft costs can be incurred is the date of enactment on
        March 15, 2022. For FY2023, this date of enactment is December 29, 2022. For FY2024, this date
        of enactment is March 9, 2024.

        CPF grants may fund costs (including administrative, planning, operations and maintenance, and
        other costs) incurred before execution of the grant agreement but on or after the date of
        enactment, provided that:
            e   The costs are soft costs incurred on or after the date of enactment, or hard costs
                incurred on or after the date of enactment, and completion of the required project-
                specific environmental review; and (2) The costs meet the allowability criteria in 2 CFR
                200.403(a) through (g)

6.   When is the grant’s ending date?
        The grant’s budget and performance period ends at the end of the fiscal year that falls eight
        years after the grant’s award year. For example, the ending date for FY 2024 grantees is
        September 30, 2032. This timeframe is established by Congress. To give grantees the maximum
        time feasible to complete their projects, HUD has established August 31st of that year as the last
        day to request funds.

7.   How is a Community Project Funding grant “closed out?”
        HUD will initiate the closeout process by sending out a closeout package for the grantee to
        complete, sign, and return. The grant can be “closed out” under at least one of three
        circumstances:

                1)   The funding availability for the award has expired; or
                2)   The grantee declines the grant by providing written notification to HUD; or
                3)    All grant funds have been expended by the grantee.

8.   Who is my HUD grants representative?
        For the most up-to-date list of HUD grants representatives, refer to the CPF grant webpage.

9.   What are the reporting requirements?
        Grantees are required to submit a performance report every six months. Report deadlines are in
        January and July. Grantees should expect to update HUD on the overall status of the project and
        report on performance metrics generated by the DRGR system. Once grantees have a fully
        executed Grant Agreement and an approved Action Plan, they will be able to access the
        performance report module in DRGR and should complete performance reports for past
        reporting periods.

        Grantees with more than one grant must submit separate reports for each grant. Regular
        reporting requirements for CPF grants do not include other reports that may be required, such
        as an audit or Section 3 compliance reports.

10. When can grantee organizations start drawing funds?
        Grantees can expect to start drawing funds approximately one month after they receive their
        fully executed grant agreement from HUD. After the grant is fully executed, grantees will login to
        the DRGR grant administration system. Grantees will need to submit a DRGR Action Plan for
        HUD’s review and approval. Once the Action Plan is approved, grantees can start drawing funds.

11. How long will it take to receive reimbursement after grantees submit voucher requests?
        Grantees can expect to see funds within 3-5 business days after their voucher request for fund
        drawdown     has been reviewed and approved. Grantees should review the DRGR Quick Guide for
        more information about the drawdown       process and requirements.
Grant Package Submission Requirements
1.   What forms are part of the grant package?
        The grant package consists of a project narrative, line-item project budget, a signed Grant
        Agreement, and several HUD standard forms. Grantees submit their grant materials directly in
         DRGR. The information input into DRGR’s grant package module will populate the forms
        generated under the ‘Documents’ tab. These forms include: 1) HUD-1044, 2) SF-424, Application
        for Federal Assistance, 3) SF 424B, Assurances - Non-Construction Programs, andSF-424D,
        Assurances for Construction Programs, and 4) SF-LLL Disclosure of Lobbying Activities. Grantees
        will also upload a completed SF-1199A Direct Deposit Sign-Up Form to their DRGR grant
         package, along with a voided check or alternative documentation verifying ABA account and
         routing numbers.

         Refer to the Grant Guide for detailed instructions on complete the grant package in DRGR. The
        submission of incomplete or inaccurate forms may delay the grant process.

2.   How do grantees submit grant materials?
        Grantees submit their grant package in DRGR. Grantees will also upload their supporting
        documentation for voucher/drawdown       requests directly into DRGR when the grantee has
         reached that point in the process.

3.   How do grantees change the Authorized Representative?
        Grantees should contact their HUD grants representative. HUD will require a signed letter on
        organizational letterhead requesting this change.

4.   How do grantees add a new point of contact?
        To add or change a point of contact, please contact your HUD grants representative. Please note
        that changing your organization’s Authorized Representative requires a different, more
        formalized process than changing a point of contact.

5.   Is there a required format or template for the narrative and budget?
         No, there are no specific required templates. However, the project narrative and budget must
         meet several criteria to be approved.

             e   The narrative and line-item budget must be consistent with the Congressional
                 authorization for the grant. The line-item budget must also be consistent with the
                 limitations on expenses as outlined in the CPF Grant Guide.
             e   Both documents should address the ENTIRE project. If the CPF grant partially funds the
                 project, the line-item project budget must also include a sub-budget dedicated to the
                 CPF grant contribution to the overall project. The CPF grant portion of the line-item
                 budget must match the total CPF grant amount.

6.   Does the narrative have to match the original funding request submitted to Congressional
     members?
         No, a grantee’s narrative does not have to match the language submitted to Congress in their
        initial application. However, it does have to align with the project’s intended purpose as
         published in the project description of the Joint Explanatory Statement in the annual
        appropriations act. See the Grant Guide for minimum       requirements of what to include in the
        project narrative.

7.   What details should the budget include?
        The line-item budget should include costs for the entire project, showing both the budget for the
        CPF portion of the project and the non-CPF portions of the project.      Also, the budget should
        separate administrative costs from active delivery costs.

        The budget should include all pertinent costs. For example, a construction project budget may
        include: the overall amount for predevelopment costs; construction, renovation, and
        rehabilitation costs; acquisition, demolition, and site preparation; architectural and engineering
        fees; initial set asides for revolving loan funds; and administrative costs.


        See the Grant Guide and past trainings for more detailed guidance if needed.

8.   How do grantees make a change to the project scope or budget?
        HUD does not have the authority to approve changes that significantly alter the Congressional
        intent of the project. Changes to the project scope must align with the statutory language in the
        annual appropriations legislation directing funds to a specific project. Grantees who wish to
        change the project narrative or budget should contact their HUD grants representative to ensure
        the change is allowable. The Amendment       process can vary depending on the change requested.
        Amendments to previously approved projects may also require a revision of the environmental
        review for the amended project.

9.   Is the SF-LLL required if the grantee does not take part in lobbying activities?
        The SF-LLL is generated based on the grant package module in DRGR. Grantees must complete a
        SF-LLL whether or not lobbying has taken place. If lobbying activities have not taken place,
        please put N/A in the fields that ask for the name of the lobbying representative.

10. Why do grantees need to register in SAM.gov?
        To do any business with the federal government you must register your business in the System
        for Award Management (SAM) and renew every year. SAM will assign organizations a Unique
        Entity ID (UEI), which grantees will need to complete their grant package. Your SAM.gov
        registration must be active and not expired at or near the time of your grant materials
        submission.

        Register at: https://sam.gov. Expect 5 business days for the system to process your application
        and to 25 business days to be approved.

11. Can grantees review the Grant Agreement before submitting it in DRGR?
        HUD will distribute   a watermarked ‘Draft’ agreement so that grantees can review the document.
        Grantees should note that HUD may make changes to the final Grant Agreement to reflect
        updated guidance.
12. How do CPF grants distinguish between a subrecipient and a contractor?
        A subrecipient is an external entity in which the named grantee subawards a portion of a CPF
        grant to implement all or part of the project. Grantees are required to ensure that subrecipients
        comply with federal and grant requirements. Further guidance on subrecipients and subawards
        can be found in the Grant Guide. A contractor is a vendor who provides goods and services to
        the recipient or subrecipient in support of the grant-funded project. Grantee recipients have a
        procurement relationship with contractors. See CFR 2 Part 200.331 for more information.

13. Who can grantees contact for assistance with the grant package?
        Grantees can contact their HUD grants representative. HUD also offers additional technical
        assistance resources. Grantees can join a TA Cohort session for in-depth assistance completing
        their grant package. Learn more about cohorts and other TA resources here.

14. What is the Action Plan?
        Grantees complete their Action Plan after their grant package is approved and they have
        received the fully executed grant agreement. An Action Plan is the informational foundation for
        all subsequent DRGR tasks, namely submitting performance reports and requesting vouchers for
        fund drawdown. HUD grant representatives will review and approve Action Plans before
        grantees can proceed with any other DRGR tasks. Refer to the DRGR Quick Guide for more
        guidance.


Cost Eligibility
1.   What costs are allowable under the CPF grant?
        CPF grants can be used for hard and soft costs. Eligible soft costs may include administrative,
        planning, operations, maintenance, and other costs that are needed to carry out the project.
        Project expenses must also meet the cost eligibility criteria described in 2 CFR 200.403. Grantees
        can review those requirements to ensure that call costs are necessary, reasonable, and allocable
        to the award.

2.   Can grantees include administrative costs in their budget?
        Grantees can include both administrative and non-administrative costs in their budget as long as
        all costs support the grant’s congressionally-authorized purpose as listed on the Joint
        Explanatory Statement of the annual appropriations act. CPF grants do not have a cap on
        administrative costs.

3.   What is considered a ‘soft cost’? What is considered a ‘hard cost’?
        Hard costs include activities related to construction and groundbreaking. Soft cost is a
        construction industry accounting term for an expense item that is not considered direct
        construction cost. Soft costs can include architectural, engineering, financing, and legal fees, and
        other pre- and post-construction expenses.

        Contact your Environmental Officer to confirm if your soft costs are covered by HUD’s Part 50
        nationwide environmental review for CPF soft costs.
4.   Can grantees use CPF funds to reimburse costs incurred before the grant agreement has
     been fully executed?
        Grantees may incur costs on or after the date of enactment and before the grant agreement has
        been fully executed if the costs meet the following criteria:

        For 2024 grants: Soft costs can be incurred on or after March 9, 2024. Hard costs can be incurred
        on or after March 9, 2023 AND the completion of the required project-specific environmental
        review.

        For 2023 grants: Soft costs can be incurred on or after Dec. 29, 2022. Hard costs can be incurred
        on or after Dec. 29, 2022 AND the completion of the required project-specific environmental
        review.

        For 2022 grants: Soft costs can be incurred on or after March 15, 2022. Hard costs can be
        incurred on or after March 15, 2022 AND the completion of the required project-specific
        environmental review.

        More information can be found in the Grant Guide.

5.   What are indirect costs and indirect cost rate?
        Indirect costs are agency-wide, general management costs (i.e., activities for the direction and
        control of the agency as a whole). General management costs consist of administrative activities
        necessary for the general operation of the agency, such as accounting, budgeting, payroll
        preparation, personnel services, purchasing, and centralized data processing.

        Grantees must account for the indirect cost rate in their budget and grant agreement. A grantee
        that does not have a current negotiated indirect rate may charge a de minimis rate of 15% of
        modified total direct costs.

6.   Does the federally negotiated approved rate apply to capital projects?

        Federally negotiated cost rate guidance for capital projects varies depending on each grantee’s
        organization type. Grantees can contact their HUD grants representative and refer to 2 CFR Part
        200 for specific guidance.

7.   Do CPF grant funds have a match requirement?
        No, there is no match requirement.


Grant Legal Compliance
1.   What laws apply to CPF grants?
        CPF grants are subject to a variety of legislative statutes, agency regulations, and Executive
        Orders. All requirements are outlined in the grant agreement. See the Grant Guide for a detailed
        list of laws and regulations. The most substantial regulations are 2 CFR Part 200 for grant
        administration and 24 CFR Part 50 or Part 58 for environmental requirements. CPF grants are
        also subject to fair housing laws and non-discrimination laws (i.e., Civil Rights Act of 1964, Age
        Discrimination Act of 1975) and Executive Orders that address minority business enterprise,
        among others.
2.   Are there “cross- cutting” requirements associated with CPF grants?
         Yes, cross-cutting requirements (those required by any entity that receives federal money)
         associated with CPF Grants include Section 3 and environmental requirements. Details and
         guidelines for all applicable requirements are included in the Grant Guide.

3.   What are the grant’s procurement requirements?
         Guidance on RFQs vary based on each grantee’s specific circumstance. Please see the guidance
         outlined in 2 CFR Part 200, particularly Section 200.319 on Competition. Grantees must follow
         the procurement requirements of Part 200 or its local procurement requirements, whichever is
         more stringent.


Environmental Review Requirements
         Please see the separate Environmental Review FAQ for detailed information.


Section 3
1.   What is Section 3, and does it apply?
        Section 3 of the Housing and Urban Development Act of 1968 applies to all grant recipients that
         are awarded $200,000 or more for projects involving housing construction, rehabilitation, or
         other public construction. It requires that recipients, to the greatest extent feasible, direct
         economic opportunities to low- and very low-income persons (especially recipients of
         government assistance for housing) and to businesses that provide economic opportunities to
         low-and very low-income persons where a project is located.

         Section 3 applies to CPF grant projects when conditions of employment or contracting
         opportunities of a covered project or activity stated above are met. Review the regulations for
         more information. Grantees enacting Section 3-applicable projects will include Section 3
         accomplishments in their semi-annual performance report submitted in DRGR. See the following
         link for reporting guidance: hitps://files. hudexchange.info/resources/documents/DRGR-
         Guidance-on-Reporting-Section-3-Labor-Hours-Fact-Sheet.pdf

2.   Whois a “Section 3 Worker”?
         A Section 3 Worker is any worker who can provide evidence they meet the following situations:
         1) The worker’s income for the previous or annualized calendar year is below the income limit
         established by HUD (HUD's income limits); or 2) The worker is employed by a Section 3 business
         concern; or 3) The worker is a YouthBuild participant.

3.   What is a “Section 3 Business Concern”?
         Section 3 Business Concerns are businesses that can provide evidence that they meet one of the
         following criteria, documented within the last six-month period: 1) At least 51% owned and
         controlled by low- or very low-income persons; or 2) Over 75% of the labor hours performed for
         the business over the prior three-month period are performed by Section 3 workers; or 3) A
         business at least 51% owned and controlled by current public housing residents or residents who
         currently live in Section 8-assisted housing.
4.   How does Section 3 differ from the Minority Business Enterprise/Women Business
     Enterprise programs?
         Section 3 is race and gender neutral. The preferences provided under this regulation are based
         on income level and location.


Build America, Buy America (BABA)
1.   Does Build America, Buy America (BABA) apply?
         BABA requirements apply to all FY2024 CPF grant funds used for infrastructure projects that
         serve a public function unless a statutory exception or waiver applies. BABA does not apply to
         FY2022 or FY2023 CPF grants. You can find more information and guidance on HUD’s BABA
         website and the BABA FAQs on HUD Exchange.

Davis-Bacon and Related Acts (DBRA)
1.   Does Davis Bacon apply?
         Davis Bacon and Related Acts (DBRA) compliance is not a condition or requirement for CPF
         grants. It may be required if your project is also supported by other funds requiring adherence to
         the DBRA. You can find more information and guidance on the HUD Exchange’s Davis Bacon
         webpage.


DRGR System
1.   What is DRGR?
         DRGR (Disaster Relief Grant Reporting) is a grant administration and accounting system used to
         facilitate CPF grant management,   reporting, and fund drawdown. Grantees use it to submit their
         grant package, set up an Action Plan, submit performance reports, and request vouchers for
         fund drawdown.

2.   When and how will grantees login to DRGR?
        HUD will create each grant’s initial DRGR user account. This initial user will then be able to
         request additional user accounts for other points of contact who require DRGR access.
         Instructions for requesting new user accounts are in the Grant Guide and DRGR Quick Guide.
         New user requests can take up to a few weeks to process. Activated users will receive the
         account ID, temporary password, and PIN via an encrypted email from HUD once the account is
         activated. Users can access DRGR at: https://drgr.hud.gov/DRGRWeb/

3.   Who should grantees contact if they haven’t received their DRGR login information when
     expected?
         Grantees can contact their HUD grants representative. Please note that user requests can take
         up to a few weeks to process through HUD’s security office. Users will receive their login
         information via an encrypted email once their user account is active. We recommend that
         grantees check their soam folder and ensure that they are able to receive encrypted emails.
         Please refer to the Grant Guide for more information about new user requests.
4.   What are the DRGR administrator’s roles?
        ‘Grantee Admin’ is one of several permissions associated with DRGR user accounts. HUD
        automatically assigns each grant’s initial user this permission. There is no cap on the number of
        users with this permission. Users can add and remove this permission (and all DRGR user
        permissions) as is necessary.

        DRGR administrators has the responsibility of recertifying other users in their organization. All
        users must be recertified in January and June. HUD recertifies all users with the ‘Grantee Admin’
        permission. These users then recertify everyone else associated with their grant.

5.   Why was the Authorized Representative given             a DRGR administrator user account?
        HUD selects who will be a grantee’s initial DRGR user account based on the contact information
        we receive from Congress. In most cases, this contact is a grantee organization’s Authorized
        Representative. Once this initial user can access DRGR, they are able to request additional user
        accounts for others who will work on the grant.

        HUD does not require that a grant’s initial DRGR user has to be the Authorized Representative. If
        a grant’s Authorized Representative was not added as the initial DRGR user, then the initial user
        may want to request a new user account for them.

6.   How do initial DRGR users request additional users accounts?

        Instructions for requesting additional user accounts are in the Grant Guide. Grantees can also
        refer to this step-by-step video. New user requests can take up to a few weeks to process
        through HUD’s security office.

        Please note that user accounts are associated with each user’s name. HUD does not permit
        individuals to access DRGR using another person’s user account.

7.   How many DRGR users should be associated with each grantee?
        DRGR users are associated with grantee organizations and instructions for requesting additional
        user accounts are in the Grant Guide. Grantees can also refer to this step-by-step video. New
        user requests can take up to a few weeks to process through HUD’s security office.

        Please note that user accounts are associated with each user’s name. HUD does not permit
        individuals to access DRGR using another person’s user account.

8.   What should grantees do if they receive an error message that the organization name, UEI,
     or EIN in their grant package does not match the grantee profile?
        Grantees should first navigate to their grantee profile to confirm if the information listed there is
        correct. Grantees can do this by navigating to the ‘Manage Grantee’ option under the crown
        icon.
                e   =If the UEI or EIN numbers are incorrect, then grantees should contact their HUD grants
                    representative. Sometimes, HUD adds temporary UEls or EINs to grantee profiles in
                    DRGR if the initial information we receive and input into DRGR is incomplete or out-of-
                    date.
                e   If the grantee organization name does not match what a grantee input into their grant
                    package, then the grantee should edit their grant packages so the names match exactly.
                  If a grantee would like to change the name listed in their grantee profile, then they
                  should contact their HUD grants representative. Please note that the grantee
                  organization names in DRGR are as they’re listed in the Joint Explanatory Statement of
                  annual appropriations legislation. Any substantial changes to your organizational name
                  may require a technical correction. However, HUD can make minor changes referred to
                  as an in-house administrative change. Grantees should discuss their individual
                  circumstances with their HUD representative.

9.   How long does the grant package review process take?
        Grant packages go through multiple levels of review. HUD representatives act as the first level of
        review, followed by supervisory and then signatory reviews. Grantees may receive their grant
        package for correction and resubmission at any level of review. Review timeframes may vary;
        however, grantees can expect a fully executed grant agreement within a few weeks of submitting
        their grant packages without any requested corrections.

10. Can grantees request drawdowns in DRGR after they receive a fully executed grant
     agreement?
        No, grantees must first submit an Action Plan for their HUD representative’s review and
        approval. The Action Plan is the informational foundation for voucher requests. When grantees
        are ready to submit voucher requests, they will need to associate each request with a particular
        Action Plan ‘Activity. Please see the DRGR Quick Guide for more information.

11. What should users do if they cannot login to DRGR because of a ‘Duplicate Session’ error
     message?
        Users should first wait a few hours to see if their DRGR session resets on its own. Users may also
        want to clear their cache and ensure that they are using the Google Chrome       browser. If this error
        message persists over multiple days, then users should contact their HUD representative to
        request a session reset.

        To prevent this error, users should not login to DRGR on multiple tabs, and they should not
        refresh DRGR when they see the loading screen that displays the DRGR logo and name.
