      Regulations Summary                     The PUSH Contract Preservation purpose includes:
                                              Preservation of affordability restrictions affecting
                                              publicly supported housing properties facing OHCS,
                                              HUD or USDA Rural Development contract termination
                                              through an opportunity to offer to purchase by OHCS or
                                              local government (qualified purchasers).



     Definition of Publicly Supported Housing
     “Publicly Supported Housing” means a multifamily rental housing development of five or
     more units that receives or benefits from government assistance. Applicable types of
     government assistance include:
        e Acontract for project-based rental assistance trom the Department of Housing and
           Urban Development (HUD) or USDA Rural Development (RD);
        e OHCS contract(s) which include an affordability restriction; and
         e   Local government subsidy programs as approved                              by OHCS   to be included in the
             definition of publicly supported housing.
     Note: OAR 813-115-0110(12) identifies exclusions to this definition.

     Owner Notice to OHCS and Local Government (“Qualified Purchasers”)
     Owners of publicly supported housing are required to provide notice(s) to qualified
     purchasers entitled to notice, as follows:
         e   Notice of Expiring Affordability Restrictions: Provide the owner’s “intent” regarding
             preservation between 36 and 30 months prior to when contract(s) for the
             participating property will expire or terminate.
         «   Notice of Withdrawing Property: Provide updated “intent” regarding preservation
             between 30 and 24 months prior fo when contract(s} for the participating property
             will expire or terminate.

     Qualified Purchaser Opportunity to Offer to Purchase
     Qualified purchasers have opportunity to submit offers to purchase starting as early as
     36 months prior to expiring affordability restrictions; however, the owner is not obligated
     to accept any of those initial offers. The owner is required to provide access to property
     records/documents within 30-days upon written request.




Publicly Supported   Housing Contract   Preservation   (PUSH-CP)   - Fact Sheet - Page 1 of 2
                                                                                                             OREGON HOUSING and
                                                                                                             COMMUNITY SERVICES
    Qualified Purchaser Right of First Refusal
    If there is a subsequent 3° Party offer to purchase, qualified purchasers with right of first
    refusal, may submit          a matching offer.          The owner must accept the first matching offer
    received.        If no matching offers are submitted, the owner may pursue the sale to the 34
    party. A Right of First Refusal may extend up to 36 months after a property has been
    withdrawn from publicly supported housing.

    OHCS “Designee”
    OHCS may appoint a “designee” to act as a qualified purchaser.   Potential designees
    may contact OHCS about project-specific preservation opportunities through new
    ownership. Once approved by OHCS, a designee must: (a) agree to preserve the
    affordability of the participating property, and                    (b}) assume alll rights and responsibilities
    attributable to OHCS as a prospective purchaser of the participating property.
    Successful appointment as a designee is not associated with OHCS funding
    opportunities or approvals. Designees that become owners are required to enter into a
    minimum 20-year affordability restriction contract with OHCS, even if OHCS does not
    provide new funding.

    Owner Notice to Tenants (OHCS contracts only).
    Between 24 and 20 months before expiration of OHCS                            restrictions, Owners must provide
    notice to the tenants and prospective tenants, including: of 1) Expiration date of the
    OHCS affordability restrictions; 2} Owner’s intent to withdraw the property from publicly
    supported housing upon the expiration date; 3) an explanation of current Oregon law
    limits on annual rent increases and the maximum allowable percent increase by the end
    of September each year, including the current maximum rent increase percentage
    allowable ; and 4} Information about tenant resources.

    Safe Harbor (OHCS contracts only)
    “Safe harbor” means residential tenancies that existed on the termination date of a
    contract with OHCS, and beginning on the termination date and lasting for a period of
    three years, the owner or landlord of formerly publicly supported housing: (a) May not
    terminate the tenancy under ORS 90.727(3}(b), (4) (bb) or (5); (b) May not provide a rent
    increase notice more than once in a calendar year; and (c} Shall comply with ORS 90.323
    and with requirements adopted by OHCS and applicable to publicly supported housing
    managed by OHCS that govern rent increases, including requirements related to rent
    increase limits, required notices or approval or review by OHCS.

    Oregon      Revised Statutes (ORS) and Oregon Administrative Rules (OAR)
        e    Oregon Revised Statutes, ORS 456.250 through 456.265; and 456.559(
                                                                             1) (b}
        e    Oregon Administrative Rules (OAR), Chapter 813, Division 115

         For more information about PuSH-CP, please contact arh.hcs@hcs.oregon.gov.




Publicly Supported   Housing Contract   Preservation   (PUSH}-CP - Fact Sheet - Page 2 of 2                  PP
                                                                                                             OREGON HOUSING and
                                                                                                             COMMUNITY SERVICES
