Advancing racial justice in our policies, institutions and culture. | Race Forward Skip to main content Main navigation Learn About Us Our Story Our Mission, Vision, and Values Our Strategic Plan Annual Reports 2024 2022-23 Projects, Programs, & Initiatives Butterfly Lab Colorlines Government Alliance on Race and Equity H.E.A.L. (Honest Education Action and Leadership) Together Housing and Land Justice Narrative Place-Based Strategies (Co-governance) Policy Innovation Lab Services for Organizations Our Board Our Team Get Tools and Resources Understanding Racial Equity Events Cultural Week of Action Facing Race Conference Just Narratives Training Racial Equity Series H.E.A.L. Together Training Government Webinars (#RaceAnd) Podcasts Toolkits Reports Ways to Give Open Search Donate Now Submit Close Search Breadcrumb Home Advancing racial justice in our policies, institutions and culture. We support communities and public institutions to achieve a just multiracial democratic society through governance that advances racial justice. Featured CWA Returns for 2025 Race Forward is proud to announce the return of the Cultural Week of Action on Race and Democracy! Join communities across communities across cities, towns, and in virtual spaces as we bring into view the vision of a just, multicultural democracy that serves ALL of us. Take Action Messages to Grow and Uproot Race Forward's new guide equips organizations with the tools to develop and strengthen messages that advance racial equity and justice. Learn More Coming to Just Narratives Race Forward is honored to welcome Alok Vaid-Menon as keynote speaker for Just Narratives for Multiracial Solidarity. Hear from the internationally acclaimed poet, actor, comedian, and artist, November 13-15, 2025 in St. Louis. Register Today We build power in our communities We work with communities to build the collective power necessary to counter structural racism. Connected and aligned individuals, organizations, and movements standing together to inspire positive change can build a just, multiracial, democratic society. Events We convene people across all sectors into collaborative spaces for racial justice movement building. Check Upcoming Events Training We provide training to help people develop skills and strategies to understand, challenge, and address structural and institutional racial inequities. Learn more Tools We develop toolkits to provide guidance for building collaborative racial equity strategies, cultures, and practices. Get Tools Reports We offer analysis of how systemic racism leads to inequitable outcomes in different areas and highlight ways to foster and strengthen social change. View Reports We Work with Government to Transform Institutions and Sectors Deepening the ability of local, regional, and federal government to eliminate racial inequity drives larger systemic and institutional change across multiple levels of society. The Government Alliance on Race and Equity (GARE) A national network of local, regional, and state government jurisdictions working to achieve racial equity in their policies and practices, GARE equips racial equity practitioners in government with skills, resources, tools, and strategic approaches to build and sustain racial equity across sectors to improve opportunities for all. Learn More Federal Initiative to Govern for Racial Equity (FIRE) An initiative aimed at creating sustained racial equity change across the federal government. FIRE helps federal partners to organize for and operationalize racial equity. Learn More We Harness the Power of Narrative to Transform Culture We construct new, effective narratives that build power to achieve racial equity and advance racial justice. Narrative Strategy We use Narrative Strategy to tell our story of how a racially just society benefits all of us. Through the practice of sharing connected and ongoing stories across multiple mediums and platforms, we are able to build a powerful narrative that reinforces the need for a just, multiracial democracy while countering harmful narratives. Read more Videos Race Forward works with community advocates and organizations to build power in communities and bridge connections to effect policy change that centers community voices in decision-making. Watch now Colorlines How do we implement effective co-governance? Watch How Government Can Deliver Lasting Racial Justice Wins , a conversation between community organizers and government practitioners. Watch now on Colorlines Podcasts Momentum at the White House: On his last day as Special Advisor to the President and Deputy Director of the Domestic Policy Council, Chiraag Bains sits down with Momentum podcast to talk about President Biden’s commitment to racial equity across the federal government. Watch the episode Footer Careers Contact Us Press Privacy Policy ©1999–2025 Race Forward. All rights reserved. Donate Now Sign Up For Our Newsletter Charity Navigator Candid Youtube Instagram LinkedIn Bluesky Facebook Threads