U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development

             Public and Indian Housing

         2017 Mainstream Voucher Program
                    FR-6100-N-43
          Application Due Date: 06/18/2018
          2017 Mainstream Voucher Program
                    FR-6100-N-43
               TABLE OF CONTENTS

     . Funding Opportunity Description.
  II. Award Information.
 Il. Eligibility Information.
           A. Eligible Applicants.
           B. Cost Sharing or Matching.
           C. Other.
 IV.   Application and Submission Information.
           A. Obtaining an Application Package.
           B. Content and Form of Application Submission.
           C. System for Award Management (SAM) and Dun and
               Bradstreet
               Universal Numbering System (DUNS) Number.
               Application Submission Dates and Times.
          Q-mm ©




               Intergovernmental Review.
               Funding Restrictions.
               Other Submission Requirements.
       Application Review Information.
           A. Criteria.
           B. Review and Selection Process.
           C. Anticipated Announcement and Award Dates.
 VI.   Award Administration Information.
           A. Award Notices.
           B. Administrative, National and Departmental Policy R
               equirements.
           C. Reporting.
 VIL.  Agency Contact(s).
VII.   Other Information.
  IX. Appendix.
                   U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development

Program Office:                                        Public and Indian Housing
Funding Opportunity Title:                             2017 Mainstream Voucher Program
Announcement Type:                                     Initial
Funding Opportunity Number:                            FR-6100-N-43
Primary CFDA Number:                                   14.879
Due Date for Applications:                             06/18/2018


 Overview
For Further Information Contact: Please direct questions regarding the specific program
requirements of this Program Notice of Funding Availability (NOFA) to the agency contact
identified in Section VII. Please direct general questions regarding the FY2017 NOFAs to the
Office of Strategic Planning and Management, Grants Management and Oversight Division, at
AskGMO@hud.gov.

Additional Overview Information

Incorporation of the General Section. HUD publishes a General Section each fiscal year that
contains requirements for all applicants to HUD’s various competitive grant programs,
including this NOFA. Applications must meet all of the requirements of the General Section in
addition to the requirements of this NOFA to be considered and potentially receive funding. The
full title of the General Section is the General Section to HUD's Fiscal Year 2017 Notices of
Funding Availability for Discretionary Programs. Copies are available at Grants.gov and HUD's
Funds Available page.

1. Participative Planning and Implementation. HUD encourages applicants to ensure, where
applicable, public decision making and meaningful participation throughout the visioning,
development, and implementation of funded projects. HUD encourages applicants to work with
all residents of affected areas, especially communities traditionally marginalized from planning
processes. In seeking public participation, applicants and grantees must ensure that all
communications are provided in a manner that is effective for persons with hearing, visual, and
other communications-related disabilities consistent with Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act
of 1973 and, as applicable, the Americans with Disabilities Act. In addition, Title VI of the
Civil Rights Act of 1964, 42 U.S.C. 2000d and Executive Order 13166 require that grantees
take responsible steps to ensure meaningful access to services, programs, and activities by
persons with Limited English Proficiency (LEP persons).


2. OMB   Approval Number(s):                           2577-0169


I. Funding Opportunity Description.




                                                                                           1 of 32
A. Program Description.

1. Purpose and Summary.
The Omnibus Appropriations Act, 2017 made approximately $13 million available for new
Section 811 Housing Choice Vouchers (known as Mainstream Vouchers) to assist non-elderly
persons with disabilities. The Omnibus Appropriations Act, 2018 made an additional $385
million available for new Mainstream Vouchers. HUD plans to award the 2017 funding and a
portion of the 2018 funding through this NOFA to qualified applicants based on the criteria laid
out in this NOFA. Remaining funds will be awarded through a future NOFA.
While not a requirement to receive funding under this NOFA, HUD will provide additional
points for public housing agencies (PHAs) that target funds to assist non-elderly persons with
disabilities who are transitioning out of institutional or other segregated settings, at serious risk
of institutionalization, homeless, or at risk of becoming homeless. In addition, points will be
awarded for PHAs that formalize partnerships with and leverage resources from State Medicaid
Agencies and various health and human services partner agencies or organizations.
Targeting resources to assist eligible persons with disabilities and their families who are
transitioning out of institutional or other segregated settings or at serious risk of
institutionalization will help further the goals of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA).
One critical goal under the ADA is to ensure services, programs, and activities by public entities
are provided in the most integrated setting appropriate to the needs of individuals with
disabilities, as affirmed by the Supreme Court in the Olmstead decision (and settlements and
decrees implementing O/mstead). This NOFA will offer vouchers to provide sustained
community-based integrated housing opportunities to non-elderly persons with disabilities.
Partnerships
Applicants are encouraged to establish formal partnerships with multiple health and human
service agencies or organizations with a demonstrated capacity to coordinate voluntary services
and supports to enable individuals to live independently in the community. These partnerships
should assist the PHA to use these vouchers by providing referrals, assisting with a timely
transition to a unit, and providing the opportunity to access any supportive services and
supports. Demonstrated capacity may refer to previous experience and a well-developed plan to
provide referrals, services, and supports, such as organizations participating in a state-wide
Olmstead plan to assist obtaining integrated housing throughout the community, in the Money
Follows the Person demonstration to assist transitions from institutional to community settings,
or in implementing a state or local plan to prevent and end homelessness.
A well-developed plan would align with any existing state Olmstead Plan and any other existing
state plans for housing/community living for persons with disabilities, and detail how the
partnerships will function to provide outreach and referrals, transition services, tenancy support,
and other services and supports. Applicants with no significant previous experience with these
types of partnerships may also meet these requirements by detailing the specified plan above
and documented efforts and intention to establish these types of partnerships.
In addition to receiving referrals from partner agencies, the PHA must allow non-elderly
persons with disabilities to apply directly to the program without going through a partner
agency. There is no limit to the number of agencies a PHA may partner with for referrals and



                                                                                                2 of 32
supportive services.
Although PHAs may provide vouchers to any eligible non-elderly person with a disability, the
review process awards more points to those PHAs that set up partnerships and preferences for
eligible persons that are transitioning out of institutional or other segregated settings, at serious
risk of institutionalization, homeless, or at risk of becoming homeless.

2. Changes from Previous NOFA.
The last NOFA for the Mainstream Voucher Program was issued in 2005. The target
beneficiaries or voucher recipients for this NOFA are any household that includes one or
more non-elderly person with disabilities, instead of only those families with a head, co-head, or
spouse that is a person with disabilities. This NOFA provides additional points to PHAs that
target assistance towards non-elderly persons with disabilities who are transitioning out of
institutional or other segregated settings, at serious risk of institutionalization, homeless, or at
risk of becoming homeless, and who formalize partnerships with and leverage resources from
State Medicaid Agencies and various health and human services partner agencies or
organizations.

3. Definitions.
a. Standard Definitions

Analysis of Impediments to Fair Housing Choice (AI) is a review of impediments or barriers
that affect the rights related to fair housing choice, and pertains to program participants in
jurisdictions operating under a current Consolidated Plan and public housing agencies operating
under a PHA Plan.

Assessment of Fair Housing (AFH) is the analysis undertaken pursuant to 24 CFR 5.154. AFH
includes an analysis of fair housing data, an assessment of fair housing issues and contributing
factors, the prioritization of contributing factors, and the identification of fair housing goals. It
is conducted and submitted to HUD using the Assessment Tool. Entities obligated to prepare
and submit an AFH are: (1) Jurisdictions and Insular Areas that are required to submit
Consolidated Plans for the following programs: (1) The Community Development Block Grant
(CDBG) program (see 24 CFR part 570, subparts D and I); (11) The Emergency Solutions Grants
(ESG) program (see 24 CFR part 576); (111) The HOME Investment Partnerships (HOME)
program (see 24 CFR part 92); and (iv) The Housing Opportunities for Persons With AIDS
(HOPWA) program (see 24 CFR part 574); and (2) Public housing agencies (PHAs) receiving
assistance under sections 8 or 9 of the United States Housing Act of 1937 (42 U.S.C. 1437f or
42 U.S.C.1437g).

Authorized Organization Representative (AOR) is the person authorized by the E-Biz point of
contact in the System for Award Management to submit applications on behalf of the
organization. The AOR is listed in item 21 on the SF-424.

Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance (CFDA) is a directory of the various Federal programs,
projects, services and activities that offer financial and non financial assistance and benefits to
the American public. CFDA Number is the unique number assigned to each program, project,
service or activity listed in the Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance (CFDA).


                                                                                                 3 of 32
Consolidated Plan is a document developed by states and local jurisdictions, which they
complete by engaging in a participatory process to assess their affordable housing and
community development needs and market conditions, and to make data-driven, place-based
investment decisions with funding from formula grant programs. (See 24 CFR 91 for more
information about the Consolidated Plan and related Annual Action Plan.)

Contract means a legal instrument by which a non-Federal entity purchases property or services
needed to carry out the project or program under a Federal award. The term as used with respect
to awards, subawards, and cooperative agreements subject to 2 CFR part 200 does not include a
legal instrument, even if the non-Federal entity considers it a contract, when the substance of
the transaction meets the definition of a Federal award or subaward. (See 2 CFR 200.22 and
200.92.)

Contractor means an entity that receives a contract.

Deficiency — Deficiency is information missing or omitted within a submitted application.
Deficiencies typically involve missing documents, information on a form, or some other type of
unsatisfied information requirement (e.g., an unsigned form, unchecked box, etc.). Depending
on specific criteria, deficiencies may be either curable or non-curable.

     e Curable Deficiency — Applicants may correct a curable deficiency with timely action. To
       be curable the deficiency must:
       - Not be a threshold requirement;
       - Not influence how an applicant is ranked or scored versus other applicants; and
       - Be remedied within the time frame specified in the notice of deficiency.
     e Non-Curable Deficiency — An applicant cannot correct a non-curable deficiency after the
       submission deadline. Non-curable deficiencies are deficiencies that if corrected would
       change an applicant’s score or rank versus other applicants. Non-curable deficiencies
       may result in an application being marked ineligible, or otherwise adversely affect an
       application’s score and final determination

DUNS Number is the nine-digit identification number assigned to a business or organization by
Dun & Bradstreet and provides a means of identifying business entities on a location-specific
basis. Requests for a DUNS number can be made by visiting the Online DUNS Request Portal.

Eligibility Requirements — Eligibility requirements are those requirements that must be met for
an application to be eligible for funding. Deficiencies in meeting an eligibility requirement may
be categorized as either curable or non-curable.

Federal Awardee Performance and Integrity Information System (FAPIIS) is a database that has
been established to track contractor misconduct and performance.

Grants.gov is the website that serves as the Federal government’s central portal for searching
for and applying for grants throughout the Federal government.



                                                                                            A of 32
Non-Federal Entity means a state, local government, Indian tribe, institution of higher education
(IHE), or non-profit organization that carries out a Federal award as a recipient or subrecipient.

Pass-through Entity means a non-Federal entity that provides a subaward to a subrecipient to
carry out part of a Federal program.

Personally identifiable information (PII), as defined in Office of Management and Budget M-
07-16, is any information which can be used to distinguish or trace an individual’s identity, such
as their name, social security number, biometric records, etc. alone, or when combined with
other personal or identifying information which is linked or linkable to a specific individual,
such as date and place of birth, mother’s maiden name, etc.

Point of Contact (POC) is the person who may be contacted with questions about the
application submitted by the AOR. The point of contact is listed in item 8F on the SF-424.

Preferred Sustainability Status Communities (PSS) for the purposes of HUD’s FY2017 funding
competitions, are communities that have received PSS under HUD's FY2011 Sustainable
Communities Regional Planning Grant Program and/or HUD's FY2011 Community Challenge
Planning Grant Program. Click here for list. Promise Zones are federally-designated, high-
poverty urban, rural and tribal communities where the Federal government will partner with and
invest in communities to accomplish these goals: create jobs, leverage private investment,
increase economic activity, expand educational opportunities, and reduce violent crime.

Promotores/Promotoras are Spanish-speaking Community Health Workers who work in their
communities to reduce barriers to health services and make health care systems more
responsive.

Recipient means a non-Federal entity that receives an award directly from HUD to carry out an
activity under a HUD program.

Section 3 Business Concern means a business concern (1) that is 51 percent or more owned by
Section 3 residents; or (2) of which at least 30 percent of permanent, full-time employees are
currently Section 3 residents, or were Section 3 Residents within three years of the date of first
employment with the business concern; or (3) that provides evidence of a commitment to
subcontract over 25 percent of the dollar award of all subcontracts to be awarded to business
concerns that meet the qualifications in this definition.

Section 3 Residents means: 1) Public housing residents; or 2) Low and very-low income
persons, as defined in 24 CFR 135.5, who live in the metropolitan area or non-metropolitan
county where a HUD-assisted project for housing or community development is located.

Standard Form 424 (SF-424) is the Application for Federal Assistance Programs required by
discretionary grant programs.

Subaward means an award provided by a pass-through entity to a subrecipient for the
subrecipient to carry out part of a Federal award received by the pass-through entity. It does not


                                                                                              5 of 32
include payments to a contractor or payments to an individual that is a beneficiary of a Federal
program. A subaward may be provided through any form of legal agreement, including an
agreement that the pass-through entity considers a contract.

Subrecipient means a non-Federal entity that receives a subaward from a pass-through entity to
carry out part of a HUD program; but does not include an individual that is a beneficiary of such
program. A subrecipient may also receive other Federal awards directly from a Federal
awarding agency (including HUD).

System for Award Management (SAM), located at the website sam.gov, is the official U.S.
Government system that consolidated the capabilities of Central Contractor Registry (CCR),
Excluded Parties List System (EPLS) and the Online Representations and Certifications
Application (ORCA). Registration with Sam.gov is required for submission of applications via
grants.gov.

Threshold Requirement — Threshold requirements are a type of eligibility requirement.
Threshold requirements must be met in order for an application to be reviewed. Threshold
requirements are not curable. Threshold requirements are listed in Section III.C.1. Threshold
Requirements of this Program NOFA.

Applicants must ensure their application package addresses all threshold requirements. Please
check your application carefully!

b. Program Definitions
Eligible household: A household composed of one or more non-elderly person with disabilities,
which may include additional household members who are not non-elderly persons with
disabilities. A household where the sole members is an emancipated minor is not an eligible
household.
The terms "disability" and "person with disabilities" are used in two contexts - for civil rights
protections, and for program eligibility purposes. Each use has specific definitions. When used
in the context of application of Federal civil rights laws and requirements, including the
prohibition against discrimination, the civil rights related definitions apply. When used in the
context of eligibility under this NOFA, the program eligibility definitions apply.
Non-elderly person with disabilities (for purposes of determining eligibility):   A person 18 years
of age or older and less than 62 years of age, and who:
(1) Has a disability, as defined in 42 U.S.C. 423;
(11) Is determined, pursuant to HUD regulations, to have a physical, mental, or emotional
impairment that:
(A) Is expected to be of long-continued and indefinite duration;
(B) Substantially impedes his or her ability to live independently, and
(C) Is of such a nature that the ability to live independently could be improved by more suitable
housing conditions; or



                                                                                              6 of 32
(111) Has a developmental disability as defined in 42 U.S.C. 6001.
Person with disabilities (for purposes of civil rights): see 24 CFR § 8.3; 24 CFR § 100.201; 28
CFR 8§ 35.104, 108).
The following definitions are provided as a guide for the purposes of this NOFA, however,
PHAs may use applicable local or state definitions if available as long as individuals who
fall under these definitions are still eligible.
Institutional or other segregated settings include, but are not limited to: (1) congregate settings
populated exclusively or primarily with individuals with disabilities; (2) congregate settings
characterized by regimentation in daily activities, lack of privacy or autonomy, policies limiting
visitors, or limits on individuals’ ability to engage freely in community activities and to manage
their own activities of daily living; or (3) settings that provide for daytime activities primarily
with other individuals with disabilities.
At serious risk of institutionalization: Includes an individual with a disability who as a result of
a public entity's failure to provide community services or its cut to such services will likely
cause a decline in health, safety, or welfare that would lead to the individual's eventual
placement in an institution. This includes individuals experiencing lack of access to supportive
services for independent living, long waiting lists for or lack of access to housing combined
with community based services, individuals currently living under poor housing conditions or
homeless with barriers to geographic mobility, and/or currently living alone but requiring
supportive services for independent living. A person cannot be considered at serious risk of
institutionalization unless the person has a disability. An individual may be designated as at
serious risk of institutionalization either by a health and human services agency, by a
community-based organization, or by self-identification.
Homeless means:
(1) An individual or family who lacks a fixed, regular, and adequate nighttime residence,
meaning:
(1) An individual or family with a primary nighttime residence that is a public or private place
not designed for or ordinarily used as a regular sleeping accommodation for human beings,
including a car, park, abandoned building, bus or train station, airport, or camping ground;
(ii) An individual or family living in a supervised publicly or privately operated shelter
designated to provide temporary living arrangements (including congregate shelters, transitional
housing, and hotels and motels paid for by charitable organizations or by federal, State, or local
government programs for low-income individuals); or
(iii) An individual who is exiting an institution where he or she resided for 90 days or less and
who resided in an emergency shelter or place not meant for human habitation immediately
before entering that institution;
(2) An individual or family who will imminently lose their primary nighttime residence,
provided that:
(1) The primary nighttime residence will be lost within 14 days of the date of application for
homeless assistance;
(11) No subsequent residence has been identified; and



                                                                                               7 of 32
(iit) The individual or family lacks the resources or support networks, e.g., family, friends, faith-
based or other social networks, needed to obtain other permanent housing;
(3) Unaccompanied youth under 25 years of age, or families with children and youth, who do
not otherwise qualify as homeless under this definition, but who:
(1) Are defined as homeless under section 387 of the Runaway and Homeless Youth Act (42
U.S.C. 5732a), section 637 of the Head Start Act (42 U.S.C. 9832), section 41403 of the
Violence Against Women Act of 1994 (42 U.S.C. 14043e-2), section 330(h) of the Public
Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 254b(h)), section 3 of the Food and Nutrition Act of 2008 (7
U.S.C. 2012), section 17(b) of the Child Nutrition Act of 1966 (42 U.S.C. 1786(b)), or section
725 of the McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act (42 U.S.C. 11434a);
(11) Have not had a lease, ownership interest, or occupancy agreement in permanent housing at
any time during the 60 days immediately preceding the date of application for homeless
assistance;
(111) Have experienced persistent instability as measured by two moves or more during the 60-
day period immediately preceding the date of applying for homeless assistance; and
(iv) Can be expected to continue in such status for an extended period of time because of
chronic disabilities; chronic physical health or mental health conditions; substance addiction;
histories of domestic violence or childhood abuse (including neglect); the presence of a child or
youth with a disability; or two or more barriers to employment, which include the lack of a high
school degree or General Education Development (GED), illiteracy, low English proficiency, a
history of incarceration or detention for criminal activity, and a history of unstable employment;
or
(4) Any individual or family who:
(1) Is fleeing, or is attempting to flee, domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault,
stalking, or other dangerous or life-threatening conditions that relate to violence against the
individual or a family member, including a child, that has either taken place within the
individual‘s or family‘s primary nighttime residence or has made the individual or family afraid
to return to their primary nighttime residence;
(11) Has no other residence; and
(111) Lacks the resources or support networks, e.g., family, friends, and faith-based or other
social networks, to obtain other permanent housing.
At risk of becoming homeless: An individual or family who:
(1) Does not have sufficient resources or support networks, e.g., family, friends, faith-based or
other social networks, immediately available to prevent them from moving to an emergency
shelter or another place described in paragraph (1) of the “Homeless” definition in this section;
and
(11) Meets one of the following conditions:
(A) Has moved because of economic reasons two or more times during the 60 days immediately
preceding the application for homelessness prevention assistance;
(B) Is living in the home of another because of economic hardship;



                                                                                                 8 of 32
(C) Has been notified in writing that their right to occupy their current housing or living
situation will be terminated within 21 days of the date of application for assistance;
(D) Lives in a hotel or motel and the cost of the hotel or motel stay is not paid by charitable
organizations or by federal, State, or local government programs for low-income individuals;
(E) Lives in a single-room occupancy or efficiency apartment unit in which there reside more
than two persons, or lives in a larger housing unit in which there reside more than 1.5 people per
room, as defined by the U.S. Census Bureau;
(F) Is exiting a publicly funded institution, or system of care (such as a health-care facility, a
mental health facility, foster care or other youth facility, or correction program or institution); or
(G) Otherwise lives in housing that has characteristics associated with instability and an
increased risk of homelessness.



4. Resources.




     e Grants.gov
     e HUD Funds available
     e Code of Conduct list
     e SAM
     e Dun & Bradstreet
     e Do Not Pay
     e FAPHS




B. Authority.
The statutory authority for the Mainstream Voucher program is the Cranston-Gonzalez National
Affordable Housing Act, 42 U.S.C. 8013 (P.L. 101-625) as amended by the Frank Melville
Supportive Housing Act of 2010 (P.L. 111-374), the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2017
(P.L. 115-31) and the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2018 (P.L. 115-141).


II. Award Information.

A. Available Funds.
$100,000,000 is available through this NOFA.

Additional funds may become available for award under this NOFA as a result of HUD's efforts
to recapture unused funds, use carryover funds, or because of the availability of additional
appropriated funds. Use of these funds is subject to statutory constraints. All awards are subject
to the applicable funding restrictions described in the General Section and to those contained in



                                                                                                9 of 32
this NOFA.


B. Number of Awards.
HUD expects to make approximately 40 awards from the funds available under this NOFA.


C. Mintmum/Maximum         Award   Information.


Estimated Total Funding:                                $100,000,000
Minimum Award Amount:                                   $75,000 Per Project Period
Maximum Award Amount:                                   $5,000,000 Per Project Period

D. Period of Performance.


Estimated Project Start Date:                           08/07/2018
Estimated Project End Date:                             08/06/2019
Length of Project Periods:                              12-month project period and budget
                                                        period
Length of Project Periods Explanation of Other:

E. Type of Funding Instrument.
Funding Instrument Type:                                Grant




IIL. Eligibility Information.

A. Eligible Applicants.
Public housing authorities/Indian housing authorities

Only public housing authorities (PHAs) and non-profit organizations that already administer
Housing Choice Vouchers are eligible to apply. Indian housing authorities (IHAs) are not
eligible because they do not administer Housing Choice Vouchers.


HUD does not award grants to individuals. HUD will not evaluate applications from ineligible
applicants.

B. Cost Sharing or Matching.
This Program does not require an applicant to leverage resources through cost sharing or
matching.


C. Threshold Requirements.



                                                                                           10 of 32
Applicants who fail to meet any of the following threshold eligibility requirements will be
deemed ineligible. Applications from ineligible applicants will not be evaluated. See also
Section I.A.3. Definitions.

1. Timely Submission of Applications — Applications submitted after the deadline stated within
this NOFA and that do not meet the requirements of the grace period policy will be marked late.
Late applications are deemed ineligible and will not be considered for funding. See also Section
IV Application and Submission Information, part D. Application Submission Dates and Times.

2. Resolution of Civil Rights Matters. Outstanding civil rights matters must be resolved before
the application deadline. Applicants who after review are confirmed to have civil rights matters
unresolved at the application deadline will be deemed ineligible; the application will receive no
further review, will not be rated and ranked, and will not receive funding.

a. Applicants having any of the charges, cause determinations, lawsuits, or letters of findings
referenced in subparagraphs (1) — (5) that have not been resolved to HUD’s satisfaction before
or on the application deadline date are ineligible for funding. Such matters include:
    (1) Charges from HUD concerning a systemic violation of the Fair Housing Act or receipt
    of a cause determination from a substantially equivalent state or local fair housing agency
    concerning a systemic violation of a substantially equivalent state or local fair housing law
    proscribing discrimination because of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, disability or
    familial status;
    (2) Status as a defendant in a Fair Housing Act lawsuit filed by the Department of Justice
    alleging a pattern or practice of discrimination or denial of rights to a group of persons
    raising an issue of general public importance under 42 U.S.C. 3614(a);
    (3) Status as a defendant in any other lawsuit filed or joined by the Department of Justice,
    or in which the Department of Justice has intervened, or filed an amicus brief or statement
    of interest, alleging a pattern or practice or systemic violation of Title VI of the Civil
    Rights Act of 1964, Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, Section 109 of the
    Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, the Americans with Disabilities Act or
    a claim under the False Claims Act related to fair housing, non-discrimination, or civil
    rights generally including an alleged failure to affirmatively further fair housing;
    (4) Receipt of a letter of findings identifying systemic non-compliance with Title VI of the
    Civil Rights Act of 1964, Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, Section 109 of the
    Housing and Community Development Act of 1974; or the Americans with Disabilities
    Act; or
    (5) Receipt of a cause determination from a substantially equivalent state or local fair
    housing agency concerning a systemic violation of provisions of a state or local law
    prohibiting discrimination in housing based on sexual orientation, gender identity, or lawful
    source of income.


b. HUD will determine if actions to resolve the charge, cause determination, lawsuit, or letter of
findings taken before the application deadline date will resolve the matter. Examples of actions
that may be sufficient to resolve the matter include, but are not limited to:




                                                                                             11 of 32
     e Current compliance with a voluntary compliance agreement signed by all the parties;
     e Current compliance with a HUD-approved conciliation agreement signed by all the
       parties;
     e Current compliance with a conciliation agreement signed by all the parties and approved
       by the state governmental or local administrative agency with jurisdiction over the
       matter;
     e Current compliance with a consent order or consent decree;
     e Current compliance with a final judicial ruling or administrative ruling or decision; or
     e Dismissal of charges.



D. Statutory and Regulatory Requirements Affecting Eligibility.

1. Compliance with Non-discrimination and Related Requirements.
Unless otherwise specified, these non-discrimination and equal opportunity authorities and
other requirements apply to all Program NOFAs. Please read the following requirements
carefully as the requirements are different among HUD’s programs.
Compliance with Fair Housing and Civil Rights Laws.
With some exceptions for federally recognized Indian tribes, recipients and their prospective
subrecipients must comply with all applicable fair housing and civil rights requirements in 24
CFR 5.105(a), including, but not limited to, the Fair Housing Act; Title VI of the Civil Rights
Act of 1964; Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act; Title II and Title III of the ADA of 1990.

Recipients of HUD funds, and their prospective sub-recipients, who are conducting programs or
activities in a state or local jurisdiction that has passed a law prohibiting discrimination in
housing based upon sexual orientation or gender identity, or a law prohibiting discrimination in
housing based on lawful source of income, must comply with the law(s) of the state or locality
in which the program activities are conducted.



Affirmatively Furthering Fair Housing.
Section 808(e)(5) of the Fair Housing Act requires HUD to affirmatively further the purposes of
the Fair Housing Act in its housing and urban development programs. HUD requires recipients
of funds, including those awarded and announced under HUD's FY 2017 Program NOFAs not
specifically exempted, to take meaningful actions that affirmatively further fair housing.

Unless otherwise specified elsewhere in this Program NOFA, an applicant must discuss how it
will carry out the proposed activities in a manner that affirmatively furthers fair housing in
compliance with Section 808(e)(5) of the Fair Housing Act. If the applicant operates in a
jurisdiction with an accepted Assessment of Fair Housing, the proposed activities should be
consistent with the AFH's fair housing goals and with fair housing strategies specified in any
applicable Consolidated Plan or Public Housing Agency Plan.

Federally recognized Indian tribes are not subject to the requirement to affirmatively further fair


                                                                                            12 of 32
housing in their use of certain HUD funds. Other tribal entities may also be exempt. If a tribal
entity's use of HUD funds is subject to the Fair Housing Act, then its proposed activities under a
particular program NOFA should be consistent with the AFH's fair housing goals and with fair
housing strategies specified in any applicable Consolidated Plan.

Improving Access to Services for Persons with Limited English Proficiency (LEP).
Executive Order (E.O.) 13166 seeks to improve access to federally assisted programs and
activities for individuals who, because of national origin, have LEP. Recipients of HUD funds
shall take reasonable steps to ensure meaningful access to their programs and activities to LEP
individuals. As an aid to recipients, HUD published Final Guidance to Federal Financial
Assistance Recipients: Title VI Prohibition Against National Origin Discrimination Affecting
Limited English Proficient Persons (LEP Guidance) in the Federal Register on January 22, 2007
(72 FR 2732). LEP guidance and LEP information is available on HUD's website.

Accessible Technology.
Section 508 of the Rehabilitation Act (Section 508) requires HUD to ensure, when developing,
procuring, maintaining, or using electronic and information technology (EIT), that the EIT
allows persons with disabilities to access and use information and data comparably to those
without disabilities unless an undue burden would result to the Federal agency. HUD
encourages its recipients to adopt the goals and objectives of Section 508 by ensuring
comparable access whenever EIT is used. Recipients must also comply with Section 504 of the
Rehabilitation Act and, where applicable, the ADA. These statutes also require effective
communication with individuals with disabilities and prohibit EIT-imposed barriers to access
information, programs, and activities by persons with disabilities. (See Information on
accessible technology.)

Equal Access Housing in HUD Programs Regardless of Sexual Orientation or Gender
Identity.
The Equal Access Rule requires that a determination of eligibility for housing that is assisted by
HUD or subject to a mortgage insured by the Federal Housing Administration (FHA) shall be
made in accordance with the eligibility requirements provided for such program by HUD, and
such housing shall be made available without regard to actual or perceived sexual orientation,
gender identity or marital status. In addition, the rule prohibits owners or administrators of
HUD.-assisted or FHA insured housing, approved lenders in an FHA mortgage insurance
program, or any other recipient or subrecipient of HUD funds from inquiring about the sexual
orientation or gender identity of an applicant for or occupant of HUD-Assisted or insured
housing. Thus, HUD recipients and subrecipients must comply with 24 CFR 5.105(a)(2) when
determining eligibility for housing assisted by HUD or insured by FHA and may not inquire
about sexual orientation or gender identity to make such determinations. HUD's definitions of
sexual orientation and gender identity are at 24 CFR 5.100. HUD's definition of family is at 24
CFR 5.403. (See other regulatory changes made through HUD's Equal Access Rule at 77 FR
5662 Feb. 3, 2012.)


2. HUD- or Federal government-wide Requirements.
a. Outstanding Delinquent Federal Debts — It is HUD policy, consistent with the purposes and



                                                                                           13 of 32
intent of 31 U.S.C. 3720B and 28 U.S.C. 3201(e), that applicants with outstanding delinquent
federal debt will not be eligible to receive an award of funds, unless:

     e A negotiated repayment schedule is established and the repayment schedule is not
       delinquent, or
     e Other arrangements satisfactory to HUD are made prior to the award of funds by HUD.

If satisfactory arrangements cannot be completed within 90 days of notification of selection,
HUD will not make an award of funds to the applicant, and instead offer the award to the next
eligible applicant. HUD may act earlier than the above stated 90 days to ensure, in HUD’s
determination, that the funds can be obligated in a timely manner. Applicants selected for
funding, or awarded funds, must report any changes in status of current agreements covering
federal debt. HUD may withhold funding, terminate an award, or seek other remedies from a
grantee if a previously agreed-upon payment schedule has not been followed or a new
agreement with the federal agency to which the debt is owed has not been signed.

b. Sufficiency of Financial Management System. HUD will not award or disburse funds to
applicants that do not have a financial management system that meets Federal standards as
described at 2 CFR 200.302. HUD may arrange for a survey of financial management systems
for applicants selected for award who have not previously received Federal financial assistance,
where HUD Program officials have reason to question whether a financial management system
meets Federal standards, or for applicants considered high risk based on past performance or
financial management findings.

c. Debarments and/or Suspensions — Under 2 CFR 2424, no award of Federal funds may be
made to debarred or suspended applicants, or those proposed to be debarred or suspended from
doing business with the Federal government.

d. False Statements — A false statement in an application is grounds for denial or termination of
an award and possible punishment, as provided in 18 U.S.C. 1001.

e. Pre-selection Review of Performance. — If your organization has delinquent federal debt or is
excluded from doing business with the Federal government, the organization may be ineligible
for an award. In addition, before making a Federal award, HUD reviews information available
through any OMB-designated repositories of government-wide eligibility qualification or
financial integrity information, such as Federal Awardee Performance and Integrity Information
System (FAPHS), and the “Do Not Pay” website. HUD may consider other public sources such
as newspapers, Inspector General or Government Accountability Office reports or findings, or
other complaints that have been proven to have merit. Applicants may review and comment on
any information in FAPIIS through SAM. HUD reserves the right to:

     e Deny funding, or with a renewal or continuing award, consider suspension or
       termination of an award immediately for cause,
     e Require the removal of any key individual from association with management or
       implementation of the award, and



                                                                                           14 of 32
     e Make provisions or revisions regarding the method of payment or financial reporting
       requirements.


f. Mandatory Disclosure Requirement. Recipients or applicants must disclose in writing to the
awarding program office at HUD, all violations of Federal criminal law involving fraud,
bribery, or gratuity violations potentially affecting the Federal award within ten days after
learning of the violation. Recipients that have received a Federal award including the term and
condition outlined in Appendix XII to Part 200—Award Term and Condition for Recipient
Integrity and Performance Matters are required to report certain civil, criminal, or
administrative proceedings to SAM. Failure to make required disclosures can result in any of
the remedies described in §200.338 Remedies for noncompliance, including suspension or
debarment. (See also 2 CFR part 180, 31 U.S.C. 3321, and 41 U.S.C. 2313.)

g. Conducting Business in Accordance with Ethical Standards/Code of Conduct —

Before entering into an agreement with HUD, applicants selected for award must ensure an up-
to-date copy of the organization’s code of conduct, dated and signed by the Executive Director,
Chair, or equivalent official, of the governing body of the organization has been submitted to
HUD.

Codes of conduct must prohibit real and apparent conflicts of interest that may arise among
officers, employees, or agents; prohibit the solicitation and acceptance of gifts or gratuities over
minimal value by officers, employees, or agents for their personal benefit; and outline
administrative and disciplinary actions available to remedy violations of such standards. (See 2
CFR 200.112 and 2 CFR 200.318.)

If the recipient has a parent, affiliate, or subsidiary organization, whether non-profit or for-
profit, the recipient must also maintain written standards of conduct covering organizational
conflicts of interest. “Organizational conflicts of interest” means that because of relationships
with a parent, affiliate, or subsidiary organization, the recipient is unable, or appears to be
unable, to be impartial in administering the award or serving as a pass-through-entity.

h. Conflict of Interest of Consultants or Technical Experts Assisting HUD — Consultants and
technical experts who assist HUD in rating and ranking applications for funding under
published FY 2017 Program NOFAs are subject to 18 U.S.C. 208, the federal criminal conflict-
of-interest statute, and the Standards of Ethical Conduct for Employees of the Executive Branch
regulation published at 5 CFR part 2635. As a result, consultants and technical experts who
have assisted or plan to assist applicants with preparing applications for FY 2017 Program
NOFAs may not serve on a selection panel and may not serve as a technical advisor to HUD.
Anyone involved in rating and ranking FY 2017 Program NOFA applications, including
departmental staff, experts and consultants must avoid conflicts of interest or the appearance of
such conflicts. These individuals must also disclose to HUD’s Office of General Counsel Ethics
Law Division the following information, if applicable:

     e How the selection or non-selection of any applicant under a FY 2017 Program NOFA


                                                                                              15 of 32
       will affect the individual’s financial interests, as provided in 18 U.S.C. 208, or
     e How the application process involves a party with whom the individual has a covered
       relationship under 5 CFR 2635.502

The consultant or technical expert assisting HUD must disclose this information before
participating in any matter regarding an FY 2017 program NOFA. Applicants with questions
regarding these provisions or concerning a conflict of interest, please call the Office of General
Counsel, Ethics Law Division, at (202) 708-3815 (this is not a toll-free number). The phone
number above may also be reached by individuals who are deaf or hard of hearing, or who have
speech disabilities, through the Federal Relay Services service at 1-800-877-8339.

1... Prohibition Against Lobbying Activities. Applicants are subject to the provisions of Section
319 of Public Law 101-121, 31 U.S.C. 1352, (the Byrd Amendment) and 24 CFR part 87, which
prohibit recipients of federal awards from using appropriated funds for lobbying the executive
or legislative branches of the Federal government in connection with a specific award. All
applicants must submit with their application the signed Certification Regarding Lobbying
included in the Application download from Grants.gov. In addition, applicants must disclose,
using Standard Form LLL (SF-LLL), “Disclosure of Lobbying Activities,” any funds, other
than federally appropriated funds, that will be or have been used to influence federal employees,
members of Congress, or congressional staff regarding specific grants or contracts. Federally-
recognized Indian tribes and tribally designated housing entities (TDHEs) established by
federally-recognized Indian tribes as a result of the exercise of the tribe’s sovereign power are
excluded from coverage of the Byrd Amendment, but state-recognized Indian tribes and TDHEs
established only under state law shall comply with this requirement. Applicants must submit the
SF-LLL if they have used or intend to use non-federal funds for lobbying activities.

k. Consistency with the Consolidated Plan and Analysis of Impediments (AI)/Assessment of
Fair Housing — Certain competitive Programs require applications to contain a certification of
consistency with a HUD-approved Consolidated Plan. This certification means that the
proposed activities are consistent with the jurisdiction’s strategic plan, and the location of the
proposed activities is consistent with the geographic areas specified in the Consolidated Plan.
The Consolidated Plan also includes the jurisdiction’s certification to affirmatively further fair
housing which means, among other requirements, that the jurisdiction has conducted an
Al/Assessment of Fair Housing. If a program NOFA requires a certification of consistency with
the Consolidated Plan and you fail to provide the certification, and you do not cure the omission
as a curable deficiency, HUD will not fund the application.

Under HUD’s regulations at 24 CFR 91.2(d), an applicant’s PHA Plan must include a
certification by the appropriate state or local official that the PHA Plan is consistent with the
applicable Consolidated Plan for the jurisdiction in which the PHA is located and must describe
the manner in which the applicable contents of the PHA Plan are consistent with the
Consolidated Plan.

E. Program Specific Requirements.
Housing Choice Voucher Program (HCV) Requirements. HCVs awarded under this
NOFA will be subject to all requirements of 24 CFR part 982, or part 983 if vouchers are


                                                                                            16 of 32
project-based. Moving to Work (MTW) agencies may administer these vouchers under their
MTW agreements, unless inconsistent with Appropriations Act requirements or
the requirements of this NOFA. If a conflict occurs, the Appropriations Act and/or this funding
notice govern.
Reallocation of Funds. Funds awarded may be recaptured and reallocated if the PHA or non-
profit organization does not comply with the requirements of the NOFA or fails to maintain a
utilization rate of 80% for the vouchers awarded under this NOFA.
Nondiscrimination Requirements for Partnerships. Establishing a network of referrals and
supports through PHA partnerships with service agencies should help ensure voucher
utilization, especially among individuals transitioning from institutional and other segregated
settings and individuals at serious risk of institutionalization. While HUD does not require a
particular structure for partner agreements, HUD encourages PHAs to develop partnerships with
several agencies at both the state and local level. This may be accomplished by formalizing
agreements with several community-based organizations committing to provide supports and
referrals, or alternatively, by formalizing agreements with primary partner agencies that in turn
have demonstrated commitments to work with various identified community-based
organizations. This commitment may be demonstrated by identifying the various local
organizations the PHA and primary partner agencies will work with through this network. This
may include, for example, organizations assisting with discharge/transition planning and case
management; supported employment providers; state Medicaid agencies (SMAs); Centers for
Independent Living (CILs); fair housing organizations; state Aging and Disability Resource
Centers (ADRCs); Area Agencies on Aging (AAA); State Protection and Advocacy Agencies
(P&A's); Community Mental Health Centers and/or Long-Term Care Ombudsmen;
Accountable Care Organizations; health and human service agencies; other State agencies; and
other various entities.
Such partnerships, however, cannot result in eligibility requirements which may violate
nondiscrimination requirements under any applicable Federal civil rights statutes and
requirements, including Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act (Section 504), titles II or III of the
Americans with Disabilities (ADA), and the Fair Housing Act and their implementing
regulations at 24 CFR part 8; 28 CFR parts 35 and 36; 24 CFR part 100. PHAs cannot restrict
the vouchers to those referred or approved by a single state or local agency or to persons with
specific disabilities or diagnoses unless through a HUD-approved remedial action. See HUD's
Statement on the Role of Housing in Accomplishing the Goals of Olmstead, https://www.hud
.2zov/sites/documents/OLMSTEADGUIDNC060413.PDF. For example, PHAs cannot
exclusively partner with a local organization that solely provides services to individuals with a
specific type of disability, or with a state Medicaid agency whose programs do not provide
service options for individuals with certain disabilities; such partnerships would result in
referrals being limited to individuals with a limited range of disabilities who qualify for specific
service programs and exclude individuals with other types of disabilities who otherwise would
qualify for participation in the voucher program.
Voluntary Supportive Services. PHAs (including MTW agencies) or partner
agencies/organizations must not require participants to utilize supportive services as a condition
for participation. Moreover, individuals with disabilities are not required to accept any services
as a condition of housing assistance. Individuals may receive services from a different provider



                                                                                             17 of 32
of their choosing or choose not to participate in any services.
Option to Apply Directly. As with any other program applicant, PHAs (including
MTW agencies) must allow qualifying persons with disabilities that are transitioning out of
institutional or other segregated settings, at serious risk of institutionalization, homeless, or at
risk of becoming homeless to apply for the program directly through the PHA and not limit
vouchers only to those being referred or approved through partner agencies. The PHA cannot
give preference to referred persons over applicants who apply directly through the PHA for the
program.
Program Evaluation. As a condition of the receipt of financial assistance under this NOFA, all
Grantees will be required to cooperate with HUD, Department of Health and Human Services
(HHS), and Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS), or any contractors affiliated
with HUD, HHS, and CMS in evaluating this program. HUD may pursue the option to fund a
rigorous independent evaluation of this program, or HUD may choose to utilize existing
administrative data and data submitted by grantees as part of quarterly and annual reports to
assess the effectiveness of the program.
Effective Communication. All notices and communications must be provided in a manner that
is effective for persons with hearing, visual, and other communication-related disabilities
consistent with Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act and HUD's Section 504 regulation, and
Titles II or III of the ADA and implementing regulations. Recipients must provide appropriate
auxiliary aids and services necessary to ensure effective communication, which includes
ensuring that information is provided in appropriate accessible formats as needed, e.g., Braille,
audio, large type, assistive listening devices, and sign language interpreters, accessible websites
and other electronic communications (See 24 CFR 8.6; 28 CFR 35.160, 36.303).

F. Criteria for Beneficiaries.
This program has eligibility criteria for beneficiaries.
Voucher recipient households must include a person that meets the definition of a non-
elderly person with disabilities.


IV. Application and Submission Information.

 A. Obtaining an Application Package.
Instructions for Applicants
You must download both the Application Instruction and the Application Package from
Grants.gov. To ensure you are using the correct Application Package and Application
Instructions, you must verify that the CFDA Number and CFDA Description on the first page of
the Application Package, and the Opportunity Title and the Funding Opportunity Number match
the Program and NOFA to which you are applying.

The Application Package contains the Adobe forms created by Grants.gov. The Instruction
download contains official copies of the General Section and Program NOFA, and forms
necessary for a complete application. The Instruction download may include Microsoft Word,
Microsoft Excel and additional Adobe Portable Document Format documents.




                                                                                              18 of 32
An applicant demonstrating good cause may request a waiver from the requirement for
electronic submission. For example, a lack of available Internet access in the geographic area in
which your business offices are located. Lack of SAM registration or valid DUNS is not
deemed good cause. If you cannot submit your application electronically, you must ask in
writing for a waiver of the electronic grant submission requirements. HUD will not grant a
waiver if HUD does not receive your written request at least 15 days before the application
deadline or if you do not demonstrate good cause. If HUD waives the requirement, HUD must
receive your paper application before the deadline of this NOFA. To request a waiver and
receive a paper copy of the application materials, you should contact:
Email:   Mainstream Vouchers(@hud.gov




 B. Content and Form of Application Submission.
To ensure that the correct Application Package and Application Instructions are used, applicants
must verify that the CFDA Number and CFDA Description on the first page of the Application
Package downloaded from Grants.gov, as well as the Funding Opportunity Title, and the
Funding Opportunity Number match the Program and NOFA to which they are applying. You
must verify that boxes 11, 12, and 13 on the SF-424 match the NOFA     for which you are
applying. If they do not match, you have downloaded the wrong Application Instruction and
Application Package.
Submission of an application under the wrong CFDA and Funding Opportunity Number is a
curable deficiency.
1. Content.
Forms for your package include the forms outlined below:

Forms / Assurances     Submission Requirement           Notes / Description
/ Certifications
HUD Applicant       HUD will provide instructions       HUD will provide instructions to
Recipient           to grantees on how the form is      grantees on how the form is to be
Disclosure Report — to be submitted.                    submitted.
(HUD) 2880
Applicant/Recipient
Disclosure/Update
Report

Acknowledgment of      This form is applicable only   — This form is not required but is
Application Receipt    to applications submitted on   —_ available for applicants who want
(HUD2993), if          paper, following receipt ofa    — confirmation that their hard-copy
applicable             waiver of electronic              application was received by HUD. The
                       submission.                       form must be submitted with the
                                                         application, in accordance with the
                                                         application submission instructions
                                                         included in the waiver of electronic


                                                                                            19 of 32
                                                            submission.

Funding Application      See instructions for
(HUD-52515)              completing this form in the
                         following section.


Additionally, your complete application must include the following narratives and non-form
attachments.

     1. Funding Application (HUD-52515)
             1. PHA’s name, address, and PHA code (“Name and Mailing Address of the
                 Housing Agency (HA) requesting housing assistance payments” on HUD-52515)
                 The geographic area in which the PHA may administer the vouchers awarded
                 under this NOFA (“Legal Area of Operation” on HUD-52515)
                 Minimum Number of Vouchers the applicant will accept
               mY




                 Maximum Number of Vouchers the applicant will accept
               . Section D: enter narrative responses to the following questions under Section D
                 of the form:
                       1. Describe the PHA’s and partner organization(s)’s experience and
                          capacity for providing the following services:
                                1. Coordinating outreach and referral of persons with disabilities in
                                   institutional and other segregated settings who want to move to
                                   community settings.
                                2. Coordinating outreach and referral of persons who are homeless
                                   or at risk of becoming homeless.
                                3. Assisting persons with disabilities applying to various housing
                                   programs.
                                4. Assisting persons with disabilities in finding housing, making or
                                   facilitating home modifications and securing disability-related
                                   accommodations.
                                5. Assisting persons with disabilities moving into units on the
                                   private rental market.
                                6. Making referrals, coordinating, and monitoring home
                                   and community-based services.
                                7. Providing tenancy support for persons with disabilities.
                       2. Describe how the PHA and partner organization(s) will work together
                          and communicate to track and improve referrals and leasing of the
                          vouchers awarded through this NOFA.
                       3. Describe how the PHA will ensure that persons with all types of
                          disabilities may access assistance under this program. For example, the
                          PHA may:
                                1. Partner with multiple organizations that combined will assist
                                   persons with all types of disabilities
                                2. Partner with one organization that serves all persons with
                                   disabilities, i.e. does not target only a specific subset of persons



                                                                                                20 of 32
                                 with disabilities, e.g. persons with developmental disabilities.
                              3. Provide direct outreach to persons with disabilities and groups
                                 serving persons with disabilities inviting them to apply for
                                 assistance
     2. Certification - PHA must submit a certification stating whether the PHA will provide an
        admissions preference for the targeted population. Certification should be provided as
        follows. If certification is not provided, relevant points will not be awarded. (/nsert
        name of PHA) will provide a preference in its administrative plan for non-elderly
        persons with disabilities transitioning out of institutional and other segregated settings,
        at serious risk of institutionalization, homeless, or at risk of becoming homeless. An
        update to the administrative plan will be completed within one calendar year of award
        date.
     3. Letters of intent, memoranda of understanding, or other agreements from State Medicaid
        Agencies and/or other community-based organizations serving persons with disabilities,
        including but not limited to Centers for Independent Living (as defined in section 702 of
        the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 U.S.C. 796a)), fair housing organizations, state Aging
        and Disability Resource Centers (ADRCs), Area Agencies on Aging (AAAs) or State
        Agencies (as defined as defined in section 102 of the Older Americans Act of 1965 (42
        U.S.C. 3002), State Protection and Advocacy Agencies (P&A’s) Community Mental
        Health Centers and/or Long Term Care Ombudsmen, Accountable Care Organizations,
        health and human services agencies, or other State agencies with experience helping
        identify and assist individuals seeking to transition into community settings or to remain
        in community settings. The letter, memo, or agreement must be on the organization’s
        letterhead and must include:
              1. The services the organization will provide.
              2. The population the organization serves, including whether population is limited
                 by type of disability, age, or geographic area.
     4. Relevant excerpts from PHAs Administrative Plan, PHA Plan, and any other relevant
        evidence to demonstrate the PHAs commitment to serving persons with disabilities.

2. Format and Form.
Narratives and other attachments to your application must follow the following format
guidelines.


No restrictions.



 C. System for Award Management (SAM) and Dun and Bradstreet Universal Numbering
 System (DUNS) Number.
1. SAM Registration Requirement

Applicants must be registered with SAM before submitting their application. In addition,
applicants must maintain an active SAM registration with current information at all times when
they have an active Federal award or an application or plan under consideration by HUD.




                                                                                            21 of 32
2. DUNS Number Requirement.

Applicants must provide a valid DUNS number, registered and active at SAM, in the
application. DUNS numbers may be obtained for free from Dun and Bradstreet.

3. Requirement to Register with Grants.gov.

Anyone planning to submit grant applications on behalf of an organization must register at
Grants.gov and be approved by the EBiz Point of Contact in SAM to submit applications for the
organization.

Registration for SAM and Grants.gov is a multi-step process and can take four (4) weeks or
longer to complete if data issues arise Applicants without a valid registration cannot submit an
application through Grants.gov. Complete registration instructions and guidance are provided at
Grants.gov. See also Section IV.B for necessary form and content information.


D. Application Submission Dates and Times.
The application deadline is 11:59:59 p.m. Eastern time on 06/18/2018. Applications must be
received no later than the deadline.
Submit your application to Grants.gov unless a waiver has been issued allowing you to submit
your application in paper form. Instructions for submitting your application to Grants.gov are
contained in the Application Package you downloaded from Grants.gov. Instructions for
submitting your paper application will be contained in the waiver of electronic submission.

Applications under HUD’s Continuum of Care (CoC) grant program are an exception to the
submission requirements detailed in the previous paragraph. Applications for that grant program
are submitted through HUD’s e-snaps system.

“Received by Grants.gov” means the applicant received a confirmation of receipt and an
application tracking number from Grants.gov. Grants.gov assigns an application tracking
number and date- and time-stamps each application upon successful receipt by the Grants.gov
system. A submission attempt that does not result in confirmation of receipt and an application
tracking number is not considered received by Grants.gov.

Applications received by Grants.gov must be validated by Grants.gov in order to be received by
HUD. “Validated by Grants.gov” means the application has been accepted and was not rejected
with errors. You can track the status of your application by logging into Grants.gov, selecting
“Applicants” from the top navigation, and selecting “Track my application” from the dropdown
list. If the application status is “rejected with errors,” you must correct the error(s) and resubmit
the application before the 24-hour grace period ends. Applications in “rejected with errors”
status after the 24-hour grace period expires will not be received by HUD. Visit Grants.gov for
a complete description of processing steps after submitting an application. To quickly check the
status of your application:




                                                                                              22 of 32
     e Go to www. grants. gov.
     e Under the APPLICANTS tab on the Home page header, select Track My Application.
     e In the text box provided, enter your Grants.gov application tracking number and click on
       the red Submit Application Tracking Numbers button. If the status is rejected with
       errors, you can get more information by logging in to Grants.gov with the username and
       password for the AOR account used to submit the application.

HUD strongly recommends Applications be submitted at least 48 hours before the deadline and
during regular business hours to allow enough time to correct errors or overcome other
problems.

Note: Now you can verify the contents of your submitted application to confirm Grants.gov
received everything you intended to submit. To verify the contents of your submitted
application:

     e Go to www. grants. gov.
     e On the top, right corner, click on the LOGIN link.
     e Under the APPLICANT tab, enter the username and password for the AOR account
       used to submit the application and click on the LOGIN button.
     e If your organization has Standard AOR Access Level, please click on the CHECK MY
       APPLICATION STATUS link on the left. If your organization has Expanded AOR
       Access Level, please click on the CHECK APPLICATION STATUS FOR
       ORGANIZATION link.
     e Select SEARCH BY: ALL and click on the SEARCH button.
     e Click on the submission you wish to download to highlight it.
     e Click on the DOWNLOAD APPLICATION button.
     e You will be prompted to OPEN or SAVE a ZIP file. Click on the button for the option
       of your choice.

Please make note of the associated tracking number as it will be referenced by the Grants.gov
Help Desk. Make note of the ticket number in case you need help from grants.gov.

HUD may extend the application deadline for any program if Grants.gov is offline or not
available to applicants for at least 24 hours immediately prior to the deadline date, or the system
is down for 24 hours or longer and impacts the ability of applicants to cure a submission
deficiency within the grace period.

HUD may also extend the application deadline upon request if there is a presidentially-declared
disaster in the applicant’s area.

In the event of either of these events, HUD will post a notice on its website that establishes the
new, extended deadline for the affected applicants. HUD will also include the fact of the
extension in the program’s Notice of Funding Awards that is required to be published in the
Federal Register.



                                                                                             23 of 32
In determining whether to grant a request for an extension based on a presidentially-declared
disaster, HUD will consider the totality of the circumstances including the date of an applicant’s
extension request (how closely it followed the basis for the extension), whether other applicants
in the geographic area are similarly affected by the disaster, and how quickly power or services
are restored to enable the applicant to submit its application.

PLEASE NOTE: Busy servers, slow processing, or large file sizes, improper registration or
password issues are not valid circumstances to extend the deadline dates or the grace period.
1. Amending or Resubmitting an Application.
Before the submission deadline, you may amend an application that has been validated by
Grants.gov by resubmitting a revised application containing the new or changed material. The
resubmitted application must be received and validated by grants.gov by the applicable
deadline. If HUD receives an original and a revised application for a single proposal, HUD will
evaluate only the last submission received by Grants.gov before the deadline.

2. Grace Period for Grants.gov Submissions.
If your application is received by Grants.gov before the deadline, but is rejected with errors, you
have a grace period of 24 hours after the application deadline to submit a corrected application
that is received and validated by Grants.gov. The date and time stamp on the Grants.gov system
determines the application receipt time. Any application submitted during the grace period that
is not received and validated by grants.gov will not be considered for funding. There is no grace
period for paper applications.

3. Late Applications.
An application received after the Program NOFA deadline date that does not meet the Grace
period requirements will be marked late and will not be received by HUD for funding
consideration. Improper or expired registration and password issues are not causes that allow
HUD to accept applications after the deadline.

4. Corrections to Deficient Applications.
Except as provided by the electronic submission grace period described in this NOFA, HUD
may not consider any information that applicants may want to provide after the application
deadline. HUD may not seek or consider clarification of application items or responses that
improve the substantive quality of an application or which correct deficiencies which are in
whole or part of a rating factor, including items that impact preference points. HUD may
contact the applicant to clarify other items in its application. In order not to unreasonably
exclude applications from being rated and ranked where there are curable deficiencies, HUD
will uniformly notify applicants of each curable deficiency. A curable deficiency is an error or
oversight which, if corrected, would not alter, in a positive or negative fashion, the review and
rating of the application. Examples of curable (correctable) deficiencies include inconsistencies
in the funding request, failure to submit the proper certifications, and failure to submit an
application that contains a signature by an official able to make a legally binding commitment
on behalf of the applicant. These examples are non-exhaustive.

When HUD identifies a curable deficiency, HUD will notify the authorized representative in


                                                                                            24 of 32
item 21 of the SF-424 describing the curable deficiency. The email notifications are the official
notification of the need to cure a curable deficiency. Each applicant must provide accurate email
addresses for receipt of these notifications and must monitor their email accounts to determine
whether a deficiency notification has been received. The applicant must carefully review the
request for cure of a curable deficiency and must provide the response in accordance with the
instructions contained in the deficiency notification.

Applicants must email corrections of curable deficiencies to applicationsupport@hud.gov
within the time limits specified in the notification. The time allowed to correct deficiencies will
not exceed 14 calendar days or be less than 48 hours from the date of the email notification. The
start of the cure period will be the date stamp on the email sent from HUD (or GrantSolutions).
If the deficiency cure deadline date falls on a Saturday, Sunday, Federal holiday, or other day
when HUD’s Headquarters offices in Washington, DC, are closed, then the applicant’s
correction must be received on the next business day that HUD Headquarters offices in
Washington, DC are open.

The subject line of the email sent to applicationsupport@hud.gov must state: “Technical Cure”
and include the Grants.gov application tracking number (e.g., Subject: Technical Cure -
GRANT 123456). If this information is not included, HUD cannot match the response with the
application under review and the application may be rejected due to the deficiency.

Corrections to a paper application must be sent in accordance with and to the address indicated
in the notification of deficiency. HUD will treat a paper application submitted in accordance
with a waiver of electronic application that contains the wrong DUNS number as having a
curable deficiency. Failure to correct the deficiency and meet the requirement to have a DUNS
number and active registration in SAM will render the application ineligible for funding.


E. Intergovernmental Review.
This program is not subject to Executive Order 12372, Intergovernmental Review of Federal
Programs.


F. Funding Restrictions.
No restrictions.

Indirect Cost Rate.
Statutory or Regulatory Restrictions Apply
Indirect costs may not be charged to awards made under this NOFA.




 G. Other Submission Requirements.
1. Discrepancies between the NOFA on Grants.gov and Other Documents.
The Program NOFA posted at the Grants.gov website is the official document HUD uses to


                                                                                            25 of 32
solicit applications. Applicants are advised to review their application submission against the
requirements in the posted Program NOFA. If there is a discrepancy between the Program
NOFA posted on Grants.gov and other information provided in any other copy or version or
supporting documentation, the posted Program NOFA located at www.Grants.gov prevails. If
discrepancies are found, please notify HUD immediately by calling the program contact listed
in the Program NOFA. HUD will post any corrections or changes to a Program NOFA on the
Grants.gov website. Applicants must enroll an email address at the application download page
to receive an e-mail alert from Grants.gov in the event the opportunity is changed.

2. Application Certifications and Assurances.
Applicants signing the SF424 cover page either through electronic submission or in paper copy
submission (for those granted a waiver) affirm that the certifications and assurances associated
with the application are material representations of the facts upon which HUD will rely when
making an award to the applicant. If it is later determined that the signatory to the application
submission knowingly made a false certification or assurance or did not have the authority to
make a legally binding commitment for the applicant, the applicant may be subject to criminal
prosecution, and HUD may terminate the award to the applicant organization or pursue other
available remedies. Each applicant is responsible for including the correct certifications and
assurances with its application submission, including those applicable to all applicants, those
applicable only to federally-recognized Indian tribes, and those applicable to applicants other
than federally-recognized Indian tribes. All program-specific certifications and assurances are
included in the program Instructions Download on Grants.gov.

3. Lead Based Paint References

Not Applicable



V. Application Review Information.

A. Review Criteria.

1. Rating Factors.



Capacity and Experience                                        Maximum Points: 60
a. PHA Capacity and Demonstrated Commitment to Provide Housing for Persons with
Disabilities (up to 25 points):
No applicant will receive more than 25 points for this criterion. PHA has demonstrated a
commitment to assist persons with disabilities by implementing policies or programs that
promote assistance to persons with disabilities, increase the supply of accessible
units, or provide additional supportive services (either directly or through partnerships) to
persons with disabilities to ensure housing stability. Examples of programs or policies a PHA
may have implemented:




                                                                                           26 of 32
     e Partnered or collaborated with state Medicaid agencies, homelessness assistance
       providers, or health and human services agencies in the implementation of the Money
       Follows the Person demonstration, the Section 811 Project Rental Assistance Program,
       the Non-Elderly Disabled Category 2 (NED2) voucher, or similar programs that
       coordinate community-based housing assistance and supportive services for persons
       with disabilities. (up to 10 points per demonstrated example)
     e Developed or adopted a referral and/or monitoring system to track referrals, applicants
       and participants of supportive housing programs for persons with disabilities. (up to 5
       points per demonstrated example)
     e Provided or leveraged resources from a partner organization to cover the cost of (1)
       home modifications to make units more accessible, including fall prevention
       and assistive technology/smart housing, or (11) assistance securing units to further the
       implementation of Olmstead settlements or similar initiatives to expand community-
       based setting options for individuals with disabilities, e.g. rent deposit, move-in costs,
       furniture. (up to 5 points per demonstrated example)
     e Partnerships with local government to provide tax credits or zoning incentives for the
       development of accessible housing units. (up to 3 points per demonstrated example)
     e Developed or partnered with another organization to provide an enhanced
       accessible housing registry with units compliant with federal accessibility standards,
       including additional assistance to individuals in search of accessible units. (up to 3
       points per demonstrated example)
     e Other similar experience as described in the application (up to 5 points per
       demonstrated example)

HUD reserves the right to award fewer than the points listed for each example above if
application or available performance data demonstrate low quality or partial implementation.
Documentation: Narrative provided under Section D of HUD-52515, performance data
available in HUD systems, other publicly available data, and the PHA’s Administrative Plan,
PHA Plan or other provided supporting documents.
b. Partner Agency Capacity (up to 15 points)
No applicant will receive more than 15 points for this criterion. PHA has partnered with one or
more health and human and/or disability service agencies with a demonstrated capacity to
coordinate outreach and recruitment of potential applicants, and to assist residents with
disabilities in the referral and application processes and in the housing search by:

     e Securing any accommodations (up to 5 points)
     e Transitioning persons with disabilities from institutional and other segregated settings
       to rental market units (up to 5 points)
     e Coordinating voluntary services and supports after the transition (up to 5 points)
     e Providing other similar assistance described in application (up to 5 points)

HUD reserves the right to award fewer than 5 points for each demonstrated example if
application or available performance data demonstrate low quality or partial implementation.
Documentation: Narrative provided under Section D of HUD-52515, performance data


                                                                                            27 of 32
available in HUD systems, and other publicly available data.
c. Geographic Jurisdiction (up to 10 points)
Applicant has a policy that allows recipients of these vouchers to port prior to leasing up in the
jurisdiction or applicant has jurisdiction (or will make agreements with nearby jurisdictions) to
issue these vouchers on a regional or state basis.

     e Portability allowed prior to leasing up in jurisdiction = 10 points

OR

     e State-wide program = 10 points, OR
     e PHA has formed a consortium, created cooperative agreement(s), or merged to create a
       larger operational jurisdiction = 5 points

Documentation: Description of jurisdiction provided on HUD-52515.
d. Admissions Preference (10 points)
PHA/non-profit will provide a certification statement agreeing to grant a preference in their
administrative plan for persons with disabilities who are transitioning out of institutional and
other segregated settings, at serious risk of institutionalization, homeless, or at risk of becoming
homeless. Update to administrative plan must be completed within one calendar year of award
date.
Documentation: Points will be awarded if PHA provided required certification statement as
described above in Section IV.B. of this NOFA.

Leveraging Resources                                                     Maximum Points: 30
Applicant must demonstrate it has one or more partnerships with agencies or organizations that
will provide the following services:

     e Coordinating outreach and referral of persons in institutional and other segregated
       settings who want to move to community-based integrated settings, persons at serious
       risk of institutionalization, homeless, or at risk of becoming homeless (10 points)
     e Funding or staffing to support training and coordination of program implementation,
       including any necessary training, between PHA and partner organization(s) (10 points)
     e Assisting persons with disabilities to apply to and obtain acceptance in housing
       programs OR find housing OR secure home modifications and/or disability-
       related accommodations (4 points)
     e Assisting persons with disabilities move into units, including physically accessible units
       where appropriate, on the private rental market (3 points)
     e Referring, coordinating, or providing home and community-based services (3 points)

Documentation: Letters of intent, MOUs, or other documentation of commitment from the
partner agency/organization, narrative provided under Section D of HUD-52515
and other publicly available data.

Achieving Results and Program Evaluation                                      Maximum Points: 10


                                                                                             28 of 32
     e PHA/non-profit provided a program evaluation plan describing how it will work with
       partner agencies to monitor and correct issues with number of referrals received,
       vouchers issued, units leased/families housed, service coordination and tenancy support
       provided, and overall utilization. The plan identified who will maintain the report, how
       frequently it will be produced, and how it will be shared between the organizations
       (5 points).

OR

     e Program evaluation plan addressed the criterion above but also included a centralized
       tracking system used with the partner agencies, allowing both the PHA and partner
       organizations to access the required metrics electronically (10 points).

Documentation: Narrative provided under Section D of HUD-52515.

2. Preference Points.
Preference points are not available for this program.


B. Review and Selection Process.
1. Past Performance

In evaluating applications for funding, HUD will take into account an applicant’s past
performance in managing funds. Items HUD may consider include, but are not limited to:

a. The ability to account for funds appropriately;
b. Timely use of funds received from HUD;
c. Timely submission and quality of reports submitted to HUD;
d. Meeting program requirements;
e. Meeting performance targets as established in the grant agreement;
f. The applicant’s organizational capacity, including staffing structures and capabilities;
g. Time-lines for completion of activities and receipt of promised matching or leveraged funds;
and
h. The number of persons to be served or targeted for assistance.

HUD may deduct points from the rating score or establish threshold levels as specified under
the Factors for Award in the Program NOFAs. Each Program NOFA will specify how past
performance will be rated or otherwise used in the determination of award amounts. Whenever
possible, HUD will obtain past performance information from staff with the greatest knowledge
and understanding of each applicant’s performance. If this evaluation results in an adverse
finding related to integrity or performance, HUD reserves the right to take any of the remedies
provided in Section HI.C.2.b.(5), Pre-selection Review of Performance, above.

2. Assessing Applicant Risk
Risk will be evaluated reviewing the elements described in Sections III.C., I.D., and IIE. of



                                                                                         29 of 32
this NOFA.

C. Anticipated Announcement and Award Dates.
Anticipated Announcement Date: 8/7/2018
Anticipated Award Date: 8/7/2018


VI. Award    Administration   Information.

A. Award Notices.
Following the evaluation process HUD will notify successful applicants of their selection for
funding. HUD will also notify all other applicants, whose applications were received by the
deadline, that have not been chosen for award. Notifications will be sent by email to the person
listed as the AOR in item 21 of the SF-424.


 B. Administrative, National and Department Policy Requirements.
For this NOFA, the following requirements apply:
Participation in a HUD-Sponsored Program Evaluation.

As acondition of the receipt of financial assistance under a Program NOFA, all successful
applicants will be required to cooperate with all HUD staff, contractors, or designated grantees
performing research or evaluation studies funded by HUD.

Environmental Requirements.
Compliance with 24 CFR Part 50 or 58 procedures is explained below:
Environmental Review. Tenant-based rental assistance is excluded from environmental review
in accordance with 24 CFR 50.19(b)(11) and 24 CFR 58.35(b)(1). Homeownership assistance
activities are categorically excluded from NEPA requirements and excluded from other
environmental requirements under 24 CFR 58.5 in accordance with 24 CFR 58.35(b)(5), but
PHAs are responsible for the environmental requirements in 24 CFR 982.626(c). Regarding
activities under the homeownership option for units not yet under construction at the time the
family enters into the contract for sale, the additional environmental review requirements
referenced in 24 CFR Sections 982.628(e), 982.63 1(c) (3) and 982.637(b) also apply in addition
to Section 982.626(c), and the PHA shall submit all relevant environmental information to the
responsible entity or to HUD to assist in the completion of those requirements. Project-based
vouchers funded under this NOFA are subject to environmental review requirements in 24 CFR
983.4, 983.58, and 983.153(b).

 C. Reporting.
HUD requires recipients to submit performance and financial reports under OMB guidance and
program instructions.

1. Reporting Requirements and Frequency of Reporting. This Program NOFA and award
agreement will specify the reporting requirements, including content, method of data collection,


                                                                                           30 of 32
and reporting frequency. Applicants should be aware that if the total Federal share of your
Federal award may include more than $ 500,000 over the period of performance, you may be
subject to post award reporting requirements reflected in Appendix XII to Part 200--Award
Term and Condition for Recipient Integrity and Performance Matters.

2. Race, Ethnicity and Other Data Reporting. HUD requires recipients that provide HUD-
funded program benefits to individuals or families to report data on the race, color, religion, sex,
national origin, age, handicap (disability), and family characteristics of persons and households
who are applicants for, participants in, or beneficiaries or potential beneficiaries of HUD
programs in order to carry out the Department’s responsibilities under the Fair Housing Act,
Executive Order 11063, Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, and Section 562 of the
Housing and Community Development Act of 1987. Program NOFAs may specify the data
collection and reporting requirements. Many programs use the Race and Ethnic Data U.S.
Department of Housing OMB Approval No. 2535-0113 Reporting Form HUD-27061.

3. Performance Reporting. All HUD funded programs, including this program, require
recipients to submit, not less than annually, a report documenting achievement of outcomes
under the purpose of the program and the work plan in the award agreement.




Please direct questions regarding specific reporting requirements to the point of contact listed in
Section VII. Agency Contact(s), below.

 D. Debriefing.
For a period of at least 120 days, beginning 30 days after the awards for a Program NOFA are
publicly announced, HUD will provide to a requesting applicant a debriefing related to its
application. A request for debriefing must be made in writing or by email by the authorized
official whose signature appears on the SF424 or by his or her successor in office, and be
submitted to the person, organization, or email address identified as the contact under the
section entitled Agency Contact(s) in the Program NOFA. Information provided during a
debriefing may include the final score the applicant received for each rating factor, final
evaluator comments for each rating factor, and the final assessment indicating the basis upon
which funding was approved or denied.


VII. Agency Contact(s).

HUD staff will be available to provide clarification on the content of this NOFA. Please note
that HUD staff cannot assist applicants in preparing their applications.
Questions regarding specific program requirements for this NOFA should be directed to the
point of contact listed below.
Mainstream Vouchers(@hud.gov

Persons with hearing or speech impairments may access this number via TTY by calling the
toll-free Federal Relay Service at 800-877-8339.



                                                                                             31 of 32
VIII. Other Information.

Paperwork Reduction Act Statement. The information collection requirements in this notice
have been approved by OMB under the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995 (44 U.S.C.3501-
3520). In accordance with the Paperwork Reduction Act, HUD may not conduct or sponsor, and
a person is not required to respond to, a collection of information unless the collection displays
a valid OMB control number. Each Program NOFA will identify its applicable OMB control
number unless its collection of information is excluded from these requirements under 5 CFR
part 1320.

National Environmental Policy Act.


This NOFA provides funding under, and does not alter the environmental requirements of, 24
CFR parts 982 and 983. Accordingly, under 24 CFR 50.19(c)(5), this NOFA is categorically
excluded from environmental review under the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (42
U.S.C. 4321). Activities under this NOFA are subject to the environmental review provisions
referenced in Section VI.B.2. of this NOFA.




                                                                                           32 of 32
