Housing Stability Council
MEETING MATERIALS PACKET




                                        The Gloria Center
                                          The Dalles, Or.
            January 10, 2025
         9:00 a.m. – 10:45 a.m.
  Oregon Housing & Community Services
                Webinar
                                                                AGENDA
Council Members:                            January 10, 2025 9:00 a.m. – 10:45 a.m.
Claire Hall, Chair                         Oregon Housing and Community Services
Sami Jo Difuntorum                            725 Summer St NE, Salem OR 97301
Mary Ferrell
Maggie Harris
Mary Li
                                                        Webinar Mtg Only
Erin Meechan                               Public register in advance for this webinar
Javier Mena
Kristy Willard                              *Please note the public hearing process
Sharon Nickleberry Rogers

                                                                                                     SWHP
    TIME                                             TOPIC                                                               ACTION
                                                                                                    Priority

    9:00        Meeting Called to Order                                                                                  Call Roll




    9:05        Review & Follow-up Action Items                                                                          Briefing




    9:15        Report of the Chair                                                                                      Briefing




    9:30        Report of the Director                                                                                   Briefing



                Affordable Rental Housing Division (pg. 04)
                Natasha Detweiler-Daby, Director of Affordable Rental Housing Division

                     •      Public Hearing Comments in accordance with ORS 456.561

                     •      Transactions: Tai Dunson-Strane, Assistant Director Production;
                            Roberto Franco, Deputy Director Development
                                o M Carter Commons
                                                                                                                         Decision
    9:45             •      ORCA and Low Income Housing Tax Credit Framework
                            Recommendation: Mitch Hannoosh, Senior Policy Analyst;
                            Natasha Detweiler-Daby, Director

                     •      ORCA Recommendations: Amy Cole, Assistant Director
                            Development Resources; Roberto Franco, Deputy Director
                            Development
                               o Elm Park
                               o Shelly Cove



    10:45       Meeting Adjourned




 The Housing Stability Council will provide public hearing time in accordance with ORS 456.561. Council’s review of loan, grant or
                other funding award proposals under this section shall be held at a public hearing of the council.
A public hearing is a formal proceeding held in order to receive testimony from all interested parties, including the general public,
        on a proposed issue or action. A public hearing is open to the public but is regarding a specific proposal/project.
            All times listed on this agenda are approximate and subject to change. Agenda items may also be taken out of order and
               addressed at different times than listed. The agenda may be amended by the Council at the time of the meeting.
                                                                AGENDA
Council Members:                           January 10, 2025 9:00 a.m. – 10:45 a.m.
Claire Hall, Chair                        Oregon Housing and Community Services
Sami Jo Difuntorum                           725 Summer St NE, Salem OR 97301
Mary Ferrell
Maggie Harris
Mary Li
                                                       Webinar Mtg Only
Erin Meechan                              Public register in advance for this webinar
Javier Mena
Kristy Willard                              *Please note the public hearing process
Sharon Nickleberry Rogers




The Housing Stability Council helps to lead OHCS to meet the housing and services needs of low-
and moderate-income Oregonians. The Housing
Stability Council works to establish and support
OHCS’ strategic direction, foster constructive
partnerships across the state, set policy and issue                                 Statewide Housing
funding decisions, and overall lend their unique
expertise to the policy and program development                                     Plan Policy
of the agency.
                                                                                    Priorities
The 2019-2023 Statewide Housing Plan outlines six
policy priorities that focuses OHCS’ investments to
ensure all Oregonians have the opportunity to
pursue prosperity and live from poverty.                                                      Equity & Racial Justice



                                                                                              Homelessness



                                                                                              Permanent Supportive Housing



                                                                                              Affordable Rental Housing

   For more information about the Housing Stability Council
  or the Statewide Housing Plan, please visit Oregon Housing                                  Homeownership
              and Community Services online at
   https://www.oregon.gov/ohcs/OSHC/Pages/index.aspx

                                                                                              Rural Communities




 The Housing Stability Council will provide public hearing time in accordance with ORS 456.561. Council’s review of loan, grant or
                other funding award proposals under this section shall be held at a public hearing of the council.
A public hearing is a formal proceeding held in order to receive testimony from all interested parties, including the general public,
        on a proposed issue or action. A public hearing is open to the public but is regarding a specific proposal/project.
           All times listed on this agenda are approximate and subject to change. Agenda items may also be taken out of order and
               addressed at different times than listed. The agenda may be amended by the Council at the time of the meeting.
Date: January 10, 2024
To:      Housing Stability Council Members;
         Andrea Bell, Executive Director

From: Tai Dunson-Strane, Assistant Director, Production
      Hattie Iott, Housing Production Manager
      Roberto Franco, Assistant Director, Development Resources
      Natasha Detweiler-Daby, Director, Affordable Rental Housing

Re:      Approval for Resolution #2025-1-10

Motion: Approve the Resolution #2025-1-10 recommendations for the following project:

BOND RECOMMENDED MOTION: Move to approve Pass-Through Revenue Bond Financing in
an amount up to and not to exceed $20,000,000 to M Carter Commons Limited Partnership
for the construction of M Carter Commons, subject to the borrower meeting OHCS, Portland
Housing Bureau, Key Bank, and NEF’s underwriting, closing criteria, and documentation
satisfactory to legal counsel and Treasurer approval for the bond sale.

At the upcoming Housing Stability Council meeting, we will be presenting one 4% LIHTC/Conduit
Bond transaction for Council approval.

The project included in the Resolution following this memo were approved by the OHCS Finance
Committee or are scheduled for an approval by the Finance Committee. In this memo we are
providing you with a high-level summary of the recommended project. More detailed
information regarding the project and the additional funding recommendation can be found in
the individual project summaries.

All projects are subject to underwriting and programmatic requirements established under the
Qualified Allocation Plan, General Policy and Guideline Manual (GPGM) and MWESB/SDVBE
Compliance Manual are eligible to be considered for funding. All applications proposed a
percentage target of MWESB contractors and subcontractors above the minimum standards set
forth in the OHCS MWESB Compliance Policy, and all have an Affirmatively Furthering Fair
Housing Marketing Plan including a Tenant Selection Plan that will market to those least likely




                                                  Jan 10, 2025 HSC Material                                                        4

   Oregon Housing and Community Services | 725 Summer St. NE Suite B, Salem, OR 97301-1266 | (503) 986-2000 | FAX (503) 986-2020
January 10, 2024
4% LIHTC/Conduit Bond Funding



to apply. All projects sponsored have signed our Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion (DEI)
Agreement and submit an Equity & Racial Justice (ERJ) project status report.

Funding Recommendation:
We are recommending funding reservation for one (1) project. These projects will create 62
units of new affordable housing.

Projects with Other OHCS Funding
 Project Name         County                      Total                Sponsor
                                                  Units                                              Underwriting
                                                                                                           Stage
 M Carter Commons           Multnomah              63             Urban League of                FC schedule on 1/7
                                                            Portland and Northwest
                                                            Housing Alternatives


                                                           Total 63




See attached project summary.




                                                 Jan 10, 2025 HSC Material                                                          5

    Oregon Housing and Community Services | 725 Summer St. NE Suite B, Salem, OR 97301-1266 | (503) 986-2000 | FAX (503) 986-2020
                              STATE OF OREGON
                    OREGON HOUSING AND COMMUNITY SERVICES
                          HOUSING STABILITY COUNCIL

                                 RESOLUTION NO. 2025 – 1-10
                                ADOPTED: JANUARY 10TH, 2025

       A RESOLUTION OF THE HOUSING STABILITY COUNCIL APPROVING PASS-THROUGH
       REVENUE BONDS AND HOUSING PROGRAM FUNDING TO FINANCE THE PROJECTS
       DESCRIBED HEREIN, SUBJECT TO THE BORROWERS AND PROJECTS MEETING
       CERTAIN PROGRAM REQUIREMENTS, CLOSING AND OTHER CONDITIONS AS
       DESCRIBED HEREIN; AND AUTHORIZING AND DETERMINING OTHER MATTERS
       WITH RESPECT THERETO.



        WHEREAS, the State of Oregon (the “State”), acting by and through the State Treasurer
(the “Treasurer”) and the Oregon Housing and Community Service Department (the
“Department” and collectively with the State and the Treasurer, the “Issuer”), is authorized,
subject to Housing Stability Council (the “Council” or “HSC”) review and approval, pursuant to
Oregon Revised Statutes (“ORS”) Chapter 286A and ORS Sections 456.515 to 456.725, inclusive,
as amended (collectively, the “Act”) and Oregon Administrative Rules (“OAR”) Chapter 813,
Division 35 pertaining to the Department’s Pass-Through Revenue Bond Financing Program (the
“Conduit Bond Program”), to issue revenue bonds, notes and other obligations (collectively,
“Bonds”) and to loan the proceeds thereof to borrowers (“Borrowers”) in order to finance certain
costs associated with the acquisition, rehabilitation, development, construction, improvement,
furnishing and/or equipping of multifamily housing;

      WHEREAS, through the federal 4% Low-Income Housing Tax Credit Program (“LIHTC
Program”), the Department allocates tax credits (the “Credits”) in accordance with the Act and
OAR Chapter 813, Division 90 pertaining to the Department’s LIHTC Program;

       WHEREAS, through the Department’s various financing programs as authorized by the
Act and ORS Chapter 458 (collectively, “Housing Programs”), the Department, subject to the
Council’s review and approval, provides loans, grants and other financing pursuant to the Act,
ORS Chapter 458, applicable OARs and in conformance with Department policies (the “Housing
Program Funding”). The Conduit Bond Program, the LIHTC Program and the Housing
Programs are collectively referred to herein as the “Programs”; and

         WHEREAS, the Department’s Finance Committee (the “Committee” or “FC”) has
(i) approved the allocation of Credits, (ii) recommended to the Council the issuance of Bonds, and
(iii) approved or recommended providing the Housing Program Funding to finance each of the
affordable multifamily rental projects as listed on Exhibit A attached hereto (each an “FC-
Approved Project” and collectively, the “FC-Approved Projects”); and

        WHEREAS, Council desires to accept the recommendations of the Committee by
(i) approving the Bonds and directing the Department to request that the State Treasurer issue the
Bonds and (ii) further ratifying and/or approving providing the Housing Program Funding to
finance each of the FC-Approved Projects; and

RESOLUTION – PASS THROUGH REVENUE  BONDS
                              Jan 10, 2025 HSC  HOUSING PROGRAM FUNDING
                                            ANDMaterial                                   PAGE61
        WHEREAS, the further Council desires to (i) approve the Bonds and direct the
Department to request that the Treasurer issue the Bonds and (ii) further ratify and/or approve
providing the Housing Program Funding to finance each of the affordable multifamily rental
projects as listed on Exhibit B attached hereto (each a “Proposed Project” and collectively, the
“Proposed Projects”), in each case subject final approval of the Projects by the Committee,
including the allocation of Credits by the Committee to each of the Projects; and

       NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by the Council as follows:

        SECTION 1. HSC APPROVAL. The Council hereby acknowledges that it has reviewed
the information and materials included in Exhibit A and Exhibit B attached hereto describing the
Bonds and the Housing Program Funding, each FC-Approved Project and each Proposed Project
(each a “Project” and collectively, the “Projects”) and the financing of each of the Projects, and
hereby approves the issuance of the Bonds for the financing of each of the Projects, as described
therein. Subject, in the case of each Project, to the Borrower’s compliance with all legal and other
requirements of the Act and the applicable Programs and confirmation by the Department,
including final approval by the Committee in the case of each Proposed Project, that the conditions
described in Section 2 below have been satisfied, the Council finds that no further meeting or
action of the Council is needed for the Department to request and the Treasurer to proceed with
the issuance of the Bonds and for the Department to proceed with the financing of the Project.

        SECTION 2. CONDITIONS TO ISSUANCE, SALE AND DELIVERY OF BONDS. The Council
hereby approves the issuance, sale and delivery of the Bonds for each of the Projects. For each
Project, such approval is subject to any remaining final approval(s) that may be required by the
Committee (including the allocation of Credits to and final approval of each Proposed Project by
the Committee) and/or the Department’s Executive Director (or her designee), and further subject
to the Borrower meeting all requirements of the applicable Programs and satisfying all closing and
funding conditions, including:

               (A)    completion by the Department of all necessary due diligence related to the
       Project and the financing, consistent with applicable Program requirements, Department
       policies and practices;

              (B)     the absence of any material change to the Project or the financing following
       the adoption of this Resolution;

              (C)    confirmation that all legal and other requirements of the Act and the Conduit
       Bond Program for the issuance, sale and delivery of the Bonds have been satisfied, as
       determined by the Department, the Oregon Department of Justice and Bond Counsel; and

             (D)     confirmation that all legal and other requirements of the Act and the
       Programs have been satisfied, as determined by the Department and the Oregon
       Department of Justice.

        SECTION 3. COUNCIL REVIEW, APPROVAL AND PUBLIC MEETING. The Council hereby
acknowledges that it has reviewed the information and materials included in Exhibit A and in
Exhibit B attached hereto describing the Projects and the financing of each of the Projects,
including the Bonds, and conducted such additional review and made such additional inquiry, if
any, as it determined to be necessary or appropriate, in compliance with the Council’s obligations

RESOLUTION – PASS THROUGH REVENUE  BONDS
                              Jan 10, 2025 HSC  HOUSING PROGRAM FUNDING
                                            ANDMaterial                                     PAGE72
under ORS 456.561(3) and other relevant authority, to review, and to approve or disapprove the
financing of the Projects. The Council hereby further acknowledges that the adoption of this
Resolution and the HSC approval set forth herein has been made at a public meeting of the Council
as required by ORS 456.561(4) and other relevant authority, and that such meeting has been
conducted in accordance with applicable law, including any required advance public notice of such
meeting. Further, the Council acknowledges that in connection with the adoption of this
Resolution and the HSC approval set forth herein, opportunity has been provided to the public to
testify or otherwise provide public comment on the Projects and any other matters directly related
thereto.

        SECTION 4. EFFECTIVENESS; CONFLICTING RESOLUTIONS. This Resolution shall be
effective immediately upon its adoption. Any prior resolutions of or other previous actions by the
Council and any parts thereof that are in conflict with the terms of this Resolution shall be, and
they hereby are, rescinded, but only to the extent of such conflict.

                                 [Signature follows next page]




RESOLUTION – PASS THROUGH REVENUE  BONDS
                              Jan 10, 2025 HSC  HOUSING PROGRAM FUNDING
                                            ANDMaterial                                   PAGE83
                          CERTIFICATION OF RESOLUTION

        The undersigned does hereby certify that I am the duly appointed, qualified and acting
[Chair][Vice Chair][Executive Secretary] of the Oregon Housing and Community Services
Oregon Housing Stability Council (the “Council”); that the foregoing is a true and complete copy
of Resolution No. 2025-1-10 as adopted by the Council at a meeting duly called and held in
accordance with law on January 10th, 2025; and that the following members of the Council voted
in favor of said Resolution:




the following members of the Council voted against said Resolution:




and the following members of the Council abstained from voting on said Resolution:




      In witness whereof, the undersigned has hereunto set [his/her] hand as of this ___ day of
______ 20__.


                                                     ___________________________________
                                                     [Chair][Vice Chair][Executive Secretary]




RESOLUTION                          SJan          PAGEMaterial
                                         10, 2025 HSC
                                      IGNATURE                                                9
                                EXHIBIT A

            N/A



                                EXHIBIT B

                          PROPOSED PROJECT

   1- M Carter Commons (FC – Meeting Schedule for 1/7/2025)




EXHIBIT B                  Jan 10, 2025 HSC Material          10
SUMMARY
         Project Name: M Carter Commons
                     City:                  Portland                                         County: Multnomah
        Sponsor Name: Urban League of Portland (UL), and Northwest Housing Alternatives (NHA)
   Management Agent: Cascade Management
                                                                                         Total Units:                        63
          Urban/Rural:                       Urban
                                                                          Total Affordable Units:                 62
                                                                                                   6 studio units @ 60% AMI
                                                                                  Units by Size & 45 one-bed units @ 60% AMI
  # Rent Assisted Units:                        11
                                                                                    Affordability: 11 one-bed units @ 30% AMI
                                                                                                   1 one bed Manager’s unit
          Cost Per Unit:                 $587,573                              Construction Type: New
                                  LIHTC /Bond = 30 years
                                                                            # of Units with Non-
  Affordability Term(s):             OAHTC = 20 years                                            N/A
                                                                            OHCS Requirements:

                     Funding Request                                                              Funding Use
      4% LIHTC Equity: $14,700,358                                                       Acquisition $1,300,001
         Conduit Bonds up to $21,500,000                                               Construction $30,517,199
                                                                                      Development $5,199,898
                                                                                                Total: $37,017,098



PROJECT DETAILS

                       M Carter Commons is a new construction, affordable housing development located in
                       Portland. The project is named after Margaret Lousie Carter, Oregon’s first Black woman
                       legislator. The project will consist of 63 units in a single low rise six -story residential
                       building serving residents 55 years and older. There will be 62 affordable units, and 1
                       managers unit. Project amenities include an enclosed courtyard, bicycle parking, common
  Project Description:
                       area, community room, lobby, laundry room, two sets of stairwells, two elevators, heating
                       and cooling system, onsite management and a resident service provider space.

                              M Carter Commons and the 63 units are a stand-alone project and not subject to a master
                              plan development. Closing is anticipated to be January 30, 2025.




                                                       Jan 10, 2025 HSC Material                                                        11

        Oregon Housing and Community Services | 725 Summer St. NE Suite B, Salem, OR 97301-1266 | (503) 986-2000 | FAX (503) 986-2020
     M Carter Commons – Housing Stability Council




                              M Carter Commons project is co-developed and co-owned through a collaborative
                              partnership between Urban League of Portland (UL) and Northwest Housing Alternatives
                              (NHA). NHA will lead housing development and provide asset management throughout
                              development and into operations. NHA through contract management as Managing
                              General Partner of M Carter Commons LP and in collaboration as a resident service provider
                              will contribute support in connecting with the network of over 100 providers that NHA’s
                              large Community Services department.

 Partnerships to Serve Urban League will lead the provision of culturally responsive resident services. UL has deep
Communities of Color: roots in the North/Northeast Portland and extensive experience working with seniors. The
                              UL adult and Senior Services program has been active for 50 years, serving over 6,000
                              seniors pre-pandemic, it is the longest standing program at UL and is critical to achieving
                              the organizations mission of equity, equality and empowerment. Resident services at M
                              Carter Commons will be tailored to the needs of the individuals and community at the
                              property. A MOU is in place to staff one 0.5 FTE resident service coordinator who will hold
                              regular office hours on site and focus on residents’ wellbeing and encourage a sense of
                              community within the property through events and resource connections.

                              The target population for M Carter Commons is seniors 55 and older and will utilize the
                              City of Portland Placement Preference which is also known as the N/NE Preference Policy
                              list, which will prioritize housing those whose families have been displaced by urban
                              renewal’s legacy in North and Northeast Portland.

Reaching Underserved Urban League (UL) is leading the community outreach and engagement during the design
        Communities: and will provide culturally specific and responsive resident services. UL has extensive
                              knowledge and experience working with seniors with low incomes, few financial assets,
                              and barriers to accessing needed services. UL will respond with case management,
                              transportation, social engagement, utility cost assistance, income development, and
                              access to medical services.

                     Urban League of Portland (UL), Northwest Housing Alternatives (NHA), and The
       MWESB Target: O’Neil/Walsh Community builders (OWCB) are committed to meeting the metro region 1
                     goal of 30%
      Alignment with                          •    Equity and Racial Justice
   Statewide Housing                          •    Affordable Rental Housing
               Plan:




                                                       Jan 10, 2025 HSC Material                                                      12

          Oregon Housing and Community Services | 725 Summer St. NE Suite B, Salem, OR 97301-1266 | (503) 986-2000 | FAX (503) 986-2020
      M Carter Commons – Housing Stability Council




Upon Housing Stability Council approval of the established conduit bond funding limit, ultimate approval will be based
on conformance with OHCS underwriting standards and due diligence and is delegated to OHCS Finance Committee
and the Executive Director




                                                        Jan 10, 2025 HSC Material                                                      13

           Oregon Housing and Community Services | 725 Summer St. NE Suite B, Salem, OR 97301-1266 | (503) 986-2000 | FAX (503) 986-2020
Date:        January 10, 2025

To:          Housing Stability Council Members
             Andrea Bell, Executive Director

From:        Affordable Rental Housing Division

Re:          2025 ORCA Framework

Motion: Housing Stability Council adopts the following framework elements for the
ORCA and Low-Income Housing Tax Credits as presented [or will note revisions].

Overview
In this memo, we provide Housing Stability Council (HSC) with the final framework
elements to allow for updates in the 2025 Oregon Centralized Application (ORCA) and Low-
Income Housing Tax Credits (LIHTC) for adoption. These components will be implemented
through a finalized Qualified Allocation Plan as well as the updated ORCA.

The Affordable Rental Housing division has been working to make updates to the ORCA
over the past several months. In October, we provided HSC with the draft framework
related to incorporating the 9% and 4% LIHTC programs into the ORCA process. In
November, we provided HSC with the draft 2025 ORCA framework. Now, we are seeking
adoption of the final 2025 ORCA framework, which would become effective in February
2025.

At the January Housing Stability Council we will review key details of the framework
alongside a summary of public feedback gained through public comment period which
concluded on December 31st, 2024.




Summary of Final 2025 ORCA Framework
1. ORCA-LIHTC Integration
Previously, OHCS used Notices of Funding Availability to award LIHTC resources. For 2025,
we are integrating both 9% and 4% LIHTC into the ORCA application process.




                                  Jan 10, 2025 HSC Material                            14
2. ORCA Set-aside updates

There are two set-aside updates that would apply to all ORCA projects (including LIHTC
projects).

CSO & Rural set-asides *updated from previous recommendation*
 2024 ORCA           25% Culturally Specific Organization or Nonprofit organizations
                     building in rural communities.
 2025 ORCA           Retain 2024 set-aside parameters through June 2025.
                     In the next biennia resource allocations, update the set-aside to
                     20% exclusively for Culturally Specific Organizations alongside a
                     target for rural projects that is responsive to ensuring rural access
                     and opportunity.
 Rationale           Based on public feedback, including as received from the HSC, we
                     are recommending that we retain the current set-asides instead of
                     changing mid-biennia. This lessens the shifts and uncertainty for
                     development teams and communities that have invested in project
                     pipelines. As we receive additional resource investments for the
                     next biennia, our recommendation is to bifurcate the strategies for
                     ensuring CSO access from those in rural communities in order to
                     ensure policies are responsive and effective.

                     Why: While the ORCA was initially launched with set-asides for all
                     funding resources to have 25% of resources to be available to
                     Culturally Specific Organizations and nonprofit organizations
                     building in Rural Communities. However, the set-aside approach
                     doesn’t ensure regional diversity that supports rural access to
                     funding. Response to concerns from rural communities regarding
                     access to project development & permanent financing; desire to
                     ensure that communities that need more time to get project
                     development strategies retain access to resources in a way that is
                     more effective than shared set-aside funds.

ORCA Regional set-aside calculations
 2024 ORCA           Apply regional set-asides across all resources.
 2025 ORCA           Apply regional set-aside to development capital for resources
                     that do not have prescribed eligibility.
 Rationale           By doing this, we are striving to ensure that the Permanent
                     Supportive Housing development funds dedicated to Supportive
                     Housing Institute projects are able to be available to them and that
                     Preservation funds are effectively able to be prioritized through the
                     Preservation Framework.


                                  Jan 10, 2025 HSC Material                                  15
                      Why: The conceptual approach to looking at all funding resources in
                      aggregate was intended to ensure that the right types of resources
                      could serve the communities they work best in, i.e. if there was a
                      greater need for preservation resources in Eastern Oregon than new
                      construction, a set aside wouldn’t hinder an outsized portion of
                      those specific resources going to that region. However, as both PSH
                      and Preservation have other processes to prioritize investment,
                      including those resources within the regional set-asides has
                      created unnecessary risk that set-asides won’t be able to deliver
                      resources where needed to meet legislative intent for those funds.
                      By updating the approach, that risk is eliminated.

In addition to the above regional set-asides, the 9% LIHTC resources will continue to
dedicate 25% to fund preservation projects, and 10% to fund projects on tribal trust land.



3. Rural Definition Update
With the launch of the ORCA, ARH worked with our Research Team to align the definition of
rural with the creation of the State of the State’s Housing Report. While the overall
definition will still calculate rural based on a combination of factors including density, the
update to the rural definition currently within the ORCA seeks to better recognize that some
more densely populated small cities may be within a larger metropolitan area but still far
enough away from the major cities in the MSA. The resulting addition to the rural definition
is that a city/town cannot have census tracts that are considered urban if the city/town is
located farther away than 30 miles, based on standard commutes, from the border of the
nearest respective Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA).



4. 9% LIHTC Project Selection Process
Projects that apply for 9% LIHTC will be evaluated against the listed criteria to determine
the projects that will be eligible for the resource through the ORCA.

Mandatory:

   1- Project includes features in the design, services, site location, or other project
      considerations that are tailored to the population being served (e.g. appropriate
      levels of supportive services for chronically homeless households, co-located ECE
      facility or supports for families with young children, features for older adults and
      people with disabilities, transportation opportunities or unique design features for


                                    Jan 10, 2025 HSC Material                                 16
       veterans, unique features or access to locations of cultural significance for
       communities of color, etc.).

   2- Project demonstrates alignment with the Oregon Housing Needs Analysis and local
      jurisdiction housing production strategies. Small cities without an OHNA
      requirement are exempt from this.

   3- Project has supporting documentation from a local Housing Authority
      demonstrating that a commitment is in place to market available units to their wait
      list, or will rely on coordinated entry for tenant referrals.

Supplemental (must meet 3):

          a. Project incorporates an average unit AMI of less than 50% or are including
             Project-Based Rental Assistance (PBRA) with their units.
          b. Project incorporates a co-located ECE facility.
          c. Accessible units beyond minimum code requirements.
          d. Project includes features in the design, services, site location or other
             project considerations that provide opportunities for employment to
             residents and benefit to the community (e.g. co-located ECE facility for
             families with young children, access to community college or workforce
             training site, walkable access or access to transit to high job density
             locations).
          e. Projects demonstrate evidence of historic value for the community, including
             Projects using the federal Historic Tax Credit (HTC) as part of the Project
             financing, and are: Listed, or have been determined eligible for listing, in the
             National Register of Historic Places administered by the U.S. Department of
             the Interior in accordance with the National Historic Preservation Act of
             1996; or Located in a registered historic district and certified by the Secretary
             of the U.S. Department of the Interior as being of historic significance to that
             district.
          f. Projects that have formally committed to meeting the Department’s
             Sustainability Standards which include energy efficiency expectations that
             exceed current State of Oregon Energy Code requirements.
          g. Projects intended for eventual tenant ownership.
          h. Lead developer is a Culturally Specific Organization and/or a rural nonprofit
             organization.

Where 9% LIHTC resources are insufficient to fund all projects eligible for resources, tie-
breakers will be used to select projects.


                                    Jan 10, 2025 HSC Material                                 17
5. 4% Housing Authority Owned set-aside
OHCS will work annually with the Housing Authorities of Oregon to establish a Housing
Authority Owned (HAO) Private Activity Bond (PAB) Set-Aside. This HAO PAB Set-Aside will
be eligible for projects that are owned by Housing Authorities and do not require any state
loan or grant funding. The 2025 HAO PAB Set-Aside will be $100 million.



6. 4% PAB Timeline Prioritization rights
Where there is a risk that OHCS will not be able to substantially commit all available PAB to
projects in a given year, OHCS reserves the right to reassign resources within the funded
pipeline or direct resources to projects on the ORCA waitlists based on the development
timeline.



7. 4% LIHTC Subsidy Limit Updates
While 9% LIHTC will be able to leverage a max of $3 million in gap subsidy per project, the
4% LIHTC will use per unit subsidy through the ORCA.

Subsidy limits are intended to:

   •   Scale according to bedroom size and AMI served;

   •   Respond to lower rent rates in rural communities with significantly lower AMI, which
       reduces the ability for projects to cover fixed costs of development;

   •   Include an additional building-level subsidy for projects that incorporate unique
       building design functions to serve the target population; and

   •   Allow for reasonable increases (up to 10% above subsidy limits, or in alignment with
       the maximum PAB cap) when projects approach the final commitment of resources,
       upon approval by the OHCS Finance Committee.

Note that these subsidy limits differ from those projects receiving only gap resources via
the ORCA process. All projects receiving federal tax credits must adhere to the limits listed
below. Subsidy limits are outlined in the charts below.




                                    Jan 10, 2025 HSC Material                              18
Additionally, OHCS will provide up to $200,000 per project where there is a unique,
functional building need to ensure tenant life/safety/health, including spaces to meet
agricultural workforce needs, accessibility factors for elderly or disabled populations,
supporting children, or durability interventions. Standard amenities or community rooms
do not qualify.




                                  Jan 10, 2025 HSC Material                                19
Date: January 10, 2025

To:       Housing Stability Council Members
          Andrea Bell, Executive Director

From: Amy Cole, Assistant Director, Development Resources
      Roberto Franco, Deputy Director, Development Resources and Production
      Natasha Detweiler-Daby, Director, Affordable Rental Housing

Re:       January 2025 ORCA Funding Recommendations

Motion: Approve the funding reservation recommendations for the following projects:
      •   Elm Park Apartments in Florence, up to $12,235,000 in LIFT in alignment with the ORCA
          framework and process.
      •   Shelly Cove Apartments in Port Orford, up to $4,100,000 in Preservation resources in
          alignment with the ORCA framework and process.

Summary
At the upcoming Housing Stability Council (HSC) meeting, we will be presenting Oregon
Centralized Application (ORCA) funding hold recommendations for approval by the Council. This
recommendation is based on projects that have met the HSC approved ORCA standards for
Impact Assessment, the first step of the three-step ORCA process.

In this memo, we are providing you with a high-level summary of the recommended projects.
More detailed information regarding the projects can be found in the attachment following this
cover memo.

Applications
In all, there are 60 project applications actively in the Impact Assessment step of the ORCA that
are in various stages of completing the step. The projects being recommended today has met
all standards for the Impact Assessment step.

These projects will preserve 14 affordable units and add 32 new units to the state affordable
housing stock. Rent restrictions for these developments range 30% AMI-60% AMI.


                  Development                                  Location              Number of units
                  Elm Park Apts.                               Florence                    32


                                                  Jan 10, 2025 HSC Material                                                        20

   Oregon Housing and Community Services | 725 Summer St. NE Suite B, Salem, OR 97301-1266 | (503) 986-2000 | FAX (503) 986-2020
January 10, 2025
ORCA Funding Reservation Recommendation



                 Shelly Cove Apts.                            Port Orford                       14
                                                              Total                             46


Both developments will focus on serving very low-income families in rural areas.

Applications were reviewed for completeness and to ensure they meet all evaluation standards
that are part of the Impact Assessment step. These standards include review of the following
information:
    • Affirmative Fair Housing Marketing Plan (AFHMP)
    • Conceptual site plan
    • Construction costs
    • Development team capacity
    • Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion (DEI) Agreement
    • Engagement and community needs
    • Environmental reports
    • Equity and Racial Justice strategy
    • Financial proforma for Impact Assessment
    • HUD requirements review
    • Infrastructure readiness
    • Location preferences
    • Minority-owned, Woman-owned, and Emerging Small Businesses (MWESB) strategy
    • Permanent Supportive Housing (PSH) standards
    • Permit strategy
    • Prequalification
    • Resident services
    • Site control
    • Zoning in place

Next steps
If the projects are approved for a funding reservation, they will receive a conditional
commitment of funds and move to the second step in the ORCA process, Financial Eligibility,
where they will have up to 6 months to complete the requirements of that step. Once the
requirements of the Financial Eligibility step are met, projects will move to the third and final
step, Commitment, and from there move to financial closing and project construction.




                                                 Jan 10, 2025 HSC Material                                                      21

    Oregon Housing and Community Services | 725 Summer St. NE Suite B, Salem, OR 97301-1266 | (503) 986-2000 | FAX (503) 986-2020
    Housing Stability Council Project Summary – Impact Assessment
                           Application Step
SUMMARY
        Project Name: Elm Park
                    City: Florence                                                       County: Lane
  State House District: 9                                               State Senate District: 5
       Sponsor Name: Our Coastal Village, Inc.
                                                                                    Total Units: 32
         Urban/Rural: Urban
                                                                      Total Affordable Units: 32
                                                                                               2 1 BR at 30% AMI
                                                                                               2 1 BR at 40% AMI
                                                                                               1 1 BR at 50% AMI
                                                                                               1 1 BR at 60% AMI
                                                                                               5 2 BR at 30% AMI
                                                                              Units by Size & 5 2 BR at 40% AMI
 # Rent Assisted Units: 0
                                                                                Affordability: 4 2 BR at 50% AMI
                                                                                               2 2 BR at 60% AMI
                                                                                               4 3 BR at 30% AMI
                                                                                               3 3 BR at 40% AMI
                                                                                               2 3 BR at 50% AMI
                                                                                               10 3 BR at 60% AMI
  # of Units with OHCS
                        0
 PSH Services Funding:
         Cost Per Unit: $477,469                                    Construction Type: New Construction
                                                                  # of Units with Non-
   Affordability Term: 30                                                              0
                                                                  OHCS Requirements:
                                                  Estimated Funding Request

  Total OHCS Request: $12,235,000                                          Total project cost:        $15,279,000


  This project is currently in the Impact Assessment step and there may be changes as it
  progresses through the ORCA process. We recommend to Housing Stability Council the
  reservation of an up to amount of $12,235,000 in LIFT resources for this project, with the
  expectation that the project retains the characteristics submitted in the Impact Assessment
  without substantial changes.

                                                    Jan 10, 2025 HSC Material                                                        22

     Oregon Housing and Community Services | 725 Summer St. NE Suite B, Salem, OR 97301-1266 | (503) 986-2000 | FAX (503) 986-2020
  Elm Park – Housing Stability Council




PROJECT DETAILS
                      Elm Park Apartments is a new construction project located in Florence. The
                      project will consist of five 3-story buildings with 32 units including six 1-
                      bedroom, 16 2-bedroom, and 10 3-bedroom. The buildings are designed with
 Project Description: roofline breaks and variation in the front and rear wall lines. The project will
                      have a small greenhouse and raised garden beds. There will also be a small
                      community center space and a playground. The project site is adjacent to
                      Florence’s Elm Park.
  Anticipated closing
                      April 1, 2025
                date:


 Focus Population(s): Low- and very low-income families, survivors of domestic violence

                             The developer has been accepted as a member of Professional Business
                             Development Group (PBDG), a nonprofit whose mission is to advocate for
                             equity and inclusion in the construction industry and mentor and provide
                             critical resources to minority and disadvantaged business enterprises. The
                             developer has engaged PBDG for individualized assistance in improving
                             efforts to advance racial equity.

        ERJ Strategy: Elm Park Apartments has engaged with local culturally responsive
                      organizations to provide resident services and to help market the units to
                      underserved populations.
                             Additionally, the management agent, Cascade Management, has a
                             multilingual lease-up team and will be marketing the units in English and
                             Spanish language advertising. Cascade Management requires all staff to
                             undergo fair housing training upon being hired and annually.
                      Elm Park Apartments has MOUs with Siuslaw Outreach Services and Florence
                      Food Share to provide services to the tenant population. Siuslaw Outreach
                      Services provides rental assistance, prescription assistance, self-sufficiency
                      education, budgeting education. They also provide domestic violence
                      services. They will also help residents access other services by referral.
   Resident Services: Florence Food Share’s master gardener will also administer the gardening
                      program at the project.

                             The management agent will conduct regular outreach to tenants to engage in
                             dialogue to receive feedback on services and to plan out additional offerings
                             as need arises.



                                                   Jan 10, 2025 HSC Material                                                      23

      Oregon Housing and Community Services | 725 Summer St. NE Suite B, Salem, OR 97301-1266 | (503) 986-2000 | FAX (503) 986-2020
Elm Park – Housing Stability Council




                   Elm Park Apartments is in the heart of Florence and is walkable distance from
                   most amenities available in the city. The site is near an Early Care and
          Location Education facility that will open in 2025 and 3 grocery stores. As well as a
      Preferences: range of recreational opportunities.
                   The project is also located in a census tract at risk of displacement for
                   vulnerable populations.
   Alignment with Affordable Rental Housing
Statewide Housing
                   Rural Housing
             Plan:




                                                 Elm Park Apartments




                                                 Jan 10, 2025 HSC Material                                                      24

    Oregon Housing and Community Services | 725 Summer St. NE Suite B, Salem, OR 97301-1266 | (503) 986-2000 | FAX (503) 986-2020
Elm Park – Housing Stability Council




                                                Jan 10, 2025 HSC Material                                                      25

   Oregon Housing and Community Services | 725 Summer St. NE Suite B, Salem, OR 97301-1266 | (503) 986-2000 | FAX (503) 986-2020
    Housing Stability Council Project Summary – Impact Assessment
                           Application Step
SUMMARY
        Project Name: Shelly Cove Apartments
                    City: Port Orford                                                    County: Curry
  State House District: 1                                               State Senate District: 1
       Sponsor Name: Chrisman Development, Inc. (CDI)
                                                                                    Total Units: 14
         Urban/Rural: Rural
                                                                      Total Affordable Units: 14
                             14 USDA RD                                       Units by Size & 4 1BR at 60% AMI
 # Rent Assisted Units:
                             11 HUD PBRA                                        Affordability: 10 2 BR at 60% AMI
  # of Units with OHCS
                        0
 PSH Services Funding:
         Cost Per Unit: $305,106                                    Construction Type: Acq-Rehab/Preservation
                                                                  # of Units with Non-
   Affordability Term:
                                                                  OHCS Requirements:
                                                  Estimated Funding Request

  Total OHCS Request: $4,100,000                                           Total project cost:        $4,271,478


  This project is currently in the Impact Assessment step and there may be changes as it
  progresses through the ORCA process. We recommend to Housing Stability Council the
  reservation of an up to amount of $4,100,000 in Preservation resources for this project, with
  the expectation that the project retains the characteristics submitted in the Impact Assessment
  without substantial changes.

PROJECT DETAILS
                      Shelly Cove Apartments is a proposed acquisition and rehabilitation of a 14-
                      unit property in Port Orford to preserve the rent assistance contract with
                      USDA RD and prevent the loss of affordability. The development consists of 2
 Project Description:
                      buildings with 4 units in one building and 10 in the other. There are also
                      laundry and maintenance facilities on site.



                                                    Jan 10, 2025 HSC Material                                                        26

     Oregon Housing and Community Services | 725 Summer St. NE Suite B, Salem, OR 97301-1266 | (503) 986-2000 | FAX (503) 986-2020
 Shelly Cove Apartments – Housing Stability Council




                            The project has not had any major rehabilitation since its construction in
                            1976. In order to preserve the housing, bring the buildings up to code, and
                            maintain habitability, Chrisman Development, Inc. (CDI) intends to rebuild the
                            roof, replace the siding, exterior doors and windows, and undertake asbestos
                            remediation. They plan to renovate all units including replacing all fixtures
                            and exchanging hot water heaters and other appliances with energy efficient
                            models.
 Anticipated closing
                     4/1/2025
               date:


Focus Population(s): Rural, very low-income family housing

                     CDI and their property management agent Viridian Management have
                     implemented a DEI policy for Residential Housing Operations and
                     Organizational Operations. They recognize the need to provide high-quality
                     housing that serves the needs of vulnerable, low-income demographics in
                     each community where they work. They have policies in place to ensure their
                     portfolio offers accessible housing opportunities to populations facing
       ERJ Strategy:
                     disparities and barriers to safe, affordable housing.
                            CDI and Viridian have established a robust set of procedures and best
                            practices to ensure adequate outreach to BIPOC communities. This includes
                            staff training, materials translation, partnerships with CSOs and CROs, and
                            community outreach.

                            CDI’s analysis of the resident services needs in Curry County has identified the
                            following common needs: affordable housing, transportation, nutrition,
                            healthcare referral assistance, and community outreach to educate citizens
                            about services available through service provider referral systems.

                     There is a general lack of services available in Curry County, which is rural,
                     low-population, and with underfunded social services. To the extent possible,
                     CDI collaborates with local providers to strengthen the available services for
  Resident Services:
                     their tenants.

                            They partner with service providers to:
                            • Promote and increase resident access to the programs and resources
                            available in the area through referral and collaborative efforts,
                            • Provide residents with access to educational programs and services,
                            • Ensure that Latino residents and other underrepresented Communities of
                            Color receive culturally responsive and equitable access to programming,


                                                  Jan 10, 2025 HSC Material                                                      27

     Oregon Housing and Community Services | 725 Summer St. NE Suite B, Salem, OR 97301-1266 | (503) 986-2000 | FAX (503) 986-2020
Shelly Cove Apartments – Housing Stability Council




                   • Employ effective outreach strategies to market the properties to the
                   populations within the communities that are least likely to apply, and
                   • Remove real or perceived barriers to housing occupancy that underserved
                   community members and demographics may experience.
                   Shelly Cove Apartments is centrally located in Port Orford and is a walkable
                   distance away from every amenity and service available in the town. This
          Location
                   includes city and state parks and a full-service grocery store.
      Preferences:

                  The property has a walk score of 56 out of 100.
   Alignment with    • Rural priority
Statewide Housing    • Affordable Rental Housing
            Plan:    • Equity and Racial Justice


                                               Shelly Cove Apartments




                                                 Jan 10, 2025 HSC Material                                                      28

    Oregon Housing and Community Services | 725 Summer St. NE Suite B, Salem, OR 97301-1266 | (503) 986-2000 | FAX (503) 986-2020
