Constitutional Political Economy
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10602-022-09389-3

    ORIGINAL   PAPER                                                              a)
                                                                                Check for
                                                                                 updates

STAR Voting, equality of voice, and voter satisfaction:
considerations for voting method reform

Sara Wolk’ - Jameson Quinn? - Marcus Ogren?

Accepted: 24 December 2022
© Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature 2023



Abstract
The vote itself forms the foundation of our political discourse, and how we vote may
be the single most important decision in a representative democracy. In the pursuit
of more fair and representative elections, we explore common electoral pathologies
like vote-splitting, Favorite Betrayal, and the center-squeeze Spoiler Effect, and dis-
cuss criteria and methodology for evaluating voting method quality. We introduce
STAR Voting for consideration in place of Plurality and Instant Runoff Voting for
governmental elections, and compare it to other leading voting method proposals.
To evaluate voting method accuracy and strategy resilience, we present the metrics
Voter Satisfaction Efficiency (VSE) and Pivotal Voter Strategic Incentive (PVSI).
We find that compared to Plurality Voting, all methods tested substantially reduce
the need for voters to consider candidate electability but that STAR Voting, Smith/
Minimax, the Condorcet method included, and Approval Top Two go further to
ensure an equally weighted vote. We conclude that STAR Voting in particular offers
a viable, competitive, and compelling proposal for more representative elections.

Keywords Voting system - Expected social utility - One person one vote - Strategic
voting - Cardinal preferences - Ranked choice voting

JEL Classification        D72 - D63   - D71   - C70



Sara Wolk and Jameson Quinn have contributed equally to this work.

b>    Sara Wolk
      sara @equal.vote

      Jameson Quinn
      jameson.quinn @ gmail.com

      Marcus Ogren
      marcus.ogre@ gmail.com

I     Eugene, OR, USA

      Cambridge, MA, USA

      Ramat Gan, Israel



Published online: 20 March 2023                                             g) Springer
                                                                                        S. Wolk et al.


1   Introduction

Voting methods exist at the very core of our political discourse and government,
affecting electoral outcomes      and incentives for voters, candidates, and parties, and
thus shaping our society. In this paper, we present a modern voting method, STAR
Voting, discuss its properties, and give some results from statistical models com-
paring its utilitarian outcomes and strategic incentives to other prominent voting
methods.
    All voting methods consist of two parts: a ballot, and a process for the tabulation
of those ballots. STAR Voting is intended to optimize both of these components. In
this paper, we lay out the rationale for the five star ballot as a voter interface, and
the Score Then Automatic Runoff (STAR) algorithm for measuring the strength and
breadth of support for each candidate in order to find majority preferred winners
who represent the will of the people.



2 Presenting STAR Voting

STAR Voting is an alternative voting method in which voters score candidates from
zero up to five stars, as shown in Fig. 1. The name STAR is both a reference to
the five star ballot itself, and an acronym for Score Then Automatic Runoff, which
describes the two-round tallying process:

—   Scoring Round: All scores for each candidate are totaled and the two highest
    scoring candidates advance.
—   Automatic Runoff: In the runoff, each ballot is counted as one vote for the final-
    ist who was scored higher on that ballot. The finalist who was preferred by more
    voters wins.

STAR Voting was invented in 2014 with the objective of better delivering on the
underlying goals of voting reform advocates, while addressing serious issues with
Plurality Voting and limitations with leading reform proposals like Top Two Runoff,
Score Voting, and Instant Runoff Voting (IRV).
   The five star ballot allows voters to express not only preference order, but also
equal preference and preference strength. As a result, the star ballot not only con-
veys more information than a choose-one ballot, it also conveys more than a ranked
ballot. On a strict ranked ballot (where equal preferences are not allowed) a voter’s
second choice could be as good as the voter’s favorite or almost as bad as their last
choice. In contrast, even in STAR         elections with a large field,' there’s no need to
limit the number of candidates, limit the available levels of voter expression, pro-
hibit equal rankings, or present voters with an unwieldy ballot. Eliminating these




' For example, the 2020 elections for Democratic presidential delegates from Oregon (The Equal Vote
coalition, 2020).


g\ Springer
STAR Voting, equality of voice, and voter satisfaction:...


Fig.1   A STAR Voting ballot

                                                             Cg STAR VOTING
                                                                   SCORE - THEN - AUTOMATIC - RUNOFF

                                                      e Give your favorite(s) five stars.
                                                      e Give your last choice(s) zero stars.
                                                      e Show preference order and level of support.
                                                      e Equal scores indicate no preference.
                                                      e Those left blank receive zero stars.



                                                                        o     12           3      4    5
                                                       andre =—9§@) © @ © © @
                                                       Blake     ©OOO@ ©
                                                       carmen    @) @ @ © @© ©
                                                       David     | BORORORORO)
                                                       Ella      @ ®@ ® © @ ©
                                                     The two highest scoring candidates are finalists.
                                                     Your full vote goes to the the finalist you prefer.




rules reduces the probability of invalid (“spoiled”) ballots, which studies suggest
may be increased under Instant Runoff Voting (Neely & McDaniel, 2015).”
    Before the 0-5 scale was selected for STAR Voting, early simulations on Voter
Satisfaction Efficiency (Quinn, 2017) were used to confirm the hypothesis that this
level of granularity does in fact lead to significant gains in terms of more representa-
tive outcomes compared to less expressive scales. The simulations also confirmed
that increasing the ballot scale further yielded diminishing returns. Even with large
fields of candidates, the 0—5 star scale offers a high degree of resolution and granu-
larity for voter choice, without exceeding the upward bounds of cognitive load.”
    The five star rating, well-known from online surveys, is very similar to the five
star ballot and offers a familiar interface that has become a leading option for col-
lecting detailed public opinion data. When tabulating five star ballots, both scores
and runoff votes are totalled using addition, which allows STAR                          Voting to be run
on existing voting machines in most cases. Tabulation by addition also means that
STAR Voting ballots are summable and don’t require centralized tabulation, unlike
Instant Runoff Voting (Maine Supreme Judicial Court, 2017). STAR results can be
totaled at the local level with accurate reporting of preliminary results as ballots


? While some ranked ballot methods like Smith/Minimax allow equal rankings, in practice, most do not.
3 There have been many psychometric studies of the optimal number of options for scaled responses; see
for example Simms et al. (2019). General consensus is that measures such as reliability are relatively sta-
ble up to about 6 or 7 options, with cognitive load becoming a limiting factor after that. For this reason
STAR Voting employs the 0-5 star rating system.


                                                                                                 g\ Springer
                                                                                              S. Wolk et al.


come in. This makes the five star ballot itself a compelling option for increasing
voter voice in elections.
    The second half of the STAR Voting method is the ‘automatic’ Top Two run-
off. In the runoff, whether or not your favorite can win, your one full vote goes to
the finalist you prefer. Ballots that scored both finalists equally count as a vote of
 ‘no preference’ in the runoff. The STAR Voting runoff identifies majority-preferred
winners whenever possible, while voters who oppose both finalists can still, at the
least, help to prevent their worst-case scenario. In STAR Voting, the candidate
with the most votes wins (as in Plurality), as required by election laws in states and
jurisdictions.*
    While this paper focuses on single-winner voting methods, good multi-winner
voting methods are also important for comprehensive electoral reform. There are
two ways of using STAR Voting and the five star ballot for multi-winner elections.
One option is to repeat the single-winner Score Then Automatic Runoff process
until all positions have been filled. The other option is to use Proportional STAR
Voting (STAR-PR), which employs the same five star ballot as single-winner STAR
but tallies those ballots using a proportional algorithm to ensure that factions or par-
ties that have a quota worth of support can win a proportional number of seats. Eval-
uating and choosing between these options requires tools that are beyond the scope
of this paper.



3 Pass/fail criteria, vote-splitting, the ability to vote your conscience,
  and inequality in the vote

Comparisons of voting methods have historically largely focused on evaluating
methods according to various pass/fail criteria, even though many desirable electoral
goals are mutually exclusive or inversely correlated (Arrow, 1950). Despite the obvi-
ous limitations of this lens, many advocates frame the conversation around the crite-
ria which their preferred voting methods pass—to the exclusion of other criteria and
common sense considerations like representative accuracy. Predictably, this black
and white approach has proven to be more divisive than constructive.
    Two criteria which are both highly regarded but are inversely correlated are
Favorite Betrayal and Later No Harm. The Favorite Betrayal (FB) criterion is about
preventing the need for the all-too-familiar strategy where rather than throwing away
their vote on a candidate they know            can’t win, a voter will vote for the candidate
on their side who seems the most electable. Voting methods which pass Favorite
Betrayal solve this problem, requiring that a method will never incentivize giving
one’s favorite any less than maximum support.”




4 Instant Runoff has been found to be unconstitutional in Maine due to noncompliance with win by plu-
rality and lack of summability (Maine Supreme Judicial Court, 2017).
> Favorite Betrayal is defined as: “holding other votes constant, a voter should never have to give their
favorite less than the maximum rating in order get a higher-utility outcome.” See Appendix A.


g\ Springer
STAR Voting, equality of voice, and voter satisfaction:...


    The Later No Harm (LNH) criterion is effectively the opposite of Favorite
Betrayal. Saying nothing about whether it’s safe to vote for one’s favorite, LNH
specifies that supporting other candidates in addition to a voter’s favorite cannot hurt
their first choice. This allows candidates to encourage supporters to rank others at no
risk to themselves.°
    Both criteria are clearly desirable, but no deterministic voting method proposed
to date has been able to satisfy both for elections with more than two candidates. We
posit that rather than passing one but then failing the other criterion badly, voting
methods should instead seek to maximize both. We believe that violations of LNH
and FB, and their impacts on strategic voting incentives, should be evaluated statisti-
cally rather than with an axiomatic approach alone.
    As we will show, STAR Voting incentivizes both honest and expressive voting
by counting all ballot data given. The scoring round incentivizes voters to give their
favorite(s) five stars. The runoff incentives voters to also give intermediate scores
because showing honest preference order ensures their full vote will go to the finalist
they prefer in the automatic runoff. Compare this with Instant Runoff Voting, which
can actually incentivize Favorite Betrayal because, in order to pass Later No Harm,
it ignores down-ballot voter preferences which could have been relevant.
    Despite the widespread claim that IRV eliminates the Spoiler Effect, Emily
Dempsey (2018) demonstrates that in order to pass Later No Harm, a voting method
must by definition fail to eliminate the Spoiler Effect and vote-splitting. For these
reasons, we believe that the adherence to Later No Harm as a desirable pass/fail cri-
terion is problematic.
   In IRV, some voters whose favorites are eliminated will have their next choice
counted, but voters whose favorites are eliminated in the final round will not. This
biases elections against voters who prefer strong underdog candidates with broad
support. Counting the full ballot for some voters while ignoring relevant ballot data
for others (as Later No Harm requires) gives voters a false sense of agency, may
erode trust in the system and in voting reform in general, and is out of keeping with
the spirit of one person, one vote.
    Elections spoiled due to vote-splitting not only fail to elect the right winner, they
also bias outcomes in predictable ways. “The Spoiler Effect occurs when a third can-
didate entering a race splits votes with a similar candidate who would otherwise
win, thus causing a candidate less-preferred by the electorate to win instead.” Demp-
sey (2018)
    The center-squeeze Spoiler Effect in particular is pervasive in Plurality but is
exhibited by IRV as well. When it happens, it fuels polarization and entrenches two
party domination by preventing candidates in the middle of the field from winning.
The center-squeeze effect was clearly demonstrated in simulated elections visualized
by Ka-Ping Yee (2005) and was analyzed and discussed by Warren Smith and later
Mark Frohnmayer (2017). Yee Diagrams such as those shown in Fig. 2 demonstrate
that STAR, Score + Top Two Runoff, and Condorcet methods are more accurate than



© Later No Harm is defined as ’Adding a later preference to a ballot should not harm any candidate
already listed. See Appendix A.” Woodall (1997).


                                                                                      g\ Springer
                                                                                                                                          S. Wolk et al.


        Yee Diagrams such as these stills from Mark Frohnmayer's "Animated Voting Methods" video can be used to
   visualize voting method pathologies such as spoiled elections, and to identify center squeeze and expansion effects.




 Plurality Voting exhibiting a total     Instant Runoff exhibiting erratic     | Score Voting exhibiting a slight      STAR Voting exhibiting relatively
 center squeeze      spoiler effect      pathologies and a center squeeze        center expansion effect where         accurate win regions for all five
 where the light blue candidate in     _ spoiler effect where the light blue     the win region for the candidate      _—candidates.
 the middle can't possibly win.          candidate in the middle does not        in    the    middle   is _ slightly
                                         win even though they are at the         exaggerated.
                                         center of public opinion.


Fig.2    Yee diagrams



other alternative voting methods and do not exhibit exaggerated center-squeeze or
center-expansion biases, two common pathologies which can result in unrepresentative
outcomes.
    Many systemic problems in electoral politics in general can be traced back to
vote-splitting and the Spoiler Effect under Plurality Voting. Fear of wasting one’s
vote leads directly to “lesser-evil” voting where voters are unable to safely support
their favorite. This, in turn, is the reason for the “electability” bias, and it’s likely a
fundamental reason why political leadership in the United States remains starkly out
of sync with the makeup of the voting population.
    In research            on the          demographics                of elected           officials,        (Kauzlarich,           2019)       white
men held 62% of U.S. elected offices in 2019, despite comprising only 30 percent
of the population. In order to achieve gender parity and racial equity in politics—or
to overcome two-party domination—we need a level playing field where candidates
from underrepresented communities can fairly compete, but the reality is that voting
methods biased towards those who are deemed most electable (Abramowitz, 1989)
are likely to maintain serious disparities in representation, regardless of public opin-
ion. Fear of vote-splitting appears to be a powerful driver of voter behavior; if so, this
would lead to a significant additional advantage for the candidates deemed most elect-
able. In practice, those who benefit from the “electability bias” are usually those who
raised the most money,                       (OpenSecrets,              2020) candidates with name recognition, and
incumbents (OpenSecrets, 2019) who tend to be wealthy, older, white, and male.
   We posit that by passing the Equality Criterion, vote-splitting caused by the
voting method itself can be eliminated. The Equality Criterion states that for any
given vote, there is a possible opposite vote, such that if both were cast, it would not
change the outcome of an election.’ The Equality Criterion ensures that if one party
had the support of 51% of the voters and ran multiple candidates, and another party
had the support of 49% of the electorate and ran only one candidate, the majority




T For a rigorous definition of the Equality Criterion, see Appendix A.


g\ Springer
STAR Voting, equality of voice, and voter satisfaction:...


faction would always have some way to give all of their candidates full support and
thus guarantee a win, even if the front-runners were unknown.
     In 1964,    Wesberry v. Sanders,           (Black,      1964) The U.S. Supreme   Court declared
that equality of voting—one person, one vote—means that “the weight and worth of
the citizens’ votes as nearly as is practicable must be the same.” Passing the Equality
Criterion ensures that it’s possible for voters who disagree to cast equally weighted
and opposite votes, no matter how many candidates are on their side. Approval,
Score, Smith/Minimax, and STAR Voting all pass this basic and ’practicable’ crite-
ria; Plurality and Instant Runoff Voting do not.



4 Anon-binary statistical approach

In the axiomatic approach to evaluating voting methods, one begins by clearly defining an
outcome that is arguably pathological, and then proceeds to check if that pathology is pos-
sible. In the statistical approach, the question is not just “can this pathology ever happen?”
but “how problematic is this pathology on average?” Thus, we identify the context where
the problem occurs, measure its frequency, and then quantify the severity of its impact.
    In principle, one could define a context using only real historical outcomes, but in
practice that would mean sample sizes would be unacceptably small, and for newly
adopted voting methods there would be no samples at all. Historical results almost
never include the data required to assess what role, if any, strategic voting played in
an election. In practice, measuring the frequency of various pathologies adequately
means defining a generative probability model and using it to run simulated elections.
    We simulate elections for a given voting method using the following steps, which
each may involve some randomness:

1.    Populate election: Generate voters and candidates with the inherent characteristics
      that will be needed for future steps.
2.    Assign utilities: Decide how each voter feels about each candidate.
3.    Polling: Conduct some kind of “pre-election polls” of the electorate.
4.    Honest-Naive Voting: Cast ballots for each voter using their inherent feelings
      about the candidates. Determine the winner.
5.    Viability-Aware Voting: Cast ballots for each voter using their inherent feelings
      about the candidates, available “polling” information about candidate viability,
      and their understanding of the voting method. Determine the winner.
6.    Targeted Strategic Voting: For each targeted strategy tested, identify which voters
      are likely to employ the strategy in question, which ballots to change, and how to
      change those ballots. Determine the new winner.

Creating a model as outlined above requires balancing realism and simplicity. Mod-
els should have a relatively high likelihood of reproducing historical elections, and
counterfactual examples should be plausible. At the same time, the model should be
relatively easy to describe and reproduce, while avoiding unnecessary complexities
which researchers could use to bias results.



                                                                                          g\ Springer
                                                                                           S. Wolk et al.


   Although this paper focuses on STAR Voting, we have done our best to avoid cre-
ating a model biased in favor of STAR. Jameson Quinn’s early work on the models
presented here, first made public in Quinn (2017), preceded (and was the basis for)
serious STAR activism. Quinn had hoped and expected to instead find support for
Bucklin-style voting methods such as Majority Judgment (Balinski & Laraki, 2010).



4.1   Voter model


Populating the election and assigning utilities to the voters and candidates is done
according to a voter model. In order to select our voter model we first considered the
“impartial culture.” (See: Black (1958) for introduction of the idea; Klahr (1966) for
its extension to weak orderings; Fishburn and Gehrlein (1980); and Smith (2000) for
generative versions and utilitarian interpretations.) We then considered “normally-
distributed spatial models”        (see: Downs     (1957) for the introduction of the idea as
a descriptive    model;    Smith    (2000),   Tideman     and   Plassmann     (2008),   and    Green-
Armytage et al. (2016) for simulations using the model).
   Tsetlin et al. (2003) points out that impartial culture has too many Condorcet
cycles. Tideman (2020) agrees and argues that for this and other reasons spatial
models are better, but normal spatial models go too far in the other direction, with
too few Condorcet cycles.* For these reasons we use a clustered spatial model.
Because this is non-parametric (that is, because it can include an unbounded number
of clusters), it can reproduce real-world election scenarios—including Condorcet
cycles—as precisely as desired.
   In the clustered spatial model (as in the spatial model), voters and candidates are
characterized by their ideal points in a vector space; in the clustered model they are
distributed in that space using a common hierarchical Dirichlet structure of Gauss-
ian clusters, similar to a CrossCat model (Mansinghka et al., 2016). Step-by-step we:

1.    Assign relative weights to issue dimensions using a stick-breaking Dirichlet pro-
      cess, adding dimensions until the remaining weight falls below a given threshold.
      This allows differing distributions of issue weights, while ensuring that, on aver-
      age, issue weight decays exponentially and thus only a finite number of dimen-
      sions need to be modeled.
2.    Cluster the dimensions themselves into “views” using a Chinese Restaurant Dir-
      ichlet process.
3.    Within each view, independently cluster the voters using a Chinese Restaurant
      Dirichlet process. For each voter cluster, assign a mean and variance for each
      dimension, and draw the voters’ ideal points as normally-distributed using their
      cluster mean and variance in each view.




® Normal distributions are symmetric around a center point along any axis; thus, they tend not to have
Condorcet cycles (Davis et al., 1972).


g\ Springer
STAR Voting, equality of voice, and voter satisfaction:...


This results in a model with good exchangeability properties that make it relatively
easy to sample from and analyze. We believe that a nonparametric model of this
form will show good realism, and in particular that specific kinds of potentially-
pathological scenarios such as Condorcet cycles will occur with a realistic fre-
quency — neither artificially often as in impartial culture, nor artificially rarely as in
normally-distributed spatial models.

4.2    Polling model

Next we define the polling and media models used. “An initial “poll” is performed
using Approval Voting, where the approval threshold for each voter is set at 70% of the
way between an average utility candidate (0%) and the voter’s favorite (100%). We use
Approval Voting for the poll because it gives the voters a realistic amount of informa-
tion about the relative strength of the candidates. We simulate real-world polling error
with Gaussian noise (standard deviation of 5%).

4.3    Initial strategy models

We consider both a zero-information “honest/naive” strategy and a “viability-aware”
strategy using the Approval polling discussed above.”
   For Approval methods, the approval threshold for the naive strategy is set at 40%
of the way up from the average candidate to the voter’s favorite. For STAR, the
“naive” strategy is to vote per the instructions by normalizing one’s utilities to the
[0-5] star scale and voting accordingly.

“Viability-Aware” strategies are as follows:

—     Plurality: For a given voter, determine the expected utility of the election (FV),
      then, given a candidate with utility u; and estimated probability of winning p,,
      score candidates equal to p,(u; — EV). Vote for the candidate with the highest
      score.
—     Plurality Top Two: Same as Plurality except that voters who do not prefer the
      polling leader replace the estimated probability of winning with an estimate of
      the probability of being in a two-way tie for second.
—     Approval: Determine the expected utility of the election, and vote for every can-
      didate with utility greater than that.
—     Approval Top Two: Same as Approval, but replace the estimated probability
      of winning with the estimated probability of being in a two-way tie for second
      place.




° Specifically, each candidate’s probability of winning is estimated by assuming that their true percent
approval is independently beta-distributed around their observed approval, tuning the total a + f of the
two beta distribution parameters to have a given margin of error if a = f.


                                                                                           g\ Springer
                                                                                                                                            S. Wolk et al.


                                   STAR                                                                 Cc
                        Smith/Minimax                                                                 e3oe
                    Approval Top Two                                                                  eo        Voter Behavior

                                Approval                                                          @     @       @     Honest / Naive
                                       IRV                                                    @                 @     Viability-aware
                     Plurality Top Two                                                   ee
                                 Plurality       -®                               e

                                             70%                   80%                  90%              100%
                                                      % “Voter Satisfaction           Efficiency (VSE)


Fig.3 Voter Satisfaction Efficiency of selected voting methods. Model for Fig. 3 is run using 10,000
electorates each with 6 candidates and 5001 voters. Model for Figs. 4 and 5 are run using 10,000 elector-
ates each with 6 candidates and 101 voters. Insofar as voters are naturally clustered, the simulated voters
stand in for a greater number of actual individuals


                      STAR                                          @
            Smith/Minimax          @
        Approval   Top Two                              @

                   Approval                                                   @

                         IRV                 @
         Plurality Top Two                                     @

                    Plurality                                                                                                           @

                                                  0%                     5%                   10%               15%              20%
                                                               % Pivotal Voter Strategic Incentive (PVSI)


Fig.4 A “viability-aware” strategy is incentivized over honest/naive behavior for most methods tested
but the size of these incentives varies considerably. Honest voting outperformed our viability-aware strat-
egy for Smith/Minimax and IRV

—   Smith/Minimax: Use the same candidate scores determined for Plurality and rank
    the candidates in decreasing order by score. This can result in both the burial of
    disliked frontrunners and favorite betrayal akin to what is done in plurality.
—   IRV: Same as Smith/Minimax, but rank the candidates with negative scores hon-
    estly. This can result in favorite betrayal but not burial.
—   STAR: Balance strategic exaggeration (using 5’s and 0’s instead of 3’s and 2’s
    to maximize influence in the scoring round) with the competing incentive of not
    wanting to give multiple viable candidates the same score. (This yields more 5’s
    and 0’s than the naive strategy and is mostly unaffected by the presence of non-
    viable candidates in the race.)

Note that the above viability-aware strategies exhibit honest preferences for
Approval, Approval Top Two and STAR, but may exhibit dishonest preference order
for Plurality, Plurality Top Two, IRV, and Smith/Minimax. This is due to the fact
that there’s no way to change an ordinal ballot that wouldn’t also change the prefer-
ence order, whereas in cardinal methods there is more flexibility.


5 Representative outcomes: Voter Satisfaction Efficiency

An ideal winner represents as many voters as possible as well as possible. One way
to measure this is with utility. Voter Satisfaction Efficiency (VSE) is a linear meas-
ure of a voting method’s utilitarian outcomes. In VSE a voting method that always


g\ Springer
STAR Voting, equality of voice, and voter satisfaction:...



                  STAR                    ©          «      @                           wa                             Strategy
        ;     ;                                                     =              “                                   @    Favorite Betrayal
    Smith/Minimax                -—                                     w                                              =    Burial
 Approval Top Two                                                           ®          ev       A                      ©    Bullet Voting’
                                                                                                                            Exclusive
            Approval                                                                                  ay               id
                                                                                                                       A    Inclusive
                    IRV               }                         a                               @                      v_   Polarized     Exclusive
  PluiPality Top Two                                                                        e                          A    Polarized     Inenasine
                                                                                                                       Vv   Honest      Deflation
             Plurality                                                                                          e      A    Honest Inflation
                          -30%                -20%              -10%                    %                 10%
                                                 % Pivotal Voter Strategic Incentive (PVSI)


Fig.5 Incentives for various targeted strategies compared to the most-incentivized behavior from Fig. 4
(honest/naive or viability-aware). “Bullet voting, unlike other strategies pictured, is employed by a ran-
dom faction. This is because any faction could realistically bullet vote, so targeting would have required
potentially unrealistic assumptions


elected this ideal candidate would                                  score       100%, while one that elected a candidate
completely at random would score 0%.
   Smith/Minimax and STAR Voting delivered the highest levels of Voter Satisfaction
of all methods tested (see Fig. 3). Viability-aware voting yielded higher VSE under all
voting methods where it was strategically incentivized (see Fig. 4). Approval-based
methods also performed notably well under best-case-scenario voter behavior.”


6 Honest and strategic incentives

A voting method’s outcomes can only be as good as the ballot data itself, and bal-
lot data is likely to only be as good as the voter behavior. In order to evaluate the
likelihood of specific voter behaviors and their impacts on the quality of electoral
outcomes,            we          define a       statistical         metric      called          Pivotal     Voter   Strategic        Incentive
(PVSI). This measures strategic incentives by taking a faction who wants to employ
a specific strategy and changing their votes, starting with the person who stands to
gain the most and continuing down the list, until the outcome changes with one piv-
otal voter. We then evaluate the change in outcome and resulting strategic incentives
from this voter’s perspective.'' When a strategy works as intended its incentive will
be greater if it takes relatively low coordination, it will average near zero if the strat-
egy rarely has any effect, and it will be negative if the risk of the strategy backfiring
outweighs the potential reward of success.




10 See Appendix B for more VSE results, varying the model, candidates, and parameters. See supple-
mentary material for VSE/PVSI code in Python.
'l PVSI is measured as a percentage and is defined as the average over all simulations of the pivotal vot-
er’s utility of the winner under strategic voting, minus the utility of the candidate who wins in the absence
of strategy, divided by the voter’s utility gap between their favorite and their average candidates. Simula-
tion runs in which the outcome never changes count as the pivotal voter receiving no change in utility.


                                                                                                                                  g\ Springer
                                                                                            S. Wolk et al.


    We begin by using Pivotal Voter Strategic Incentive to look at how much this
voter benefits if a random faction'* that includes them takes candidate viability into
consideration (Viability-Aware).
    We then consider the impacts of strategy types such as “Favorite Betrayal” (rat-
ing the “allied” frontrunner above your true favorite); “Burial” (rating the “enemy”
frontrunner below apparently non-viable candidates you actually like less); “Bul-
let Voting*” (voting for only your favorite); “Inclusive” and “Exclusive” strategies in
Approval Voting (lowering or raising your approval threshold); “Polarized Inclusive”
and “Polarized Exclusive” in STAR Voting (scoring all candidates 5 or 0); and “Hon-
est Inflation” and “Honest Deflation” in STAR Voting (exaggerating candidates scores
to 5, 4, 1, or 0 in order to boost an allied frontrunner or block an enemy frontrunner).
    For targeted strategies (all those in Fig. 5 except for Bullet Voting), we identify
the faction who stands to benefit most from strategic voting.'°
    In Fig. 5, we can see that in STAR Voting, the dishonest strategies (Favorite
Betrayal, Burial, and Bullet Voting) are all strongly disincentivized. Weakly incen-
tivized honest/semi-honest strategies include Polarized Inclusive, in which voters
might give all the candidates on their side 5 stars, and Honest Inflation, in which
a voter might give their top candidates 5 stars, their compromise candidates 4, an
opposing frontrunner 1, and their last choice 0.
    In Instant Runoff Voting, the most-incentivized strategy is Favorite Betrayal,
commonly known as “voting for the lesser of two evils”, at 3%. The positive incen-
tive here indicates that ranking your favorite Ist can backfire. This is even more true
in Plurality, where Favorite Betrayal is incentivized at 14%. (PVSI would be 100% if
a tactical vote was guaranteed to change the winner from an average candidate to the
pivotal voter’s favorite.)
    In Approval, the most incentivized strategy, topping out at 10%, is to set one’s
approval threshold between the two most popular candidates. With Approval Top
Two,   this goes down      to 3%. For STAR        there is a weak incentive, at 2%, to exag-
gerate one’s scores up while maintaining an honest preference order. In STAR,
Approval Top Two, and Smith/Minimax, strategies that give less than full support
to a voter’s favorite are all disincentivized. Smith/Minimax disincentivized strategic
voting across the board.
   We can clearly see that Plurality Voting, with its strong and transparent strategic
incentives, pressures voters to support “electable” candidates, further entrenching
barriers to entry and existing inequities in political representation. While voters try-
ing a new method for the first time may need to unlearn strategic habits, the Pivotal
Voter Strategic Incentive voter models illustrate why we believe that over time voter
behavior would become more honest under STAR and other top-tier voting methods.




'2 A random faction is defined by randomly choosing two candidates and taking those voters who prefer
the first of them.
'3 In IRV and Plurality Top Two, voters who prefer the original third-place candidate over the original
winner make up the strategic faction. In the other methods it’s voters who prefer the original second-
place candidate.


g\ Springer
STAR Voting, equality of voice, and voter satisfaction:...


7    Conclusion

STAR Voting’s expressive and user-friendly ballot, simple and transparent tabula-
tion, positive incentives to vote one’s conscience, and its accurate outcomes make it
an actionable solution to level the playing field and elect representative winners in
single-winner elections.

Appendices

Appendix A: Formal voting definitions and criteria

Consider a voting method as a set of algorithms, indexed by a finite set of candidates
c.'* For each such set, the method defines a space 6 of valid ballots; and for any list
of V ballots (b,,...,by), where b; € B for all 1 <i < V, the method defines a “result”
R(b,,..., by), which in the most general case is a lottery over subsets of C. In this paper,
we are focused on single-winner voting methods, so R should be a lottery over individ-
ual members of R, and in fact the voting methods we consider here are all deterministic
except in rare cases of ties (asymptotically measure-zero as number of voters goes to
infinity).
     Let us call a given list of ballots an “election”, and denote specific elections we
consider as €, €*, etc. We also assume that any ballot in b € BG is legible at least in
terms of what strict,preferenges it expresses;'> that is to say, for any two candidates
X,Y EC,       either      X>Y or X <Y         holds, which is to say that ballot b either does or
doesn’t strictly prefer X over Y. The expected axioms for strict preference hold:
       b
—    X<x,
       b                    b
—    X>/YimpliesY
               <X,
      b     b      b
—    X>YandY>Zimply
                 X >Z.

Definition 1 (Favorite     Betrayal   Criterion   (FBC))    Consider    an_ election
€ = {b,,...,by} and its result R. Take the voter who cast ballot b; (for an arbitrary
i) and assume that they have an arbitrary real-valued utility u, for each candidate
cE     C. Denote their favorite candidate, arg max; Uj;, as x,!6
     In order to pass FBC: For any “strategic” ballot b* that voter i could have cast, thus giv-
ing a new result R(b,,...,D;_1, b*, bj41> +» by) with all other ballots held constant, there
must be some “non-betraying strategic ballot’ b* such that the following both hold:
       be
-    Y <X for any Y,



‘4 Unless otherwise noted, we will consider the set of candidates as fixed, and thus suppress C as a sub-
script on other entities such as B.
'S Note, of course, that the assumption that ballots carry strict preference information does not imply
that they don’t also carry further information such as strength of preference.
'© Tf there are several candidates tied for voter i’s favorite, this must hold for all of them.



                                                                                                  g\ Springer
                                                                                             S. Wolk et al.



—    Voteri’s expected (Von Neumann—Morgenstern) utility for R(b,, ...,B;_1, b*, Digs                 Dy)
     is not greater than that for R(b,, ...,;_1, be, Digs os Dy).

©
    For the next criterion, we must impose a bit more structure on the set of valid ballots. For
any ballot b and subset of candidates S, there must be a single ballot b~° which is the same
as b except that it “removes all support for” the candidates in S. The following must hold:
                           p-s

—    ForX,YE€S:XxX>               Y,

—    ForX     €S.YES:X             > Y
                             7)          p-s

—~ ForX,Y€S:(X>YeX>Y)


Definition 2 (Later No Harm (LNH)) Consider an election € = {b,, ..., by }. In order to pass
LNH, there must not exist a voter i and a candidate subset S such that the following hold:
                                           b;
—    Forevery
        X €S,YES:X>Y,
—    There    is some       candidate  X ¢S       who    is more  likely                to    win        in
     R(b,, ...5;_1,5;, b)44, . by) than in R(b,,..., bi}, bs, Digs Dy).

©
     Finally, we will define the Equality Criterion:

Definition 3 (Equality Criterion) In order to pass the Equality Criterion, for every
ballot b, there must exist some                (not necessarily distinct) ballot b, such that for any
list of ballots b,,b,...,b

                            R(b,, 55, ...,0,,6, b) = R(a(b,,bo, ...,b,))

for every permutation a of b,,b,, ...,b,. Note that the equality in the above equation
is in distribution.
     Additionally,       5 must have the opposite preferences of b. That is,
        b            b
—-   X>YSY>X,
       b      b
-    X<YSY<K<xX.

©
   The Equality Criterion implies the anonymity Criterion and therefore the identi-
cal input options Criterion. It is also easy to show that the Equality Criterion com-
bined with the mutual unanimity Criterion (the requirement that if all voters prefer
a subset of candidates over all candidates outside that subset,                a member of the sub-
set will win) implies the weak mutual majority Criterion (the requirement that if a
majority of voters all prefer a subset over all members outside that subset, there is a
way for them to vote to ensure that a member of the subset will win).



g\ Springer
STAR Voting, equality of voice, and voter satisfaction:...


Appendix B: VSE and PVSI: robustness to model and parameters

In order to test the robustness of VSE                 and PVSI, we have run election simulations
with changes to models and parameters, showing that results remain broadly similar
across such changes.
   The following graphs are each made using 4000 simulated elections. Unless other-
wise specified, they use the following parameters, like the figures in the main paper:

—   textitModel:       Hierarchical       Dirichlet      (CrossCat-like),   as   described   in the   main
    paper. Dirichlet alpha (clustering) parameters: dimensional clustering 1, dimen-
    sional weights within a cluster 1, voter clusters 1.
—   Candidates: 6
—   Voters: 101
—    “Pickiness” in initial Approval poll: 0.7 (This means that in the ini-
    tial approval poll, voter i will “support” candidate j if and only if
    U(i,j) > (Max,[UG, k)] — Min, [UG, k)]) * 0.7 + Min,[UG,k)]), where U(i, j)
    signifies the utility of voter i for candidate /.
—   Standard deviation of polling noise (both for initial approval poll, and for using
    viability-aware results to define strategy): 5% of electorate. (This is like a real-
    world poll with a margin of error, including both sampling error and systematic
    error, of 10%. Roughly speaking, this would typically indicate a sampling-only
    error of around 5%.)

As in the main paper, Bullet Voting is not included in strategy graphs for Plural-
ity or Plurality Top Two because it is non-applicable. Plurality ballots do not
allow any non-bullet votes.
    Favorite Betrayal is also omitted from the strategy graphs for Approval voting
in the main paper and appendices. This is because the authors were concerned
that without further explanation, this data point could be easily misunderstood to
incorrectly imply that voters should not approve their favorite. On the contrary,
Approval passes Favorite Betrayal Criterion and voters should always approve
their favorite candidate(s).
    In Approval Voting (with no Top Two runoff), the most incentivized strategy, at
10.1%,'’ is “Exclusive”, meaning that a voter would likely do best to approve their
preferred frontrunner and all candidates they prefer to that candidate, including their
favorite, but no others. That said, Favorite Betrayal was less strongly incentivized
for Approval at 9.8%. This positive incentive indicates that if voters do betray their
favorite in Approval, it is unlikely to backfire and hurt the voter, or to hurt the elec-
tion outcome, especially if their assessments for candidate viability are accurate.
    These incentives, and their potential impacts, are important to understand because
Approval Voting has an identical-looking ballot to Plurality, so it’s to be expected
that some voters used to voting in Plurality might continue to betray their favorite
even if it’s no longer necessary.

'7 Strategic Incentive numbers given here for Approval Voting are as they would appear in Fig. 5 in the
main paper.


                                                                                              g\ Springer
                                                                                                                                                               S. Wolk et al.


—      Model: Impartial culture (Figs. 6, 7, 8).




                                    STAR                                                                                 ee
                 Smith/Minimax                                                                          0@
            Approval Top Two                                                                   ee                                      Voter Behavior
                               Approval                                                e            @                                  @       Honest / Naive
                                         IRV                              @                e                                           @       Viability-aware
              Plurality Top Two                                       e°«
                                Plurality       -®
                                               60%             70%            80%
                                                  % “Noter Satisfaction Efficiency (VSE)

Fig.6     VSE results. 6 candidates. Impartial Culture model




                   STAR                                                                                      @
        Smith/Minimax                                         @
    Approval Top Two                                                                                                     @

               Approval                                                                                                            @

                         IRV            —@
     Plurality Top Two                                                                                               @
                Plurality                                                                                                                                                @
                                                       -10%                        0%                  10%                                                   20%
                                                                      % Pivotal Voter Strategic Incentive (PVSI)

Fig. 7 PVSI of viability aware vs. honesty. 6 candidates. Impartial culture model




               STAR                      ®                        @                wy               A                                             Strategy
         ;    _                                                                                                                                    @®   Favorite Betrayal
      Smith/Minimax            —®                          A          yevu                                                                         =    Burial

    Approval
           Top Two                                                    >       oy                A                                                  ©    Bullet Voting*
                                                                                                                                                   vw   Exclusive
            Approval                                                               A
              Pprows                *                                                                            7                                 A    Inclusive
                  IRV                            >                        =        )                                                               wv   Polarized Exclusive
    Plurality Top Two                                                               e                                                              A    Polarized   Inclusive
                                                                                                                                                   WV   Honest Deflation
             Plurality                                                                                                                     e       A    Honest Inflation
                               -60%                    -30%                             0%                                   30%
                                                     % Pivotal Voter Strategic Incentive (PVSI)


Fig.8     PVSI of strategies over viability-awareness. 6 Candidates. Impartial culture model




g\ Springer
STAR Voting, equality of voice, and voter satisfaction:...


—      Model: 2 equally-weighted ideology dimensions; independent Gaussian distribu-
       tions; utilities equal to negative of Euclidean distance (Figs. 9, 10, 11).




                                    STAR                                                                                  c
                 Smith/Minimax                                                                                       ee
            Approval Top Two                                                                                             eo         Voter Behavior
                               Approval                                                                          |                  @       Honest / Naive
                                         IRV                                                                 @                      @       Viability-aware
              Plurality Top Two                                                              @       ©
                                Plurality             -@                                     @
                                                              80%      85%      90%      95%     100%
                                                           % “Noter Satisfaction Efficiency (VSE)

Fig.9     VSE results. 6 candidates. 2-D spatial model



                   STAR                                                8
        Smith/Minimax                @

    Approval Top Two                                           @

               Approval                                                                 @

                         IRV                    @
     Plurality Top Two                                                              @
                Plurality                                                                                                                                             @
                                                    0%                      5%              10%              15%                                               20%
                                                                       % Pivotal Voter Strategic Incentive (PVSI)

Fig. 10     PVSI of viability-awareness vs. honesty. 6 candidates. 2-D spatial model




                STAR                     >—t                       e                                 WA                                        Strategy
          ;    _                                                               nm                b                                              @®   Favorite Betrayal
       Smith/Minimax           —®                                          o            VV                                                      ®    Burial

    Approval Top Two                                                                         >   ew          A                                  ©    Bullet Voting*
                                                                                                                                                     Exclusi
            Approval                                       ©                                                         A    YW                    nd     amend
                                                                                                                                                A    Inclusive
                  IRV                    5 a                           =                                                                        vW   Polarized   Exclusive
    Plurality Top Two                                                                                    e                                      A    Polarized   Meats
                                                                                                                                                WV   Honest Deflation
             Plurality                                                                                                                  e       A    Honest Inflation
                                               -20%                    -10%                0%                                 10%
                                                            % Pivotal Voter Strategic Incentive (PVSI)


Fig. 11     PVSI of strategies vs. viability-awareness. 6 candidates. 2-D spatial model




                                                                                                                                                          g\ Springer
                                                                                                                                                                       S. Wolk et al.


—      Model: 3 equally-weighted ideology dimensions; independent Gaussian distribu-
       tions; utilities equal to negative of Euclidean distance (Figs. 12, 13, 14).




                                     STAR                                                                                        @
                 Smith/Minimax                                                                                              ee
            Approval Top Two                                                                                                 eo       Voter Behavior
                               Approval                                                                                 |                 @         Honest / Naive
                                          IRV                                                                      Cc                     @         Viability-aware
              Plurality Top Two                                                           @                ®
                                Plurality            -@                                       @
                                                85%                  90%           95%           100%
                                                          % “Noter Satisfaction Efficiency (VSE)

Fig. 12     VSE results. 6 Candidates. 3-D spatial model



                   STAR                                                   @
        Smith/Minimax                 @

    Approval Top Two                                     @

               Approval                                                              @

                         IRV          —@
     Plurality Top Two                                                               @
                Plurality                                                                                                                                                      @
                                                    0%                                  5%                      10%                                                        15%
                                                                              % Pivotal Voter Strategic Incentive (PVSI)

Fig. 13     PVSI of viability-awareness vs. honesty. 6 candidates. 3-D spatial model




               STAR                  a—®                          )                               AyvA                                                 Strategy
          ;    _                                                                                                                                        @®   Favorite Betrayal
       Smith/Minimax           —-®                                    a       A      vv           a                                                     @    Burial

    Approval Top Two                                                                      eV                            A                               ©    Bullet Voting*
                                                                                                                                                             Exclusi
            Approval                                         ©}                                                              A       Vv                 w      Ese comin
                                                                                                                                                        A    Inclusive
                  IRV                           >                             =                                @                                        wv   Polarized Exclusive
    Plurality Top Two                                                                                      e                                            A    Polarized     Inclusive
                                                                                                                                                        WV   Honest Deflation
             Plurality                                                                                                                        e@        A    Honest Inflation
                         -20%                                         -10%                            0%                                      10%
                                                             % Pivotal Voter Strategic Incentive (PVSI)


Fig. 14     PVSI of strategies vs. viability-awareness. 6 candidates. 3-D spatial model




g\ Springer
STAR Voting, equality of voice, and voter satisfaction:...


—      Candidates: 3 (Figs. 15, 16, 17)




                                    STAR                                                                                              >)
                    Smith/Minimax                                                                                        ee
              Approval Top Two                                                                                          eo                     Voter Behavior
                                 Approval                                                             @                           e@           @       Honest / Naive
                                            IRV                                                           - )                                  @       Viability-aware
               Plurality Top Two                                                                      >)
                                  Plurality          -@                                 @
                                                               85%           90%          95%
                                                          % “Noter Satisfaction Efficiency (VSE)

Fig. 15       VSE results. 3 candidates. Hierarchical Dirichlet model




                     STAR                                                                                       @
        Smith/Minimax                   @
    Approval Top Two                                                                              @
                Approval                                                                                                         @

                           IRV                                                                @
     Plurality Top Two                                                                        @
                  Plurality                                                                                                                                                      ,

                                                          -4%                             0%                     4%                                                                  8%
                                                                           % Pivotal Voter Strategic Incentive (PVSI)

Fig. 16       PVSI of viability-awareness vs. honesty. 3 cands. Hierarchical Dirichlet model




                 STAR            -—@—                             ©                                             ay           A                            Strategy
          ;     i                                                                                                                                          @    Favorite Betrayal
       Smith/Minimax                                     a             a                      Avvy                                                         =    Burial
    Approval Top Two                                                                                                >    oy                A               ©    Bullet Voting*
                                                                                                                                                           vw   Exclusive
              Approval
                pprov:                                                             sa                                             A
                                                                                                                                           v               A    Inclusive
                    IRV                                               oe                a                                e                                 wv   Polarized Exclusive
    Plurality Top Two                                                                                                         e                            A    Polarized   Inclusive
                                                                                                                                                           WV   Honest Deflation
               Plurality                                                                                                                           @       A    Honest Inflation
                          -20%                    -15%                -10%                  -5%                         0%                     5%
                                                             % Pivotal Voter Strategic Incentive (PVSI)


Fig. 17       PVSI of strategies vs. viability-awareness. 3 cands. Hierarchical Dirichlet model




                                                                                                                                                                     g\ Springer
                                                                                                                                                                              S. Wolk et al.


—      Candidates: 9 (Figs. 18, 19, 20).




                                           STAR                                                                                         Cc
                     Smith/Minimax                                                                                                    ee
              Approval Top Two                                                                                                        eo         Voter Behavior
                                 Approval                                                                                         |              @        Honest / Naive
                                              IRV                                                                         @                      @        Viability-aware
               Plurality Top Two                                                                        |
                                  Plurality                 -@                                      @
                                                                       70%        80%        90%       100%
                                                                 % “Noter Satisfaction Efficiency (VSE)

Fig. 18       VSE results. 9 candidates. Hierarchical Dirichlet model




                     STAR                                                                   @
       Smith/Minimax                        }+—®
    Approval Top Two                                                       @

                Approval                                                       @

                           IRV                         @
     Plurality Top Two                                                                          @
                  Plurality                                                                                                                                                           @
                                 -5%                              0%               5%           10%            15%                                             20%                  25%
                                                                               % Pivotal Voter Strategic Incentive (PVSI)

Fig. 19       PVSI of viability-awareness vs. honesty. 9 cands. Hierarchical Dirichlet model




                 STAR                              ©                               ne                                 wa                                       Strategy
          ;      i                                                                                                                                             @     Favorite Betrayal
      Smith/Minimax              —-®                                           A      we                    a                                                  @     Burial

    Approval
           Top Two                                                                      5                        ev           A                                ©    Bullet Voting*
                                                                                                                                                               vw    Exclusive
              Approval                                                                                                                  A
                Pprows                                                                                                                       ™                 A     Inclusive
                     IRV               5                                       a                                          @                                    vW    Polarized Exclusive
    Plurality Top Two                                                                                                 e                                        A     Polarized    Inclusive
                                                                                                                                                               WV    Honest Deflation
               Plurality                                                                                                                             e         A     Honest Inflation
                           -30%                            -20%                -10%                             0%                    10%                20%
                                                                  % Pivotal Voter Strategic Incentive (PVSI)


Fig. 20       PVSI of strategies vs. viability-awareness. 9 cands. Hierarchical Dirichlet model




g\ Springer
STAR Voting, equality of voice, and voter satisfaction:...


—      Candidates:                  12 (Figs. 21, 22, 23).




                                    STAR                                                                                    ©
                 Smith/Minimax                                                                                             ee
            Approval Top Two                                                                                           eo.        Voter Behavior
                               Approval                                                                           |                   @       Honest / Naive
                                          IRV                                                               Cc                        @       Viability-aware
              Plurality Top Two                                                       @             @
                                Plurality            -@                                   ®
                                                           60%       70%      80%       90%     100%
                                                          % “Noter Satisfaction Efficiency (VSE)

Fig.21      VSE results. 12 candidates. Hierarchical Dirichlet model




                   STAR                                                       6
        Smith/Minimax                 @
    Approval Top Two                                           @

               Approval                                             @

                         IRV                    @
     Plurality Top Two                                                                @
                Plurality                                                                                                                                               @
                                                          0%                        10%                    20%                                                     30%
                                                                        % Pivotal Voter Strategic Incentive (PVSI)

Fig. 22     PVSI of viability-awareness vs. honesty. 12 cands. Hierarchical Dirichlet model




                                                °                            ne                    ve                                            Strategy
                STAR
          ;    _                                                                                                                                  @®   Favorite Betrayal
       Smith/Minimax           —®                                   Avy           =   a                                                           =    Burial

    Approval Top Two                                                     ®                ev            A                                         ©    Bullet Voting*
                                                                                                                                                  vw   Exclusive
            A pprova |                                         4                                                       A
                                                                                                                            7                     A    Inclusive
                  IRV          —                                    B                               e@                                            vW   Polarized Exclusive
    Plurality Top Two                                                                          e                                                  A    Polarized   Inclusive
                                                                                                                                                  WV   Honest Deflation
             Plurality                                                                                                                    e       A    Honest Inflation
                          -30%                      -20%            -10%                  0%                     10%            20%
                                                           % Pivotal Voter Strategic Incentive (PVSI)


Fig. 23     PVSI of strategies vs. viability-awareness. 12 cands. Hierarchical Dirichlet model




                                                                                                                                                            g\ Springer
                                                                                                                                                                    S. Wolk et al.


—      Pickiness”’ in initial Approval poll: 99% (This means that voters will almost
       certainly bullet vote in the initial approval poll.) (Figs. 24, 25, 26).


                                       STAR                                                                           Cc
                    Smith/Minimax                                                                                ee
              Approval Top Two                                                                                       eo             Voter Behavior
                                 Approval                                                                    @        ®                 @       Honest / Naive
                                         IRV                                                   ee                                       @       Viability-aware
               Plurality Top Two                                                           e
                                  Plurality            -@                              @
                                                     70%               80%           90%
                                                            % “Noter Satisfaction Efficiency (VSE)

Fig.24        VSE results with “pickiness” 99%. 6 candidates. Hierarchical Dirichlet model




                     STAR                                                 @
        Smith/Minimax                    ®

    Approval Top Two                                             @

                Approval                                                      @

                           IRV          —@
     Plurality Top Two                                                   ©
                  Plurality                                                                                                                                                 @
                                                                0%                           10%                                                         20%
                                                                         % Pivotal Voter Strategic Incentive (PVSI)

Fig. 25       PVSI of viability-awareness vs. honesty with pickiness 99%. 6 cands. Hier. Dir. model




                 STAR                            ©                a)                                wA                                             Strategy
          :     _                                                                 le           ‘                                                    @     Favorite Betrayal
       Smith/Minimax             -—®                                                   w                                                            ®     Burial

    Approval Top Two                                                                       ee           yw       A                                  ©     Bullet Voting*
                                                                                                                                                          Exclusi
              Approval                                               }                                                          A           ¥       =      erin
                                                                                                                                                    A     Inclusive
                    IRV                      4                               )                               @                                      wv    Polarized     Exclusive
    Plurality Top Two                                                                               e                                               A     Polarized     Inclusive
                                                                                                                                                    WV    Honest Deflation
               Plurality                                                                                                            e               A     Honest Inflation
                          -30%                       -20%                 -10%              0%                            10%
                                                             % Pivotal Voter Strategic Incentive (PVSI)


Fig. 26       PVSI of strategies vs. viability-awareness with pickiness 99%. 6 cands. Hier. Dirichlet




g\ Springer
STAR Voting, equality of voice, and voter satisfaction:...


—      Standard deviation of polling noise: 0%. (Perfectly-accurate polling) (Figs. 27,
       28, 29)



                                        STAR                                                                              ©
                  Smith/Minimax                                                                                         e3oe
              Approval Top Two                                                                                         ee             Voter Behavior
                                 Approval                                                                      e          e               @       Honest / Naive
                                             IRV                                                           @                              @       Viability-aware
               Plurality Top Two                                                                      eo
                                   Plurality           -@                                    @
                                                   70%                 80%           90%
                                                            % “Noter Satisfaction Efficiency (VSE)

Fig.27        VSE results with accurate polling. 6 candidates. Hierarchical Dirichlet model




                     STAR                                                        ®
        Smith/Minimax                    @

    Approval Top Two                                          @

                Approval                                                                          @

                           IRV                            e
     Plurality Top Two                                                    e@
                  Plurality                                                                                                                                                 @

                                                       0%                        5%            10%            15%                                     20%                   25%
                                                                               % Pivotal Voter Strategic Incentive (PVSI)

Fig. 28 PVSI of viability-awareness vs. honesty with accurate polling. 6 candidates. Hierarchical Dir-
ichlet model




                 STAR                        ®                        )              a                     A                                         Strategy
          ;     _                                                                                lp                                                   @    Favorite Betrayal
       Smith/Minimax              -—®                                                    Any                                                          ®    Burial
    Approval Top Two                                                                     ®            ev           A                                  ©    Bullet Voting*
                                                                                                                                                           Exclusi
              Approval                                            5                                                            AY                     =     erin
                                                                                                                                                      A    Inclusive
                    IRV                            4                                             a         @                                          wv   Polarized   Exclusive
    Plurality Top Two                                                                                                          e                      A    Polarized   Inclusive
                                                                                                                                                      WV   Honest Deflation
               Plurality                                                                                                                      e       A    Honest Inflation
                           -30%                    -20%                   -10%                   0%            10%                  20%
                                                              % Pivotal Voter Strategic Incentive (PVSI)


Fig. 29 PVSI of strategies vs. viability-awareness with accurate polling. 6 candidates. Hierarchical Dir-
ichlet model




                                                                                                                                                                g\ Springer
                                                                                                     S. Wolk et al.


—   Voters: 101 vs. 5001 (Figs. 30, 31)


                       STAR
             Smith/Minimax                                                  ee
         Approval Top Two                                                   ee      Voter Behavior
                   Approval                                             @    @      @   Honest / Naive
                          IRV                                       @               @   Viability-aware
          Plurality Top Two                                    ee
                     Plurality    -®                     @
                                 70%          80%           90%           100%
                                    % Voter Satisfaction Efficiency (VSE)

Fig.30   VSE results. 101 voters.      6 candidates. Hierarchical Dirichlet model




                       STAR                                                  tS
             Smith/Minimax                                                  ee
         Approval Top Two                                                   eo      Voter Behavior
                   Approval                                             e    &      @   Honest / Naive
                          IRV                                       @               @   Viability-aware
          Plurality Top Two                                  ee
                     Plurality    -@                     @
                                 70%          80%           90%
                                   % Voter Satisfaction Efficiency (VSE)

Fig.31   VSE results. 5001 voters. 6 candidates. Hierarchical Dirichlet model




When     compared side by side, the above two figures illustrate the minimal differ-
ences between a voter model with 101 voters and a voter model with 5001 voters.


Acknowledgements Special thanks to Mark Frohnmayer for contributions as STAR Voting co-inventor
and advocacy for the equally weighted vote.


Declarations

Conflict of interest Sara Wolk is the Executive Director for the Equal Vote Coalition, which advocates for
some of the voting methods discussed here.




References

Abramowitz, A. I. (1989). Viability, electability, and candidate choice in a presidential primary election: A
     test of competing models. The Journal of Politics, 51(4), 977-992. https://doi.org/10.2307/2131544.
Arrow, K. J. (1950). A difficulty in the concept of social welfare. Journal of Political Economy, 58(4),
     328-346.




g\ Springer
STAR Voting, equality of voice, and voter satisfaction:...


Balinski, M., & Laraki, R. (2010). Majority Judgment. Cambridge: The MIT Press.
Black, D. (1958). The theory of committees and elections. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
      https://doi.org/10.1007/978-94-009-4225-7.
Black, H. (1964). Wesberry v. Sanders, 376 U.S. 1.
Davis, O. A., DeGroot,      M.   H., & Hinich, M. J. (1972).              Social preference orderings           and majority rule.
     Econometrica, 40(1), 147-157. https://doi.org/10.2307/1909727.
Dempsey, E. (2018). Farewell to Pass/Fail. https://starvoting.org/pass_fail
Downs, A. (1957). An economic theory of political action in a democracy. Journal of Political Econ-
     omy, 65(2), 135-150.
Fishburn,   P. C., &    Gehrlein,   W.    V. (1980).       The   paradox    of voting:   Effects    of individual     indifference
     and intransitivity. Journal of Public Economics, 14(1), 83-94. https://doi.org/10.1016/0047-
     2727(80)90006-7
Frohnmayer, M. (2017). Animated Voting Methods. https://youtube.com/watch?v=-4FXLQoLDBA
Green-Armytage,        J., Tideman,      T.   N.,   &    Cosman,     R.   (2016).   Statistical    evaluation     of voting   rules.
      Social Choice and Welfare, 46(1), 183-212. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00355-015-0909-0
Kauzlarich, N. 2019). The Electability Myth: The Shifting Demographics of Political Power in Amer-
      ica. Technical report, Reflective Democracy Campaign.
Klahr, D. (1966). A computer simulation of the paradox of voting. The American Political Science
      Review. https://doi.org/10.2307/1953365.
Maine Supreme Judicial Court. (2017). Opinion of the justices of the supreme judicial court under the
      provisions of Article VI, Section 3 of the Maine Constitution (0j-17-1).
Mansinghka,    V., Shafto, P., Jonas, E., Petschulat, C., Gasner, M., Tenenbaum,                     J. B., et al. (2016). Cross-
      Cat: A fully Bayesian nonparametric method for analyzing heterogeneous, high dimensional data.
      Journal of Machine Learning Research, 17, 1-49.
Neely, F., & McDaniel, J. (2015). Overvoting and the equality of voice under instant-runoff voting in San
      Francisco. California Journal of Politics and Policy. https://doi.org/10.5070/P2cjpp7428929.
OpenSecrets. (2019). Reelection rates over the years. https://opensecrets.org/elections-overview/reele
      ction-rates
OpenSecrets. (2020). Did money win? https://opensecrets.org/elections-overview/winning-vs-spending?
      cycle=2020
Quinn, J. (2017). Voter Satisfaction Efficiency (VSE) FAQ. https://electionscience.github.io/vse-sim/
      VSE/
Simms,   L., Zelazny, K., Williams, T., & Bernstein, L. (2019). Does                   the number of response options mat-
      ter? Psychometric perspectives using personality questionnaire data. Psychological Assessment,
      31(4), 557-566. https://doi.org/10.1037/pas0000648.
Smith, W. D. (2000). Range voting. https://web.archive.org/web/20210801134240/https://rangevoting.
      org/WarrenSmithPages/homepage/rangevote.pdf
The Equal Vote coalition. (2020). 2020 DNC Presidential Delegate Elections. https://starvoting.org/
     2020_dnc_delegate_selection
Tideman, N. (2010). Structure of the election-generating universe. In Voting power in practice,
     Normandy.
Tideman, T., & Plassmann, F. (2008). Evaluating voting methods by their probability of success: An
     empirical analysis. Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
Tsetlin, I., Regenwetter,    M., & Grofman,             B. (2003).   The impartial culture maximizes            the probability of
     majority cycles. Social Choice and Welfare, 21(3), 387-398.
Woodall, D. R. (1997). Monotonicity of single-seat preferential election rules. Discrete Applied Math-
     ematics, 77(1), 81-98.
Yee, K. P. (2005). Voting simulation visualizations. https://zesty.ca/voting/sim/

Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps
and institutional affiliations.

Springer Nature or its licensor (e.g. a society or other partner) holds exclusive rights to this article under
a publishing agreement with the author(s) or other rightsholder(s); author self-archiving of the accepted
manuscript version of this article is solely governed by the terms of such publishing agreement and
applicable law.




                                                                                                                     g\ Springer
