                                                                                                                  Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                                                                04/2024

                                                  TABLE OF CONTENTS


Chapter                                                                                                              Page Number

CHAPTER 1. GENERAL PROGRAM INFORMATION 1... cece ceccscceceeeesnteeeeeessneceeseeseeeeeeneeas 3
    1-1     Legislative and Regulatory Authority. 0.0.0... eceecsssccccccccceeeeeenneececeeeceseeseaaeeeeeeesenseeaaes 3
    1-2 —- Program DeSCTIPtlODN.............ccssecccccecceseseennneceeceescesessnaceceeceeseeeennneeeeceeseeeesseaaaeeeeceeseeeeaaas 4
    1-3     Compliance with Program Requirements. ...........:cccccccceesssssssenceceecceseeeennneeeeceeseeseeeeaaaeees 4
   |rs       Do) G08        (0) |e                                                                                                        5
    1-5     HUD Program Responsibilities ............cccccccccccesssesnnneccecceeeesesnneaeeceeseeeessenaeeeeceeseeseeaaes 11
CHAPTER 2. OBTAINING HUD APPROVAL .... cc cceccccccccessnceeeesenceeeesesnseeeeeessneeeesenseneeeenes 13
   2-1      HUD Approval ............cccccccecssesssnssncsecnceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeeeseeseeseessesssseessussaagaaaaeaaees 13
   2-2      aN 0) 8) KOD'E-9 Os Wo)6:                                                                                                   14
   2-3      Application Process ........cccccccsesssrssnnssnnecceceeceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeseeseeseesssseessuessuaaaaaaaaaaaaegs 20
   2-4      On-site COMPETENCE ....... eee ccscccccceeeesessncceceeeceeeeeesnneeeeceeeceeeeeenaeeeeceeseeseeeaaaeeeeceeseeeeesaaas 21
   2-5      Approval of Application... cccccsssccceeccccssessensneceeeceeseessseeeeeeecceeseeessseeeeeeeceneneaaas 22
   POZEOD Scat       18) 8) KO )\1-) ee                                                                                                 22
CHAPTER 3. DELIVERY OF HOUSING COUNSELING SERVICES... eeeeecccceeeesneeeeeees 23
   3-1      Basic REQUIreMeNs ...........ccccceesesssnssecneceececeeceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeseeseeseeseeessseaseaaeasaasaqages 23
   3-2      Housing Counseling Work Plano... eeceeeesssecceccecceeeeeennneeeeceesceseseeaaeeeeeeeseneeseues 26
   3-3      Client Intake. oo. eccsssccceccecessesssncceceeeceeessesnneeeeceeeceeeesenaeeeeeeeseeseeseaaaeeeeeeeeeeeeeaaes 31
   3-4      Information Dissemination and Correspondence ...............ccecceeeeeeeeseeeeeeeeessessenssnaeaaes 31
   3-5      Counseling Services .........cccscccccsssssccecceseneceecesesnaeceeeessneeeecceeeaaeeeceseaaeceeseeneeeeseseeaaeeenes 31
   3-6      Approved Housing Counseling, Education, and Outreach Topics...                                                eeeeeeeeeeee 34
   3-7      Fair Housing and Civil Rights Requirements... eeeeessscececeeeceeeesennneeeeeeeseeseeeaes 36
   3-8      Marketing and Outreach Initiatives...                            ee eeeessneccecceeeeseseneeeeceecceeeesenneeecessenseeaaes 39
   3-9 ~—s Affirmative Fair Housing Outreach...                          eee ecessscccccceeeesesssceceecceeeseennneeeecesesessseeaaeees 39
   3-10     Debt Management or Liquidation...                             eee ecessccceccecceeeeeennneeeeceesceseeesaaeeeseeseeeeeeaaas 39
   3-11     Knowledge of HUD Programs. 0.0.0... eeceeesssncecceeeeeeeeennneeeeceescesesseaaeceeeesseeeeeeaes 40
   3-12     Referrals to Community RESOULCES 2.0... eeeeessseccecceeeeeeeeanneeeeceesceseeseaaaeeeeeeeseneeeaaes 40
   3-13     Discussion of For-Profit Entities... eeeeeessscccecceeceeeeeennneeeeceescessesaaaeeeeseesseeesaaas 40
   3-14     Client Satisfaction SUIVeY. .0........eeeeeeeeeccccecceeesseseneceeececceeesesanneeeeeeesceseseeaaaeeeeeeeseeeeeaaes 40
CHAPTER 4. REVERSE MORTGAGE HOUSING COUNSELING) ...... ee eeeecccceeeessteeeeenens Al
   4-]      Reverse Mortgages. ..........ccssccccccccceeessssnnecceccescesesssnaaeceeecescesesneaeeceseceseseeaaeeeeceeseseeeeaas Al
   4-2      Home Equity Conversion Mortgages (HECM),. ....... c ccccccccceeessennneeceeeeeesesesnaaeeeeseesenes 49
   4-3      Fees for HECM and Reverse Mortgage Counseling. ............ccccccccccccesessentneceeeeeeeeesees 54
CHAPTER 5. RECORDKEEPING AND REPORTING...                                           cece cecceesnsceeeeeenneeeeesennaeeeeesseeeeeenens 56
   5-1      IMtrOCUCtION, ......ceeeeeescceeeesseccecceseneeceesesaeeeeeesaeeeeceseaaeeeeeseaaeeeeessaaeceeseeeaeeeseneeaaeeenss 56
   5-2 —- Recordkeeping System. .........ccccccccccesssseccesesnnecceesssneceeecesaaeeceesesaeceesesseeeesenseeeeeeneeaas 56
   5-3      Client Management System (CMS )...........ccccccssscceesssseccecceseneeeceesesaecesessseeeesceeeaeeeeees 56
   5-4 —- File Retention Requirements .0...........ccccccccesesssecceesssneceecceseeceeccesenaeceeseseneceseeseeeeeeeeeaas 56
   5-5      Client Data Collection. 2.0.0... ccecceccccccessnnceccesesneeeeesssneeeecceeeaeecesseaaeceesessaeeeesseeeaaeeeens 57
   5-6 — Confidentiality of Records and Credit Reports ............ceccccccceeesnteceeesssteceeeessseeeeeeneeas 57
   5-7 —-—- Counseling File...           ee cecccccecesssscceccsssneeecesseneeceeessseeeeccseeaeeceeseaaeceesessneeeesenseaaeeseneeaas 59
                                                                                                                   Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                                                                 04/2024

   5-8     Group Education File... ccccesssssnscecceceeeeeeeessseeeeeecceseeeessseeeeeeeccssseesaseeeeeeeseneeeaaas 62
   5-9 —-— Fimancial Records. .........ccccccccesssscceccessnececcesenneeceeessneeeeccseeaeeeeesenaeceesessneeeeseneeeeeseneeaas 63
   5-10    Supporting DoCUMENtAtION. 0.0.0... ceccceceeesneceecesesteeceeeesaecesceseaeeecessesaaeceeeesaecesseeaees 63
   5-11    Reports tO HUD. wo ccccccccccccccceeseeensneceeeeeecnseeseaeeeeeeeeeceeesseeeeeeesceseeeesaaeeeeesecenensgeas 63
   5-12    Notification of Agency Updates, Actions Requiring Prior Approval and Required
   DiSCIOSUTES. .......ccccceccssceccesesnneceeeesseeeeeeeseseeeeeeeeaaeeeeeesaaeeeeeesseeeeeceseaaeeseesesuaeceseeaaeeessneeaeeseeeeaas 64
   5-13    Failure to Comply with Recordkeeping and Reporting Requirements...................6 66
   5-14    HUD Review and Analysis of Agency Reports ............cccccccccceeestteceeesssteceeeessseeeeeeneeas 66
CHAPTER 6, PERFORMANCE CRITERIA AND MONITORING... cecesscreeeeeeeneeeeees 67
   6-1     Performance Criteria.........cccccccccccessceccesessneceeeessseececceseaeeeecsseaneceesesaeceeeeseaeeeseeeeaaeeenss 67
   6-2     Conflicts of Interest. 00... ececccccccessnececcesesnecceessnneceeeceeeaeeeccesesaaeceeesseeeesesseeeaeeseneegs 71
   6-3 — Performance REVIEWS. ........cecssscccccessncceceesesneceeessnneceeeceseeeeecesesaaeceseesaeceseeseaaeeeneeaas 73
     6-4        Results of a Performance ReVICW.............:ccssssssesssessesceccecceceeceecaeassaesseesseseseeeeeeeeeeeenes 74
     6-5       Tnactive Status... ceccssccceessssscceeceseneeeccesesneeeeesssneceeeceeeeeeeeceseaaecesesseeeseseeeeaeeseneegs 75
     6-6    —- Terminated Status. 0.0... ccccsscccccsssncceccssesnecceesssneceeecessaeeeccesesaaecesessaeeeeseeseaeeeseneeaas 76
     6-7        Suspension, Termination, Debarment and Limited Denial of Participation............... 77
     6-8    —-_— Agency Withdrawal ..........:ccecssscccccessncceccesesneceeesssneceecseeaaeecessesaaeceessesneeeeseeseaeeeeeneeaas 77
     6-9        Post-Termination, Post-Withdrawal Requirement ................cccccsseeeeeeeeeeeessessesssnssenaes 77
CHAPTER 7. FUNDING 2.0... eeccccccccccssccceceessncceeesenaeeceeesneceeeceseaeeecesseaaeceesssaneeesesseeeeeseneeaaeeeenes 78
   7-1     HUD Housing Counseling Grants 0.0... ceeeessennneccecceeeesesnneeeeceecceeeeeennaeeeeceesesseeeaas 78
   7-2     Grant ACMINIStratiONn .........cccccecceecessssenececeeeceecesennneeeeceecceseeennaeeeeceesceseeeeaaaeeeeceeeeeeeeaaas 80
   7-3     Alternative Funding Sources. ...........ccccsscsccccccceeeesessneccececceeeseenneeeeceeseesesseaaeeeeeeeseeeaeas 81
   7-4 ~— Lender Funded Counseling Services. .........ccccccccecessesssencecceceeseseennneeeeceeecsseeenaaeeeeeeeenes 82
   7-5     Fees for Housing Counseling and Related Services.............cceeccccccccceeeesennteececeeeeeeeseees 82
   7-6     Debt Management Service Fees ..........ccccccessnsceccesenneecceesssnececcsseaeeecesseaaeceeessseeesenees 84
CHAPTER 8. APPEALS 00.0... ececcccccccsssccceecessnececeesesaaeeeeessnaeeeeseeseaeeesenseaaaeceessaueceseseaeeeesenseaaeeseey 85
   8-1     Right to Appeal.........ccccccccssssceccsssnnceccesesseceeeessneeecceseaacecessesaeeeeeesaaeeeeeseeeaeeessneeaaeeeenes 85
   8-2 —»- Appeal Process. ........cccscccscscccccesseeessseceeeeeccnseeeesseeeeeeeeeeeessseeeeeeecceseeeessseeeeesecenseeeeaaaeeees 85
   8-3     Timeliness of Appeals. .......ccccccccccccccssesssecceeccccssessessneceeeceeceeessneeeeeeeceeseeessseeeeeeeceneneeaaas 85
   B-4     Other Action... ceeeccccccesssssecceeessseeeccneeneeeceesesneeeeeeeseaeeeceeseaaeceeesseeeeeseseaeeeceneeaaess 85
APPENDIX 1: HECM Counseling Protocol .........ccccccccccssssscceccesenceeceesenceeeesesnaeeeeeesseeeeseeseaaeesens 86
                                                                                 Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                         04/2024


                    CHAPTER      1. GENERAL PROGRAM            INFORMATION

1-1   Legislative and Regulatory Authority. This section identifies the statutory and regulatory
      authorities applicable to the Department’s role in the provision of housing counseling
      Services.

      A.   Section 106 of the Housing and Urban Development Act of 1968. The Department's
           primary authority to provide housing counseling services is HUD’s Housing
           Counseling Program authorized by Section 106 of the Housing and Urban
           Development Act of 1968 (12 U.S.C. §1701x) as amended. Section 106 authorizes
           HUD to provide, make grants to or contract with public or private organizations to
           provide a broad range of housing counseling services to homeowners and tenants to
           assist them in improving their housing conditions and in meeting the responsibilities
           of tenancy or homeownership. Subsection 106(a)(1)(iii) states that the Secretary is
           authorized to provide counseling and advice to tenants and homeowners with respect
           to property maintenance, financial management, and such other matters as may be
           appropriate to assist them in improving their housing conditions and in meeting the
           responsibilities of tenancy or homeownership.

      B.   Section 255 of the National Housing Act (12 U.S.C. §1715z-20(d)(2)(B)). Section
           255(d)(2)(B) of the National Housing Act (12 U.S.C. §1715z-20(d)(2)(B)) provides
           that to be eligible for insurance, a Home Equity Conversion Mortgages (HECM)
           must be executed by a qualifying elderly mortgagor who received “‘adequate
           counseling” by an independent third party that “is not associated with or
           compensated by” a party involved in originating, servicing, or funding the mortgage.
           Subsection 255(f) establishes that the Department shall provide or cause to be
           provided qualifying HECM housing counseling by entities other than the lender.
           Mortgagors may also waive the housing counseling requirement for a mortgage
           provided to refinance an existing HECM when the conditions specified in subsection
           255(k)(3) of the National Housing Act and HUD’s regulations at 24 CFR§ 206.53
           are satisfied. Pursuant to subsection 255(f), HECM housing counseling must include
           certain topics as described in the HECM   Handbook 4235.1, this Handbook, and any
           subsequent mortgagee letters and housing notices issued regarding HECM
           counseling.

      C.   24 CFR §5.100. This section incorporates definitions for ‘“homeownership
           counseling’’, and “rental counseling’’ and adds a clarifying definition for ‘*housing
           counseling’’, implemented by HUD’s Final Rule titled “Housing Counseling: New
           Certification Requirements,” 81 FR 90632, that apply to all HUD programs that
           provide housing counseling in accordance with 24 CFR part 214.

      D.   24 CFR Part 214. This part of HUD’s regulations implements the Housing
           Counseling program authorized by section 106 of the Housing and Urban
           Development Act of 1968 (12 U.S.C. §1701x). The regulations contained in this part
           prescribe the procedures and requirements by which the Housing Counseling
           program is administered.
                                                                                 Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                         04/2024




      E.   24 CFR Part 206. This part of HUD’s regulations implements the Home Equity
           Conversion Mortgage Insurance program authorized by Section 255 of the National
           Housing Act, which was amended by the FHA Modernization Act, which Title I of
           Division B of the Housing and Economic Recovery Act of 2008 to require that
           adequate counseling be provided to mortgagors by counselors who meet qualification
           standards and are independent third parties not associated with or compensated by
           originating or servicing entities. The regulation at 24 CFR § 206.41(a) requires that a
           HECM mortgagor, any non-borrowing spouse, and any non-borrowing owner must
           receive housing counseling and 24 CFR part 206 Subpart E sets forth the
           requirements for the HECM Counselor Roster.

      F.   Other Requirements. In addition to the requirements of 24 CFR part 214, the
           Housing Counseling program is subject to other applicable federal requirements
           including but not limited to the nondiscrimination, equal opportunity, and fair
           housing requirements at 24 CFR §5.105(a) and the requirements in Chapter 3,
           Paragraph 3-7 of this Handbook.

1-2   Program Description. This program supports the delivery of a wide variety of housing
      counseling services to homebuyers, homeowners, renters and individuals experiencing
      homelessness. The primary objective of the program is to educate families and
      individuals to help them make informed decisions regarding improving their housing
      situation and meeting the responsibilities of tenancy and homeownership. HUD certified
      housing counselors also help borrowers avoid inflated appraisals, unreasonably high
      interest rates, unaffordable repayment terms and other conditions that can result in a loss
      of equity, increased debt, default and possible foreclosure. Counselors may also provide
      reverse mortgage counseling to elderly homeowners who seek to convert equity in their
      homes to pay for home improvements, medical costs, living expenses or other expenses.
      Additionally, housing counselors may also distribute and be a resource for information
      concerning Fair Housing and Fair Lending. The Housing Counseling Program is
      instrumental to the achievement of HUD’s mission. The program’s far-reaching effects
      support numerous departmental programs, including, but not limited to, the Home
      Investment Partnerships Program, Community Development Block Grant Program,
      Public and Indian Housing, and FHA Single Family.

1-3   Compliance with Program Requirements. Section 106 of the Housing and Urban
      Development Act of 1968 authorizes HUD to provide, make grants to or contract with
      public or private organizations to provide a broad range of housing counseling services to
      homeowners and tenants to assist them in improving their housing conditions and in
      meeting the responsibilities of tenancy or homeownership. The regulations contained in
      24 CFR §§ 5.100 and 5.111 prescribe guidance to all applicable HUD programs,
      including the requirement that all HUD-approved housing counseling must be provided
      by HUD certified housing counselors. The regulations contained in 24 CFR part 214 and
      24 CEFR part 206 prescribe the procedures and requirements by which the Housing
                                                                                  Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                          04/2024


      Counseling Program is administered. In accordance with 24 CFR § part 214.1, all
      agencies participating in HUD’s Housing Counseling Program must comply with the
      requirements outlined in the Housing Counseling program regulations in 24 CFR part
      214. Additionally, participants must comply with this handbook, other applicable
      governing documents, including mortgagee letters, OMB regulations governing federal
      grant recipients, other applicable federal requirements including but not limited to the
      nondiscrimination and equal opportunity requirements at 24 CFR 5.105(a) and the
      requirements in Chapter 3, Paragraph 3-7 of this Handbook, and if applicable, grant
      agreements.

1-4   Definitions.


      A.   Action plan. The action plan outlines what the housing counseling agency and the
           client will do in order to meet the client’s housing goals and, when appropriate,
           address the client’s housing problem(s).

           Affiliate. An affiliate is defined as a nonprofit organization participating in the HUD-
           Housing Counseling program of an intermediary, or State Housing Finance Agency.
           The affiliate is incorporated separately from the intermediary or state housing finance
           agency. An affiliate is: (1) duly organized and existing as a tax-exempt nonprofit
           organization, (2) in good standing under the laws of the state of the organization, and
           (3) authorized to do business in the states where it provides or proposes to provide
           housing counseling services.

           Branch or Branch Office. The branch or branch office is an organizational and
           subordinate unit of a local housing counseling agency, multi-state organization,
           intermediary, or state housing finance agency, not separately incorporated or
           organized, that participates in HUD’s Housing Counseling program. A branch or
           branch office must be in good standing under the laws of the state where it provides
           or proposes to provide housing counseling services. A branch or branch office cannot
           be a subgrantee or affiliate.

           Client Management System (CMS). A client management system is a commercial or
           self-developed online Housing Counseling application that is required to interface
           with HUD’s Housing Counseling System (HCS). A CMS automates much of the
           housing counseling process, including client intake, file creation and maintenance,
           along with the collection and reporting of client-level information including, but not
           limited to, financial and demographic data, counseling services provided, and
           outcomes. CMSs also provide counselors with sophisticated calculators and other
           tools, that can analyze credit, evaluate readiness for homeownership and compare
           loan products and features.

      E.   Clients. Clients are individuals or households who seek assistance from an agency
           participating in HUD’s Housing Counseling program to meet a housing need or
           resolve a housing problem.
                                                                         Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                 04/2024


  Disaster Assistance Counseling. Disaster Assistance Counseling is the provision of
  education and counseling services, where the need for services is created by a
  disaster, either pending or occurred. A disaster may be a natural or man-made event
  that is local, regional or national in scope.

. Education. For the purposes of HUD’s Housing Counseling program, education is
  defined as formal classes, with established curriculum and instructional goals,
  provided in a group or classroom setting, or other formats approved by HUD,
  covering topics such as, but not limited to: (1) renter rights; (2) the home buying
  process; (3) how to maintain a home; (4) budgeting; (5) fair housing and civil rights;
  (6) identifying and reporting predatory lending practices; and (7) the importance of
  good credit. Special Note: The educational topic of “fair housing” includes the
  promotion and protection of civil rights as they relate to ensuring equal housing
  opportunity; rights of applicants with negative criminal, credit, or eviction records;
  the benefits of and help with moving to well-resourced areas of opportunity; and the
  housing rights of survivors of domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, or
  stalking. Such educational sessions may include topics such as identifying and
  reporting discriminatory policies, procedures, and practices; rights for individuals
  with disabilities; and fair lending.

  FHA — Federal Housing Administration. The Federal Housing Administration is the
  organizational unit within HUD that provides mortgage insurance on loans made by
  FHA approved lenders nationwide.

  FHA Connection (FHAC).       FHA Connection is the web-based platform that houses
  the database for HUD   counselors, including HECM     roster counselors and HUD
  certified housing counselors. Once the counselor has taken and passed the HUD
  Housing Counselor Certification written exam, the individual applies for certification
  through FHA Connection. Similarly, HECM counselors must also request their
  certificate through FHA Connection.

  FHAC Application Coordinator. FHAC application coordinator is any individual(s)
  designated by the HUD-participating agency to verify the counselor’s employment at
  the agency and to manage the data regarding the counselor’s employment status in
  the future.

  Grant Agreement. A grant agreement is a legal instrument that outlines the terms and
  conditions that HUD-approved housing counseling agency must comply with when it
  receives a HUD Housing Counseling Grant award. The agency and the HUD Grant
  Officer or authorized designee sign the agreement.

  Grantee. A grantee is a HUD-approved housing counseling agency or State Housing
  Finance Agency that receives housing counseling funds from HUD. The term
  “Grantee” includes the agency’s branch or branch offices identified in the grant
  application.
                                                                            Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                    04/2024


. Grant Officer (GO). The GO is the HUD official who is the designated authority for
  the award and administration of HUD grants.

 Homeownership Counseling. Homeownership counseling means housing counseling
 related to homeownership and residential mortgage loans when provided in
 connection with HUD’s Housing Counseling Program or required by or provided in
 connection with HUD Programs as defined in 24 CFR §5.111. Homeownership
 counseling is housing counseling that covers the decision to purchase a home, the
 selection and purchase of a home, issues arising during or affecting the period of
  ownership of a home (including financing, refinancing, default, foreclosure, and
  other financial decisions) and the sale or other disposition of a home.

 Housing Counseling. Housing counseling is independent, expert advice customized
 to the need of the consumer to address the consumer's housing barriers and to help
 achieve their housing goals and must include the following processes: Intake;
 financial and housing affordability analysis; an action plan, except for reverse
 mortgage counseling; and a reasonable effort to have follow-up communication with
 the client when possible. The content and process of housing counseling must meet
 the standards outlined in 24 CFR part 214. Homeownership counseling and rental
 counseling are types of housing counseling.

 Housing Counseling Grant Funds. Housing counseling grant funds are awarded to
 participating agencies under section 106 of the Housing and Urban Development Act
 of 1968 (12 U.S.C. §1701x). In the past, HUD has awarded grants for the purposes of
 funding comprehensive housing counseling activities, as well as for training designed
 to improve and standardize the quality of counseling provided by housing
 counselors.

 Housing Counseling System (HCS). The HCS is a real-time web application that
 allows agencies to verify certain information and reports, such as client level data,
 submitted from their CMS. Agencies also use the HCS to verify agency profile
 information such as changes in address, telephone number, and contact information.
 HUD may use the HCS to manage the housing counseling program, including the
 scoring of grant applications, and of calculating grant amounts. The system is
 accessed through the Housing Counseling webpage.

 Housing Counseling Work Plan. The housing counseling work plan is a participating
 agency’s plan that includes but is not limited to: (1) the needs and problems of the
 target population; (2) how the agency will address one or more of these needs and
 problems with its available resources; (3) the type of housing counseling services
 offered including rental or homeownership counseling, as applicable; (4) fee
 structure, if applicable; (5) the geographic service area to be served; and (6) the
 anticipated results (outcomes) to be achieved. An agency’s housing counseling work
 plan must also address, if appropriate, alternative settings and formats for the
 provision of housing counseling services. Alternative formats can include telephonic
 counseling or remote counseling systems designed using internet video conferencing
                                                                          Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                  04/2024


 technology. Plans for an Intermediary, State Housing Finance Agency and Multi-
 State Organization include similar information for the network of their affiliated
 agencies or branches.

 Changes or amendments to the work plan must be in accordance with Chapter 3,
 Paragraph 3-2 (B) of this Handbook.

 Housing Goal. A housing goal is a realistic short- or long-term objective set by the
 client, with advice from a housing counselor.

 HUD-Approved Housing Counseling Agency. HUD-approved housing counseling
 agencies are private and public nonprofit organizations that are exempt from taxation
 under section 501(a) pursuant to section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code of
 1996, 26 U.S.C. §§ 501(a) and 501(c)) and approved by HUD, in accordance with
 this part and 106(e) of the Housing and Urban Development Act of 1968 (12 U.S.C.
  § 1701x(e)), to provide housing counseling services to clients directly, or through
 their affiliates or branches, and which meet the requirements set forth in 24 CFR part
 214.

 HUD Certified Housing Counselor. A HUD certified housing counselor is a housing
 counselor who has passed the HUD Certification examination, works for a
 participating agency, and is certified by HUD as competent to provide housing
 counseling services.

 HUD Certified Housing Counselor Certificate. The HUD certified housing counselor
 certificate is one that HUD issues to an individual who has passed the HUD
 Certification examination, works for a participating agency, and is certified by HUD
 as competent to provide housing counseling services.

. Interface Control Document (ICD). The ICD is a technical guide to assist CMS
  vendors that have been contracted by housing counseling agencies to build an
  interface to HUD’s database for the submission of client level and agency data.

 Intermediary. An intermediary is a HUD-approved organization that provides
 housing counseling services indirectly through its branches or affiliates, for whom it
 exercises control over the quality and type of housing counseling services rendered.
 The Housing Counseling Program recognizes two types of intermediaries, which
 include:

  1.   National Intermediary. A national intermediary provides, in multiple regions of
       the United States: (a) housing counseling services, through its branches or
       affiliates or both; and (b) administrative and supportive services to its network of
       affiliates or branches, including but not limited to oversight, pass-through
       funding, training and technical assistance.
                                                                             Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                     04/2024


     2.   Regional Intermediary. A regional intermediary provides, in a generally
          recognized region within the United States such as the Southwest, Mid-Atlantic,
          New England: (a) housing counseling services, through its branches or affiliates
          or both; and (b) administrative and supportive services to its network of affiliates
          or branches, including but not limited to oversight, pass-through funding, training
          and technical assistance.

Y.   Local Housing Counseling Agency (LHCA). A local housing counseling agency that
     directly provides housing counseling services. A LHCA may have a main office, and
     one or more branch offices, in no more than two contiguous states.

Z.   Marketing and Outreach. Marketing and outreach is the provision of information to
     raise awareness about critical housing topics, such as predatory lending, fair lending
     and fair housing issues, including how to file a discrimination complaint, and the
     availability of housing counseling and other forms of assistance. Marketing and
     outreach include distributing materials, presenting at community events, conducting
     informational campaigns such as public service announcements (PSAs),
     advertisements, or other forms of media campaigns, including social media, and
     advocating with lenders and other industry partners.

AA. Multi-State Organization (MSO). A multi-state organization provides housing
    counseling services through a main office and branches in two or more states.

BB. Non-Profit Organization. As used in this Handbook, Non-Profit Organization shall
     have the meaning given in 42 U.S.C. § 12704(5), except that, pursuant to 12 U.S.C. §
     1701x(h)(1), subparagraph (D) of such section shall not apply.

CC. Notice of Funding Opportunity (NOFQ). The NOFO is HUD’s funding opportunity
    announcement that is published to announce the availability of competitive housing
    counseling grant funds. It sets forth the instructions regarding the preparation and
    submission of a housing counseling grant application.

DD. Office of Housing Counseling Point of Contact (QHC POC). The OHC POC is a
    HUD staff person that oversees and monitors the activities of Participating Agencies
    including but not limited to grant activities of grantees and the agency’s housing
    counseling grant agreement.

EE. Other HUD Programs. Any housing counseling required under or provided in
    connection with any program administered by HUD must be provided by HUD
    certified housing counselors that work for an agency approved to participate in
    HUD’s program. For the purposes of this definition, required under or provide in
    connection with any program administered by HUD means:

     1.   Housing counseling required by statute, regulation, NOFO, or otherwise required
          by HUD;
                                                                              Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                      04/2024


      2.   Housing counseling that is funded under    a HUD program;

      3.   Housing counseling that is required by a grantee or subgrantee of a HUD
           program as a condition of receiving assistance under the HUD program; or

      4.   Housing counseling to which a family assisted under a HUD program is referred,
           by a grantee or subgrantee of the HUD program.

FF, Participating Agency. Participating Agencies are all housing counseling and
    intermediary organizations participating in HUD’s Housing Counseling program,
    including HUD-approved agencies, affiliates and branches of HUD-approved
    intermediaries, HUD-approved MSOs, and State Housing Finance Agencies.

GG. Person in a Position of Trust. This person in a position of trust is a participating
    agency’s employee (including both paid and volunteer staff), consultant, officer,
      director, elected or appointed official, any member of their immediate families, or
      anyone who is in a position to influence a participating agency’s decision-making
      process or who has access to the agency’s confidential client information.

HH. Predatory Lending. Predatory lending describes unscrupulous actions by lenders,
    appraisers, mortgage brokers, home improvement contractors and other industry
    participants that take advantage of mortgagors and can result in a loss of equity,
    increased debt, default and possible foreclosure. Examples include, but are not
    limited to: selling properties for more than they are worth using false appraisals;
      encouraging borrowers to lie about their income, expenses, or cash available for
      down payment in order to obtain a loan; knowingly lending more money than a
      borrower can afford to repay; charging higher interest rates to borrowers based on
      their race or national origin and not on their credit history; or charging fees for
      unnecessary or nonexistent products and services.

Il.   Rental housing counseling. Rental housing counseling is counseling related to the
      rental of residential property, which may include counseling regarding future
      homeownership opportunities when provided in connection with HUD’s Housing
      Counseling Program or required under or provided in connection with HUD
      Programs as defined in 24 CFR §5.111. Rental housing counseling may also include
      the decision to rent, responsibilities of tenancy, affordability of renting and eviction
      prevention.

JJ.   Reverse Mortgage. A reverse mortgage is a mortgage that pays a homeowner loan
      proceeds drawn from accumulated home equity and that requires no repayment until
      a future time.

KK. State. Each of the several States, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the District of
    Columbia, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, Guam, the Virgin
    Islands, American Samoa, or any other possession of the United States.




                                                                                                 10
                                                                                    Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                            04/2024


      LL. State Housing Finance Agency (SHFA). A SHFA is defined as the public body,
          agency or instrumentality, created by a specific act of a state legislature, empowered
          to finance activities designed to provide housing and related services, for example
          land acquisition, construction or rehabilitation, throughout an entire state. SHFAs
          may provide direct counseling services or sub grant housing counseling funds, or
          both, to affiliated housing counseling agencies within the SHFA's state. “State”
            includes the several states, Puerto Rico, the District of Columbia, Guam, the
            Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, American Samoa and the U.S.
            Virgin Islands

      MM. Sub grantee. An affiliate of a HUD-approved intermediary or SHFA that receives a
          sub-award of housing counseling funds provided under a HUD housing counseling
            grant.

      NN. Unit of Local Government. Any city, county, parish, town, township, borough,
          village, or any other general-purpose political subdivision of a State.

1-5   HUD        Program Responsibilities.


      A.    Deputy Assistant Secretary (DAS) for the Office of Housing Counseling. The DAS is
            the head of the Office of Housing Counseling and administers the program.

      B.    Office of Housing Counseling Staff. Housing Counseling staff are located at HUD
            Headquarters, HUD Regional offices and field offices and support the DAS in
            administering the Housing Counseling program. These offices review agencies for
            approval, evaluate grant applications and monitor participating agencies’
            performance relative to the Housing Counseling Program. The staff develops and
            implements program policy and procedures. The staff also provides technical
            assistance and training regarding HUD’s Housing Counseling program. Housing
            Counseling Program staff can be contacted by emailing:
            housing.counseling   @     hud.gov.

      C.    Communication with Participating Agencies. HUD communicates Housing
            Counseling program information principally through email and Internet postings.

            1.     Housing Counseling Today. Housing Counseling Today is a publication focused
                   on building the knowledge, skills, and capacity of HUD’s participating housing
                   counseling agencies, counselors, and their industry partners.

            2.     Housing Counseling Gov Delivery. The participating agency’s HUD point of
                   contact that is registered in HCS will automatically be sent Housing Counseling
                   Program updates from HUD. The agency’s HUD point of contact must have a
                   valid email address to receive these updates and is responsible for ensuring the
                   address provided to HUD is valid. Examples of announcements include system
                   updates, extensions to file reports, NOFO publication and training notices.




                                                                                                      11
                                                                         Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                 04/2024


3.   Housing Counseling Homepage. This webpage provides relevant information for
     housing counselors including Housing Counseling and HECM program
     information, toolkits, access to HCS, and training opportunities.




                                                                                      12
                                                                                  Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                          04/2024


                          CHAPTER 2. OBTAINING HUD APPROVAL

2-1   HUD Approval. A Local Housing Counseling Agency, Multi-State Organization or
      Housing Counseling Intermediary may be approved by HUD to participate in the
      Housing Counseling program upon meeting the requirements enumerated in 24 CFR part
      214 and this Handbook chapter. In order for an agency to participate in HUD’s Housing
      Counseling Program, all individuals who provide housing counseling, including
      homeownership and rental housing counseling, must be HUD certified housing
      counselors. The agency must also complete and submit all the required documentation for
      application outlined in HUD-Form 9900.

      The approval of a housing counseling agency does not create or imply a warranty or
      endorsement by HUD of the listed agency, or their employees, including housing
      counselors, to a prospective client or to any other organization or individual. Nor does it
      represent a warranty of any housing counseling provided by the agency. Approval
      means only that the agency has met the qualifications and conditions prescribed by
      HUD.

      A. Eligible Applicants. HUD will accept an application from an eligible housing
         counseling agency functioning as a private or public nonprofit organization, a unit
         of local, county or state government entities (including public housing authorities)
         and meet the criteria outlined below in Paragraph 2-2 of this Chapter.

      B.   Religious and Faith-Based Organizations. HUD is committed to full implementation
           of Executive Order 13279, “Equal Protection of the Laws for Faith-Based and
           Community Organizations”. The Executive Order established fundamental
           principles and policymaking criteria to guide Federal agencies in formulating and
           developing policies that have implications for faith-based and community
           organizations to ensure the equal protection for these organizations in social service
           programs receiving federal financial assistance. HUD’s regulations at 24 CFR §
           5.109 set a general policy on the participation of religious organizations in HUD
           programs: “Religious organizations are eligible, on the same basis as any other
           organization, to participate in programs and activities. Neither the Federal
           government, nor a State or local government, nor any other entity that administers
           any HUD program or activity shall discriminate against an organization on the basis
           of the organization’s religious character or affiliation.”

      C.   State Housing Finance Agencies (SHFAs). SHFAs are not required to submit an
           application for approval to participate in HUD’s Housing Counseling Program as
           long as they have statutory authority to provide housing counseling throughout their
           entire state and adhere to all program requirements outlined in 24 CFR part 214, this
           handbook, and other governing documents.

           To participate in HUD’s Housing Counseling program, SHFAs must either:




                                                                                                    13
                                                                                 Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                         04/2024


           1.   Submit a successful grant application or otherwise be awarded   a HUD housing
                counseling grant. or

           2.   Submit a request and provide HUD with a list of affiliates, if applicable, and
                assure that they meet all program requirements. SHFAs not planning to submit a
                housing counseling grant application or that failed to receive funding from HUD
                but are still interested in participating in HUD's Housing Counseling Program
                must submit the information required for SHFAs in form HUD-9900, Housing
                Counseling Program Application.

      D. Branches and Affiliates. HUD Program affiliates of HUD-approved intermediaries or
         SHFA’s are not required to be directly approved by HUD. Moreover, not every
         branch of a multi-state organization or intermediary must participate in the HUD
         portion of the parent entity’s program. However, to participate in HUD’s Housing
           Counseling program, whether funded or not, branches and affiliates must meet all
           approval and programmatic requirements described in 24 CFR part 214, this
           handbook and other governing documents. It is the responsibility of the parent entity
           to evaluate initial and ongoing eligibility and ensure compliance. If an agency,
           including LHCA wishes to have its branch office listed on HUD’s website as
           approved, the agency will need to contact their HUD Point of Contact.

      E.   HUD Housing Counseling Grant Funding. An organization approved by HUD to
           participate in the Housing Counseling Program does not automatically receive
           funding from HUD. Grants for the direct provision of counseling services are
           contingent upon congressional appropriations and a competitive grant process.
           Approved agencies that want to compete for funding must submit a proposal in
           response to a Notice of Funding Opportunity (NOFO) which outlines the
           application criteria along with applicable federal and HUD policies and
           regulations.

           HUD funding is not intended to cover all costs incurred by the agency in
           delivering counseling services or ensuring that counselors are adequately
           trained. See Chapter 7 for more information on HUD housing counseling grant
           requirements.

2-2   Approval Criteria. The following criteria for approval apply to all agencies, including: all
      local housing counseling agencies (LHCA), Multi-State Organizations (MSO), and
      intermediaries, and all HUD program branches and affiliates that are included in an
      application:

      A. Nonprofit and Tax-Exempt Status. A housing counseling agency must function as a
         private or public nonprofit organization, or be a unit of local, county or state
         government (including public housing authorities). The agency must submit evidence
         of nonprofit status and tax-exempt status under section 501(a), pursuant to section
           501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1996 (26 U.S.C. §§ 501 (a) and (c)).




                                                                                                   14
                                                                            Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                    04/2024


 Units of local, county or state government (including public housing authorities) must
 submit proof of their authorization to provide housing counseling services and meet
 the requirements outlined in the Form HUD-9900, Housing Counseling Program
 Application.

. Experience.   A LHCA, MSO, SHFA and/or intermediary must have administered a
 Housing Counseling Program for at least one year. An intermediary must have
 operated in an intermediary capacity for at least one year. In addition, before joining
 a network, affiliates and branches must have successfully administered a housing
 counseling program for at least one year.

. Compliance with Fair Housing and Civil Rights Laws. (1) Counseling agencies must
  comply with all applicable fair housing and civil rights requirements in 24 CFR §
  5.105 (a)(1). Agencies are ineligible if they (a) have been charged by HUD
  concerning an ongoing systemic violation of the Fair Housing Act or receipt of a
  cause determination from a substantially equivalent state or local fair housing agency
  concerning a systemic violation of a substantially equivalent state or local fair
 housing law proscribing discrimination because of race, color, religion, sex (including
  sexual orientation and gender identity), national origin, disability or familial status; or
  (b) are a defendant in a Fair Housing Act lawsuit filed by the United States alleging
  an ongoing pattern or practice of discrimination or denial of rights to a group of
 persons raising an issue of general public importance under 42 U.S.C. 3614(a); (c) are
  a defendant in any other lawsuit filed or joined by the Department of Justice, or in
 which the Department of Justice has intervened, or filed an amicus brief or statement
  of interest, alleging a pattern or practice or systemic violation of Title VI of the Civil
 Rights Act of 1964, Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, Section 109 of the
 Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, the Americans with Disabilities
 Act, Violence Against Women Act, or a claim under the False Claims Act related to
 fair housing, non-discrimination, or civil rights generally including an alleged failure
 to affirmatively further fair housing; (d) have received a letter of findings identifying
 ongoing systemic noncompliance with Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964,
  section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, Section 109 of the Housing and
  Community Development Act 1974, the Violence Against Women Act, or the
 Americans with Disabilities Act; or (e) have received a cause determination from a
 substantially equivalent state or local fair housing agency concerning a systemic
 violation of provisions of a state or local law prohibiting discrimination in housing
 based on sexual orientation, gender identity, or lawful source of income, and the
 charge, lawsuit, or letter of findings referenced in subparagraphs (a), (b), (c), (d) or
 (e) above has not been resolved to HUD’s satisfaction. HUD will determine if actions
 taken to resolve the charge are sufficient to resolve the matter. Such actions may
 include, but are not limited to: (1) current compliance with a voluntary compliance
 agreement signed by all parties; (11) current compliance with a HUD-approved
 conciliation agreement signed by all parties; (11) current compliance with a
 conciliation agreement signed by all the parties and approved by the state
 governmental or local administrative agency with jurisdiction over the matter; (iv)
  current compliance with a consent order or consent decree; or (v) current compliance



                                                                                               15
                                                                                Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                        04/2024


     with a judicial ruling or administrative law ruling or decision; or (vi) dismissal of
     charges.

     (2) Affirmatively Furthering Fair Housing. Under section 808 (e)(5) of the Fair
     Housing Act, HUD has a statutory duty to affirmatively further fair housing in all its
     activities. Funding recipients must affirmatively further fair housing for all classes
     protected under the Fair Housing Act which include race, color, national origin,
     religion, sex (including sexual orientation or gender identity), disability and familial
     status. Housing counseling agencies are expected to help remedy discrimination in
     housing and promote fair housing rights and fair housing choice. With some
     exceptions for Federally recognized Indian tribes and their instrumentalities, the
     application must discuss how the applicant will carry out the proposed activities in a
     manner that affirmatively furthers fair housing in compliance with the Fair Housing
     Act and its implementing regulations, and how applicants will meet the requirements
     of the definition of AFFH at 24 CFR 5.151. Applicants may propose activities that are
     consistent with their jurisdiction’s Analysis of Impediments (AI), an Assessment of
     Fair Housing (AFH), or other means of fair housing planning that meaningfully
     supports their AFFH certification. If the applicant will carry out proposed activities in
     a jurisdiction with an AFH, the proposed activities should be consistent with the
     AFH’s fair housing goals and with fair housing strategies specified in the
     jurisdiction’s Consolidated Plan or Public Housing Agency Plan.

D. Ineligible Participants. Participating agencies must maintain policies and procedures
   for screening ineligible participants. An agency, including any of the agency's
     directors, partners, officers, principals, or employees must not be:

     1.   Suspended, debarred, or otherwise restricted under the Department's, or any other
          federal regulations;

     2.   Indicted for, or convicted of, a criminal offense that reflects upon the
          responsibility, integrity or ability of the agency to participate in housing
          counseling activities. Examples of such crimes include, but are not limited to,
          fraud, bribery, corruption, embezzlement, identify theft, money laundering, etc.
          These offenses include criminal offenses that can be prosecuted at a local, state,
          or federal level. Before an individual is deemed ineligible because of their
          criminal history, they should be provided an opportunity to dispute the accuracy
          or relevance of the information relied upon by the participating agency and an
          opportunity to provide evidence of mitigating factors including the time, nature,
          and severity of the offense(s), and any evidence of rehabilitation. An arrest alone
          does not constitute evidence of a criminal offence.

     3.   Subject to unresolved findings because of HUD or other government audit or
          investigations.

E.   Community Base. A housing counseling agency and its HUD Program branches and
     affiliates must have functioned for at least one year in the geographic area(s) the



                                                                                              16
                                                                          Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                  04/2024


  agency will serve as a participating agency as set forth in its housing counseling work
  plan.

. Recordkeeping and Reporting. The agency must have an established system of
  recordkeeping so that client files, electronic and paper, can be kept confidential and
  reviewed and annual activity data for the agency can be verified, reported, and
  analyzed.

  1. Client files, both electronic and paper must be kept confidential in accordance with
       24 CFR § 214.315. This system must meet the requirements of 24 CFR §8§ 1.6 and
       8.55 and 24 CFR part 121 and must be easily accessible to HUD for all monitoring
       and audit purposes (24 CFR § 214.315).

. Confidentiality. Participating agencies must take affirmative measures to protect the
  confidentiality of each client's personal and financial information, including
  electronic and paper records, CMS, or other electronic data system and credit reports,
  whether the information is received from the client or from another source. Failure to
  maintain the confidentiality of, or improper use of, credit reports may subject the
  agency to penalties under the Fair Credit Reporting Act (14 U.S.C. §§ 1681 et seq.).
  Hard copies of client files must be kept in locked filing cabinets and electronic client
  files must be kept secure, and be accessible only by authorized employees.

. Client Management System (CMS). All Participating Agencies shall utilize an
  automated housing counseling client management system for the collection and
  reporting of client-level information including, but not limited to, financial and
  demographic data, counseling services provided and outcomes. Agencies must utilize
  a Client Management System that satisfies HUD’s requirements and interfaces with
  HUD’s databases.

  Housing Counseling Resources. The agency must have the following resources to
  implement the proposed housing counseling work plan:

  1.   Funding. Evidence of funds immediately available or written commitment for
       funds, to cover the cost of operating the housing counseling work plan during the
       initial twelve-month period of HUD approval or program participation.

  2.   Staff. The agency must employ staff trained in housing counseling. All staff that
       the agency proposes to provide housing counseling must be HUD certified. At
       least half the counselors must have at least 6 months experience in the job they
       will perform in the agency's housing counseling program.

  3.   Language skills. In accordance with 24 CFR § 214.103(g)(3), the agency must
       have housing counselor(s) fluent in the language(s) of the clients they serve, or
       the housing counseling agency must use the services of an interpreter, or the
       agency must make a reasonable effort to refer the client to another agency that can
       meet the client’s needs. The agency must take reasonable steps to ensure


                                                                                           17
                                                                             Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                     04/2024


          meaningful access to their programs and activities for persons with limited
          English proficiency (LEP), consistent with HUD guidance. For further guidance,
          see “Final Guidance to Federal Financial Assistance Recipients Regarding Title
          VI Prohibition Against National Origin Discrimination Affecting Limited English
          Proficient Persons” published in the Federal Register on January 22, 2007, or an
          updated version.

     4.   Alternative Formats. The agency must take appropriate steps to ensure effective
          communications with individuals with disabilities. These organizations and
          individuals are required to take appropriate steps that may be necessary to ensure
          that communications with individuals with disabilities are as effective as
          communications with individuals without disabilities. Effective communication is
          generally provided through the use of appropriate auxiliary aids and services. All
          facilities must provide accessibility features or make alternative accommodations
          for persons with disabilities, in accordance with Section 504 of the Rehabilitation
          Act of 1973 (29 U.S.C. § 794), 24 CFR parts 8 and 9, and the American with
          Disabilities Act (42 U.S.C. §§ 12101 et seq.).

J.   Knowledge of HUD Programs and Local Housing Market. The agency's housing
     counseling staff must possess a working knowledge of HUD's housing and single-
     family mortgage insurance programs such as FHA, other state and local housing
     programs available in the community, the state and local municipality Consolidated
     Plans including fair housing assessments, and the local housing market. The staff
     should also be familiar with housing programs offered by conventional mortgage
     lenders and other housing or related programs that may assist their clients. As a
     condition of approval or participation, HUD may require training, including, for
     example, training regarding FHA products and programs.

K.   Contracts or Agreements to Provide Eligible Housing Counseling Services. An
     agency and its branches, sub-grantees or affiliates must deliver all of the housing
     counseling activities set forth in the agency's housing counseling work plan. It is not
     permissible to contract out housing counseling services, except in the following
     situations:

     1.   In geographic areas where a need for housing counseling services is demonstrated
          and no HUD-approved housing counseling agency or its branches, affiliates, or
          sub-grantees exists. If a housing counseling agency identifies an underserved
          geographic area and proposes to provide counseling in the identified area through
          a service contract, the agency must present a justification to HUD. The request
          will be reviewed and subsequently approved or disapproved by HUD. Under this
          exception, if the request to use contract services is approved for the identified
          area, the contract must delineate the respective Housing Counseling Program
          responsibilities of the contracting parties, the agency providing services
          (contractor) must meet the HUD-approval and housing counseling certification
          standards. Individuals providing housing counseling for the contractor must have
          passed the HUD certified housing counselor examination and their employment



                                                                                               18
                                                                               Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                       04/2024


          must be verified by the HUD-approved agency in FHA Connection. In addition,
          the contracting agency must receive prior written approval from HUD.

     2.   Intermediaries and SHFAs may enter into agreements with affiliates to provide
          housing counseling services.

              a.   The agreements with affiliates may be in the form of an exchange of
                   letters, or a contract, that delineates the respective Housing Counseling
                   program responsibilities of each party.

             b.    Agreements must be sufficiently detailed to establish accountability and
                   allow for adequate monitoring in accordance with 2 CFR part 200.

     3.   With prior approval from HUD, and at HUD’s discretion, intermediary
          organizations may participate in HUD’s Housing Counseling Program with a
          network of affiliated counselors, rather than affiliated counseling agencies, if the
          structure is designed to meet a special housing counseling need identified by
          HUD.

L.   Community Resources. The housing counseling agency must demonstrate that it has
     established working relationships with private and public local community resources
     to which it can refer clients who need help the agency cannot offer. A description of
     these working relationships and partnerships must be documented in the agency’s
     application for program approval and in the agency’s application for Housing
     Counseling grant funds.

M. State and Local Requirements. In accordance with 24 CFR § 214.103(k) an agency
   and its branches and affiliates must meet all state and local requirements for its
   operation.

N. Facilities. In accordance with 24 CFR § 214.103), all housing counseling facilities
   of the agency and its branches, affiliates, and sub-grantees must meet the following
   criteria:

     1.   Have a clearly and properly identified office, with space available for the
          provision of housing counseling services. There must be permanent signage
          identifying the housing counseling office.

     2.   The office should operate during normal business hours and offer extended hours
          when necessary. However, an exception to this requirement is allowed for certain
          branch offices that only have the resources to operate on a part-time basis where
          the counseling services are critical to the community in which they are located.

     3.   Provide privacy for in-person counseling and confidentiality of client records.




                                                                                                 19
                                                                                   Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                           04/2024


            4.   Provide accessibility features or make alternate accommodations for persons with
                 disabilities, in accordance with section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29
                 U.S.C. § 794), 24 CFR Parts 8 and 9, and the Americans with Disabilities Act (42
                 U.S.C. §§ 12101 et seq.).

            Housing Counseling Work Plan. The agency must submit a detailed yet concise
            housing counseling plan consistent with the requirements outlined in 24 CFR part 214
            and Chapter 3, Paragraph 3-2 of this Handbook. The agency must also describe
            anticipated results (outcomes) to be achieved within the period of initial approval.
            Intermediaries and SHFAs must require that their affiliates participating in their HUD
            Housing Counseling Program maintain a work plan.

            Conflicts of Interest and Disclosure Requirements. The agency must disclose any real
            or apparent conflicts of interest and describe how these conflicts will be mitigated,
            including any disclosures that will be provided to clients. See Chapter 6, Paragraphs
            6-1 and 6-2 of this Handbook for more information on conflict of interest and
            disclosure requirements.

2-3   Application Process. For initial approval, all applicants must complete Form HUD-9900
      and submit the application and all supporting documentation to the Office of Housing
      Counseling. There are two ways to participate in HUD’s Housing Counseling Program:

      A.    Organizations may apply directly to HUD as one of the following: a Local Housing
            Counseling Agency (LHCA), an Intermediary (regional or national), and a Multi-
             State Organization (MSO).

           . Affiliates may also apply through a HUD-approved Intermediary or SHFA.
             Intermediaries and SHFAs provide affiliates with critical supportive services,
            including training, tools and templates, pass-through funding, and technical
            assistance. They also monitor their networks to ensure services meet program
            standards and effectively meet the needs of their clients.

           . Before applying to participate in HUD’s Housing Counseling Program, HUD
             recommends applicant review of the following:

                    HUD Housing Counseling Handbook 7610.1
                    24 CFR Part 214
                    HUD Office of Housing Counseling website
                    How to Become a HUD-Approved Housing Counseling Agency website
                    Eligibility Tool: To determine if an organization is ready to apply, use the
                    Housing Counseling Agency Eligibility Tool on the HUD Exchange website.
                    The Tool allows organizations to determine if they meet the basic qualifying
                    criteria to apply to become a HUD-approved Housing Counseling Agency.
                    Organizations that receive a “ready to apply” result at the end of the tool
                    should contact an application advisor at housing.counseling @hud.gov.



                                                                                                   20
                                                                             Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                     04/2024


D. Notice of Approval. If the application meets all requirements outlined in 24 CFR §
   214.103 and Paragraph 2-2 of this Chapter, HUD will approve an agency for a period
   up to three years. HUD will advise the agency of its approval in the form of an
   approval letter to the agency’s main office. See Chapter 2, Paragraph 2-5 of this
   Chapter for more information.

E.   Deficiency. If the application does not meet all the requirements for approval and
     additional information is needed to evaluate the application, HUD will issue a
     deficiency letter. The letter will identify deficiencies and provide the applicant an
     opportunity to submit additional information in support of the application within a
     specified time period. HUD may, at its discretion, request clarification or additional
     information from an agency for use in determining the agency’s eligibility for the
     Housing Counseling Program.

F.   Disapproval. If, after responding to a deficiency letter, an application does not meet
     all requirements in 24 CFR § 214.103 and Paragraph 2-2, of this Chapter, HUD will
     deny approval and provide the agency with the reasons in writing. Within 30 calendar
     days of the written notice of denial, the agency may submit a revised application, or
     appeal HUD’s decision in writing to HUD, as provided in 24 CFR §214.205. If any
     agency decides to submit a revised application, the agency may consult HUD to
     determine the specific actions needed to resolve the deficiencies. See Chapter 8 for
     additional information on the Appeal Process.

G. HUD Non-Response. The agency should contact housing.counseling @hud.gov with
   “Application Approval” in the subject line if:

     1.   The Agency does not receive an acknowledgment of the receipt of its application
          within 30 days of submission to determine if HUD received the application.

     2.   The Agency does not receive an approval, deficiency or disapproval letter within
          90 days of submission of the application to determine the review status of the
          application.

On-site Conference. Before HUD issues the approval letter to an applicant, HUD may
require an on-site conference at the agency’s main office, branch office(s) and/or affiliate
offices.

The HUD office may waive the on-site visit at HUD’s discretion. In such an event, either
HUD may require a face-to-face conference at a HUD office, or the agency may request a
live video or telephone conference at HUD’s expense. When HUD staff cannot conduct
an on-site visit, the agency may be asked to submit photographs and floor plans of the
facility to demonstrate that the facility meets programmatic requirements.

During the on-site conference, face-to-face conference at    a HUD   office, or live video or
telephone conference, HUD staff may:




                                                                                                21
                                                                                  Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                          04/2024


        . Answer the agency’s questions, if any, about this Handbook, its attachments, and
         general questions about HUD funding opportunities and the NOFO process that
         announces the availability of housing counseling grant funds. Please, note that
         because the housing counseling grants are administered through a competitive award
         process, staff may only provide information that is general public knowledge;

       . Identify training needs of the agency’s staff;

       . Evaluate the facility for compliance with the requirements listed under Paragraph 2-
         2(N), (Facilities); and

        . Make inquiries, request information or provide technical assistance regarding any
          issue relevant to the approval process or compliance with programmatic
          requirements.

2-5   Approval of Application. HUD’s Office of Housing Counseling will send the
      approval letter to the agency's main office. The letter will indicate the period of
      approval.

      A. HUD website of Approved Housing Counseling Agencies. HUD-approved housing
         counseling agencies must provide HUD with the agency name and contact
         information to receive client referrals. This information appears on HUD's public
         website in a searchable database of agencies participating in the Housing
         Counseling Program. In addition, names and addresses of all Participating Agencies
         that provide housing counseling services are made available to the public through
         HUD's locator tool.

         All clients who contact the agency as a result of these referrals must be served or
         referred the client to another Participating Agency as outlined in Chapter 3,
         Paragraph 3-1(L).

2-6   Re-approval. At the end of the approval period, and upon completion of a successful
      performance review, if conducted, HUD will reapprove agencies as described in
      Chapter 6. No application is required for re-approval.




                                                                                                22
                                                                                   Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                           04/2024


             CHAPTER 3. DELIVERY OF HOUSING COUNSELING SERVICES

3-1   Basic Requirements. This chapter details the Housing Counseling Program procedures
      and requirements as provided under 24 CFR part 214 and other applicable regulations
      and statutes, including applicable civil rights and fair housing requirements. A
      participating agency’s failure to remain in compliance with these basic programmatic
      requirements can result in consequences, which may include, but are not limited to
      termination of an agency’s approval to participate in the housing counseling program,
      placement in inactive status, suspension of payment drawdown access; forfeiture of
      remaining grant funds; and denial of access to HUD housing counseling training
      resources.

      The basic requirements are as follows:

      A. Housing Counseling. Participating agencies must provide housing counseling, as
         defined in Chapter 1, Paragraph 1-4 (O) of this Handbook, as opposed to just
           education, as defined in Chapter 1, Paragraph 1-4 (G) of this Handbook to current and
           potential homeowners or tenants to assist them in improving their housing conditions
           and in meeting the responsibilities of homeownership or tenancy. Participating
           agencies must provide counseling on one or more of the topics outlined in Paragraph
           3-6 of this Chapter.

      B.   Certification Requirement. Housing counseling required by or provided in connection
           with HUD programs must be provided only by certified housing counselors who work
           for participating agencies under HUD’s Housing Counseling Program. To be
           certified, an individual must both pass a standardized written examination covering
           six major topic areas, and work for an agency approved to participate in HUD’s
           Housing Counseling Program. Housing Counseling services must be performed by a
           HUD   certified housing counselor pursuant to 24 CFR §§ 214.303(a) and 103(n).

      C.   Education. All participating agencies that offer group education must be able to also
           offer individual counseling services on the same topics.

      D.   Setting/Format. Counseling services may take place in the office space of the housing
           counseling agency, at an alternate location (e.g., client’s home), or through an
           alternative format, as long as the location or format is mutually acceptable to the
           housing counselor and client. Alternative formats can include telephonic counseling
           or remote counseling systems designed using internet video conferencing technology.
           These technology systems can also be used to deliver group education workshops and
           sessions. However, if possible, all participating agencies that provide services directly
           must offer and provide in-person counseling to clients that prefer this format. In
           providing in person and alternative format counseling services, a participating agency
           must ensure effective communication with individuals with disabilities, including
           through the provision of appropriate auxiliary aids and services. See 24 CFR §
           214.103()(3) and 24 CFR § 8.6.




                                                                                                   23
                                                                             Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                     04/2024


E.   Housing Counseling Work Plan. A participating agency must be in compliance, and
     deliver housing counseling services and education consistent with, its approved
     housing counseling work plan as required by 214 CFR § 214.103(m) and described in
     Paragraph 3-2 below.

F.   Geographic Scope. Regardless of the setting or format, counseling activities must be
     limited to the geographic area specified in the agency’s approved housing counseling
     work plan, and all participating agencies must continue to meet the requirements of
     24 CFR § 214.103(d), §214.103(g), and §214.103(h) and Chapter 2, Paragraph 2-2 of
     this Handbook. For example, agencies may only offer telephone counseling to clients
     in their approved geographic area. Geographic scope can be expanded or reduced
     upon agency request as described in Paragraph 3-2 below.

G.   Civil Rights. All participating agencies must administer their housing counseling
     programs in accordance with and remain in compliance with corresponding
     Departmental regulations and guidance and the following nondiscrimination
     regulatory and legislative requirements:

     1.   Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, 42 U.S.C. 2000d-1, 24 CFR Part 1;

     2.   The Fair Housing Act, 42 U.S.C. $§ 3601- 3619, 24 CFR parts 100, 103;

     3.   Nondiscrimination and Equal Opportunity in Housing, Executive Order 11063,
          24 CFR part 107;

     4.   Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, 29 U.S.C. 794, 24 CFR part 8;

     5.   Age Discrimination Act of 1975, 42 U.S.C. 6101 - 6107, 24 CFR part 146;

     6.   Americans with Disabilities Act, 42 U.S.C. 12131 et seg., 28 CFR part 35;

     7.   Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972, 20 U.S.C. 1681 - 1683, 1685 -
          1688, 24 CFR part 3

     8.   Improving Access to Services for Persons with Limited English Proficiency,
          Executive Order 13166.

     9.   Advancing Racial Equity and Support for Underserved Communities Through the
          Federal Government, Executive Order 13985; and

     10. Further Advancing Racial Equity and Support for Underserved Communities
         Through the Federal Government, Executive Order 14091

     These requirements are designed to prevent discrimination in the delivery of benefits
     and services because of race, color, religion, sex, (including gender identity and
     sexual orientation), national origin, age, familial status or disability.



                                                                                          24
                                                                          Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                  04/2024



. Affirmatively Furthering Fair Housing. In accordance with 42 U.S.C. § 3608(e)(5),
  participating agencies must affirmatively further fair housing. This means that
  participating agencies are expected to take meaningful actions, in addition to
  combating discrimination, that overcome patterns of segregation and foster inclusive
  communities free from barriers that restrict access to opportunity based on protected
  characteristics.

  Accessibility and Facilities. In accordance with 24 CFR § 214.103 all participating
  agencies, its branches, affiliates, and sub-grantees must: (1) Have a clearly identified
  office with space available for the provision of housing counseling services, should
  operate during normal business hours and offer extended hours when necessary; (2)
  Provide privacy for in-person counseling and confidentiality of client records; (3)
  Provide accessibility features or make alternative accommodations for persons with
  disabilities, in accordance with section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29
  U.S.C. § 794), 24 CFR parts 8 and 9, and the Americans with Disabilities Act (42
  U.S.C. §$§ 12101 et seq) and (4) Comply with the requirements of (2) and (3) where
  the counseling services are provided at locations other than the offices of the
  participating agency. This requirement is not applicable to counseling performed in a
  client’s home or other location requested by the client.

  Religious Discrimination and Influence. Agencies and their affiliates and branches
  are prohibited from: (1) discriminating on behalf of or against any segment of the
  population in the provision of services or outreach, including those of other religious
  affiliations; and (2) requiring religious instructions or religious counseling,
  conducting mandatory religious services or worship, engaging in religious
  proselytizing, and exerting religious influence in the provision of assistance under the
  agency’s or its affiliate’s or branch’s housing counseling program.

. Limited English Proficiency (LEP). The participating agency must take reasonable
  steps to ensure meaningful access to their programs and activities for persons with
  provide language assistance to persons with LEP. See guidance in “Final Guidance to
  Federal Financial Assistance Recipients Regarding Title VI Prohibition Against
  National Origin Discrimination Affecting Limited English Proficient Persons”
  published in the Federal Register on January 22, 2007, (72 FR 2732), to determine the
  extent of the assistance the Agency should offer based on its own circumstances.

. Referrals. For purposes of client referrals, participating agencies that provide housing
  counseling services directly must provide HUD with the agency name and contact
  information. This information may appear on HUD’s website in a searchable database
  of agencies participating in the Housing Counseling Program. In addition, names and
  addresses of all participating agencies that provide housing counseling services
  directly may be made available to the public through HUD’s toll-free housing
  counseling hotline.




                                                                                          25
                                                                                   Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                           04/2024


         All clients who contact the agency as a result of these referrals must be served. In
         cases where the agency does not offer the counseling services requested by the client,
         is unable to communicate effectively with the client, does not have sufficient
         resources, or the Participating Agency is required to serve certain clients only per
         other HUD program requirements, the agency must refer the client to another
         participating agency, preferably in the area. If there is not a participating agency
         available, the agency must make a reasonable effort to refer the client to another
         agency that can help the client meet their needs.

3-2   Housing Counseling Work Plan. The housing counseling work plan is a detailed yet
      concise housing counseling plan that explains (1) the needs and problems of the target
      population; (2) how the agency will address one or more of these needs and problems
      with its available resources; (3) fair housing requirements and how the agency intends to
      affirmatively further fair housing; (4) the type of housing counseling services offered,
      and specifies the geographic service area; (5) how and when the agency will cover the
      entire process of homeownership; (6) how the agency will provide home inspection
      materials to pre-purchase clients; (7) the format for delivering housing counseling and
      education services; (8) the impact and scope of one-on-one counseling services; (9)
      ensuring accessibility for persons with disabilities; (10) the agency’s plan for follow-up
      communication with the client; (11) how the agency serves non-English speaking or
      clients with limited English proficiency; (12) the fee structure if applicable; (13)
      oversight and supervisory monitoring; (14) how the agency will monitor and document
      hardcopy and digital storage of client information and (15) Lead Safety. The type of
      counseling services in the agency’s work plan must be consistent with the agency’s client
      housing counseling disclosures and the services identified in the HUD Housing
      Counseling System.

      Agencies that provide direct housing counseling services must address all items below in
      their work plan. An Intermediary, State Housing Finance Agency (SHFA) or Multistate
      Organization's (MSO) plan includes similar information regarding the services they
      propose to provide to the network of affiliated agencies or branches. Intermediaries,
      SHFAs and MSOs must provide the individual work plans of their affiliates and
      subgrantees. The quality control plan for an Intermediary and SHFA must address
      activities and their responsibilities related to managing their affiliates and subgrantees.

      A. Required Components of the housing counseling work plan. The work plan must
         include the following components:

          1.   Target Community. The housing counseling work plan must describe the
               demographics, housing needs and problems, and geographic boundaries of the
               target area(s) the agency plans to offer its housing counseling services and include
               zip codes for each proposed area.

         2.    Housing Needs and Priorities. Describe the specific housing problems of the
               target population, barriers they face, and problems that are unique to the agency’s
               population base. Cite specific, current sources for your information.



                                                                                                   26
                                                                           Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                   04/2024




3.   Affirmatively Furthering Fair Housing. HUD requires that all participating
     agencies affirmatively further fair housing (AFFH). Affirmatively furthering fair
     housing means taking meaningful actions, in addition to combating
     discrimination, that overcome patterns of segregation and foster inclusive
     communities free from barriers that restrict access to opportunity based on
     protected characteristics. Specifically, affirmatively furthering fair housing means
     taking meaningful actions that, taken together, address significant disparities in
     housing needs and in access to opportunity, replacing segregated living patterns
     with truly integrated and balanced living patterns, transforming racially or
     ethnically concentrated areas of poverty into areas of opportunity, and fostering
     and maintaining compliance with civil rights and fair housing laws. The duty to
     affirmatively further fair housing extends to all of a program participant's
     activities and programs relating to housing and urban development.

     Participating agencies are to develop an affirmative marketing and outreach plan
     as part of the agency’s housing counseling work plan to include:

        a.   specific activities the agency will use to address barriers to fair housing,

        b.   how the agency will reach out and make services readily available to
             clients least familiar with counseling services that would benefit from such
             assistance within a specific market area, and

        c.   how the agency measures the impact of their marketing and outreach
             activities.

     Marketing and Outreach Initiatives. This includes providing general information
     and materials about housing opportunities and issues; efforts to reach groups and
     communities in need of services who are otherwise unlikely to know about or
     receive them; conducting informational campaigns; advocating with housing
     providers and lenders to adopt practices that expand housing opportunities (e.g.
     by using non-traditional lending standards; by accepting Housing Choice
     Vouchers or other forms of housing assistance; or by using tenant screening
     policies that account for the nature, severity, recency and any mitigating
     circumstances of a negative record); and raising awareness about critical housing
     topics, (e.g. fair housing rights and remedies; predatory lending and mortgage
     fraud; lead safety; energy efficiency options to reduce homeowner energy costs).

     Marketing and outreach initiatives should follow affirmative marketing principles
     and be directed at those populations least likely to seek counseling services or the
     information marketed, including those of racial, religious or national origin
     groups not normally served by the sponsoring agency, as well as individuals with
     disabilities and persons with Limited English Proficiency (LEP). To do so, it may
     be necessary to broaden the target areas or provide translation and interpretive



                                                                                            27
                                                                      Handbook 7610.1
                                                                              04/2024


services in languages other than English in order to reach a greater variety of
racial and ethnic groups. It may also require providing outreach and services in
alternative formats for individuals with disabilities (e.g., Braille, large type, sign
language interpreters, audio, assistive listening devices, etc.).

Counseling Services. The work plan should identify housing counseling services
to be provided in response to one or more of the needs in targeted communities
and geographic areas where the agency and its branches and affiliates provide
their housing counseling services. Only the housing counseling services described
in the work plan should be checked in the agency’s HUD Housing Counseling
System profile. An agency’s housing counseling work plan must meet the
requirements described in 24 CFR § 214.300 and Paragraphs 3-1, 3-5 and 3-6 of
this Chapter. Group education and marketing and outreach strategies should also
be identified in the agency’s housing counseling work plan.

Homeownership Counseling. For those agencies that provide any type of
homeownership counseling including pre-purchase counseling, post-purchase
non-default, mortgage delinquency and HECM origination counseling for their
clients, the work plan must explain how and when the agency will cover the
topics of the homeownership process that are relevant to the client.

Home Inspection Materials. Each client receiving Homeownership Counseling
services whose needs may be met through the purchase of a home, or who
expresses an interest in the purchase of a home, must receive copies of all
documents HUD requires regarding the availability and importance of getting a
home inspection. The agency work plan must describe procedures implemented
for clients to acknowledge receipt of home inspection materials. The Office of
Housing Counseling is not requiring that individual client files document
distribution of home inspection materials and discussion of each relevant topic
under homeownership counseling as long as the agency’s work plan clearly
outlines how the agency will comply with these requirements.

Alternative Modes for Delivery of Housing Counseling Services. An agency’s
housing counseling work plan must address formats for the provision of housing
counseling services. The work plan must describe options in which the agency
and the client mutually agree on the need for an alternative setting or alternative
format. Alternative formats can include telephonic counseling or remote
counseling systems, such as video conferencing, or other electronic or telephonic
systems. If the agency and client cannot mutually agree upon an alternative
setting or format for services, the client must be referred to another HUD-
approved housing counseling agency.

Impact and Scope of One-on-One Counseling Services. Agencies can use the
form HUD-9902 to provide projections. Services selected in sections 8 and 9
should match the types of counseling outlined in the work plan. Additionally, the




                                                                                         28
                                                                      Handbook 7610.1
                                                                              04/2024


   agency should identify the types of impacts expected, as identified in section 10
   of the form HUD-9902 for the current fiscal year.

   Ensuring Accessibility for Persons with Disabilities. The agency must be prepared
   to make reasonable accommodations to ensure an equal opportunity for persons
   with disabilities to access programs, services, and activities. The agency must be
   prepared to provide auxiliary aides and services including documents in different
   formats to persons with disabilities. This includes accommodations for people
   with visual or hearing impairments for other communication-related disabilities
   and people with mobility impairments. Accommodations can include but are not
   limited to alternative formats (such as documents in Braille) as well as physical
   accommodations (accessible location, counseling by telephonic and electronic
   means). The work plan must include a written description of all accommodations
   that are made available by the Agency.

10. Follow-up. The housing counseling work plan must detail the agency's plan for
    follow-up communication with the client. The agency must make reasonable
   efforts to have follow-up communication with the client, when possible, within
   the first 60 days of no client contact, to attempt to confirm that the client is
   progressing toward his or her housing goal, to modify or terminate housing
   counseling, and to learn and report outcomes. Follow-up efforts must be
   documented in the client’s file. This plan must meet the requirements outlined in
   24 CFR § 214.300 and Paragraph 3-5(F) of this Chapter.

11. Fee Structure. The housing counseling work plan must also describe, if
    applicable, the agency’s fee structure and how fees are determined, for housing
   counseling and education services. Also, describe how the fee structure is
   communicated to the client. The work plan must also explain how fees charged
   meet HUD requirements consistent with 24 CFR § 214.313 and Chapter 7 of this
   Handbook, including how the agency assesses affordability and ability to pay. If
   no fees are charged, the work plan should note the same.

12. Limited English Proficiency. The housing counseling work plan must describe
    how the agency serves and ensures meaningful access for non-English speaking
   persons or clients having a limited ability to read, write, speak, or understand
   English. Executive Order 13166, Improving Access to Services for Persons with
   Limited English Proficiency (LEP), seeks to improve access to federally assisted
   services, programs and benefits for individuals with limited English proficiency.
   Agencies participating in the Housing Counseling Program must seek to provide
   access to program benefits and information to LEP individuals through language
   assistance services, in accordance with Final Guidance to Federal Financial
   Assistance Recipients Regarding Title VI Prohibition Against National Origin
   Discrimination Affecting Limited English Proficient Persons published on the
   Federal Register on January 22, 2007 (72 FR 2732).




                                                                                       29
                                                                        Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                04/2024


  13. Supervisory Monitoring and Oversight. The housing counseling workplan must
      include supervisory monitoring and quality control procedures. Intermediaries and
      SHFAs are to address activities and responsibilities related to managing their
      affiliates and subgrantees. The supervisory monitoring and quality control
      procedures must include the following:

         a.   Reports and monitoring procedures to assure records of quality control
              findings and actions taken are maintained.

         b.   All deficiencies provided to senior management.

         c.   Prompt effective corrective measures that are taken by senior management
              and documented when deficiencies are identified.

         d.   Documentation of review of monthly percent of counselor(s) client files
              by senior management

         e.   Additional information, as needed.

     This plan must also meet the requirements outlined in 24 CFR § 214.303(h) and
     Chapter 6, Paragraph 6-1(K) of this Handbook.

  14. Documentation for Information Security Plan Compliance. The plan should
      include oversight to incorporate the basic requirements of the Gramm-Leach-
      Bliley (GLB) Act of 1999 to ensure the security and confidentiality of client
      information. Information includes all hard copy and digital storage of client
      information. The plan should include ways to monitor and document the main
      areas outlined in the GLB Act.

     This plan must meet the requirements outlined in 24 CFR § 214.315(e) and
     Chapter 5, Paragraph 5-6(C) of this Handbook.

  15. Lead Safety. When the housing counseling will cover the rental or purchase of
      housing that may include pre-1978 housing, the work plan must include informing
      clients of their rights and the procedures under the Lead Disclosure Rule (24 CFR
      part 35, subpart A) and the EPA Renovation, Repair and Painting (RRP) Rule (40
     CFR part 745, subpart E), If the housing counseling will cover the rental or
     purchase of housing that may be HUD-assisted pre-1978 housing, their rights and
     the procedures under the Lead Safe Housing Rule (24 CFR part 35, subparts B, R,
     and, as applicable, F - M).

. Work Plan Modification. With HUD’s written approval, any aspect of the work plan
  can be amended. If the agency is not a subgrantee or affiliated with an Intermediary
 or SHFA, the notice and plan must be submitted to the HUD point-of-contact (POC)
 for approval. However, if the agency is a subgrantee or affiliated with an
 Intermediary or SHFA then the notice must be submitted to the Intermediary or



                                                                                         30
                                                                                  Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                          04/2024


           SHFA, with which it is affiliated. The Intermediary or SHFA must review and
           confirm the work plan complies with OHC requirements and then forward a copy to
           the HUD POC for final approval. HUD may accept or reject work plan modifications
           proposed by the participating agency and may require the agency to adjust the
           proposed work plan as a condition for approval or participation in the housing
           counseling program. Approval of an agency’s workplan will be based on the capacity
           of the agency, the demand for services and other factors. Additionally, HUD will
           require specialized training or certifications prior to approving certain housing
           counseling services such as HECM counseling. See Chapters 5 and 6, for more
           information on notifying HUD of work plan changes.

3-3   Client Intake. A housing counselor or other agency staff who are trained in requirements
      of the Privacy Act of 1974 (5 U.S.C. § 552a) may obtain basic information to determine
      if the agency can assist a potential client, schedule an appointment with a housing
      counselor or refer the potential client to other resources. Client intake in and of itself is
      not housing counseling and doesn’t have to be performed by a HUD-certified housing
      counselor. This initial assessment is not housing counseling and should not be reported to
      HUD under housing counseling activities.

3-4   Information Dissemination and Correspondence. In accordance with 24 CFR § 8.6 and 24
      CFR § 214.103()(3) participating agencies should provide clients instructions on how to
      access information through alternative means to ensure clients with mobility, visual or
      hearing impairment or other disability have equal access to enjoy the benefits of the
      program. These instructions can be provided in correspondence materials disseminated to
      clients and prospective clients or on the agency website, or both.

3-5   Counseling Services. In order for a client to be classified as counseled under HUD’s
      Housing Counseling program, HUD certified housing counselors must deliver and
      document counseling in accordance with the requirements in 24 CFR § 214.300 (a) and
      (b). Any housing counseling required under or provided in connection with any program
      administered by HUD shall be provided only by HUD certified housing counselors.

      A. Housing counseling. The client must have received counseling on at least one of the
         topics described in Paragraph 3-6 below that enables them to make informed and
         reasonable decisions to achieve their housing goal.

      B.   Discussion of Alternatives. Counseling must include a reasonable discussion of
           alternative services, programs, products and options available to the client.

           For example, this type of discussion may occur if a recipient of pre-purchased
           counseling asks questions about a specific loan product or feature, or if the counselor
           feels that having information about a specific product, feature, property or program is
           in the best interest of the client. However, if a counselor discusses specific products,
           features, properties or programs, the counselor must also provide at least three other
           reasonable and comparable alternatives, if available, and document the client file.




                                                                                                 31
                                                                           Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                   04/2024


 Therefore, in the example provided the counselor should have given the client the
 opportunity to consider products from at least three different lenders.

 Counselors must not steer clients to, or promote specific products, features or
 programs. Any discussion of alternative options must be documented in client files.
 Safeguards and disclosures must be used as described in Chapter 6, Paragraphs 6-1
 (F), (G) and (H) of this Handbook to avoid conflict of interest. See Chapter 4,
 Paragraphs 4-1(1), (J) and 4-2 (H) of this Handbook for more information on
 discussing lenders with reverse mortgage clients.

. Action Plan. Except for reverse mortgage counseling, housing counselors and clients
  must establish an action plan as defined in Chapter 1, Paragraph 1-4 of this
  Handbook. The action plan outlines what the housing counseling agency and the
  client will do in order to meet the client’s housing goals and, when appropriate,
  addresses the client’s housing needs.

. Financial and Housing Affordability Analysis. Every housing counseling session
  requires a financial and housing affordability analysis of the client’s financial
  situation.

  1.   The financial and housing affordability analysis should obtain as much
       information as possible from the client to perform an analysis of the client’s
       finances to help the client achieve their housing goals.

 2.    The counselor must ensure that their counseling process is appropriate for the
       circumstances and consistent with HUD requirements. Establishing a budget is a
       part of conducting the required financial and housing affordability analysis for
       most types of housing counseling. A household budget generally includes a
       review of the client's income, expenses, spending history, assets and use of credit
       and must be customized to a client’s current situation including any adjustments
       the client should make to achieve their housing goals.

 3.    When conducting a financial and housing affordability analysis, the counselor
       may find that a budget is not appropriate for the circumstances. In these
       circumstances, the counselor must provide a detailed justification based on the
       counselor’s financial and housing affordability analysis in the client file.
       Situations where a budget may not be appropriate may include:

       a.   Individuals experiencing homelessness who have no income sources.

       b.   Rental counseling clients seeking advice about a landlord issue that does not
            involve a financial problem, for example, repairs.

       c.   Disaster recovery assistance clients based on the extent and type of
            emergency.




                                                                                            32
                                                                             Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                     04/2024


E.   Referrals. Participating agencies should provide referrals to local, state, and federal
     resources, if needed. Referrals made by counselors must be documented in the client
     file. Any referrals for housing counseling must be made to a participating agency that
     has   a HUD   certified housing counselor(s).

F.   Follow-up. Participating agencies must make a reasonable effort to have follow up
     communication with the client, when possible, to ensure that the client is progressing
     toward his or her housing goal, to modify or terminate housing counseling, and to
     learn and report outcomes in accordance with 24 CFR § 214.300(c). Client follow-up
     should be conducted by a certified housing counselor. The counselor should make
     reasonable efforts to follow-up within the first 60 days of no client contact. If
     unsuccessful, after two follow-up attempts, the counselor must write a letter or send
     an e-mail to the client stating that such efforts have been made and inform the client
     that there is a need for follow-up communication. The letter or email must request
     that the client contact the housing counseling agency no later than 30 days from the
     date of the letter. The follow-up communication enables the agency to assess if
     additional client services are necessary or if services should be terminated. Issuing
     surveys to assess housing outcomes does not fully meet the requirement for client
     follow-up. Hiring a third-party agency to conduct follow-up services is prohibited.

G.   Client File. The housing counseling agency must set up a confidential client file
     documenting the activities required by this section, and with the documentation
     required in Chapter 5 of this Handbook.

H. Termination of Counseling. The housing counseling agency must document in the
   client’s file when housing counseling services are terminated. The housing counselor
     must notate the client’s file with the date and explain the reason(s) for termination of
     services. Client files must not remain open indefinitely. Housing counselors must
     make reasonable efforts to conduct a follow-up session as described in Paragraph 3-
     5(F) above. If the agency does not have any client contact and/or client file activity
     within a 90-day period, the agency must not bill or count that client as an active file
     against any future billing periods unless client contact is reinitiated.

     Termination of counseling services can be for the following reasons:

     1.    The client meets his or her housing need or resolves the housing problem;

     2.    The agency determines that further housing counseling will not meet the client’s
           housing need or resolve the client’s housing problem;

     3.    The agency attempts to, but is unable to make contact with the client;

     4.    The client does not follow the agreed upon action plan;

     5.    The client otherwise terminates housing counseling;




                                                                                               33
                                                                                  Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                          04/2024


           6.   The client fails to appear for housing counseling appointments or fails to respond
                to agency inquiries concerning the client’s progress in resolving his or her
                housing need or problem; or

           7.   Other circumstances beyond the participating agency’s or client’s control such as
                a natural disaster that might prevent continuation of counseling.

           The client file should accurately reflect the types of housing counseling provided and
           when services begin and are terminated.

3-6   Approved Housing Counseling, Education, and Outreach Topics. Participating agencies
      may provide (or discuss with clients) counseling or group education on the following
      topics:

      A. Homeownership Counseling. Homeownership Counseling is housing counseling
         related to homeownership and residential mortgage loans, must address the entire
         process of homeownership including the decision to purchase a home, the selection
         and purchase of a home, issues arising during or affecting the period of
         homeownership and the sale or other disposition of a home. Types of
         Homeownership Counseling include the following: pre-purchase/home buying,
         resolving or preventing forward or reverse mortgage delinquency or default, and non-
         delinquency post-purchase, reverse mortgage counseling, homeless assistance, rental
         housing counseling, and disaster or national emergency related assistance counseling.

      B.   Pre-Purchase/Home Buying. Includes but is not limited to advice regarding readiness
           and preparation for homeownership; Federal Housing Administration (FHA) insured
           financing; housing selection and mobility; search assistance; fair housing, fair lending
           and predatory lending; budgeting and credit; loan product and feature comparison;
           purchase procedures and closing costs; money management (does not include debt
           management plan programs); selecting a real estate agent; home inspection;
           alternative sources of mortgage credit; down payment assistance; locating housing
           that provides universal design and visibility; how to apply for programs available to
           potential homebuyers; how to purchase a home using the Housing Choice Voucher
           (HCV) Homeownership Program; and referrals to community services and regulatory
           agencies.

      C.   Resolving or Preventing Forward or Reverse Mortgage Delinquency or Default.
           Includes, but is not limited to counseling addressing the consequences of default and
           foreclosure; loss mitigation, budgeting and credit; restructuring debt; importance of
           paying property taxes; obtaining re-certification for a mortgage subsidy; and
           establishing repayment plans. It may also include assisting clients affected by
           predatory lending; foreclosure prevention strategies; national emergencies or
           disasters; explaining the foreclosure process; providing referrals to other sources; and
           assisting clients with locating alternative housing.




                                                                                                  34
                                                                           Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                   04/2024


. Non-Delinquency Post-Purchase Counseling. Home maintenance and financial
  management for homeowners, including escrow funds; budgeting; refinancing; home
  equity; home improvement; utility costs; energy efficiency improvements; property
  taxes, and rights and responsibilities of homeowners. loan and grant options; housing
  codes and housing enforcement procedures; accessibility codes and how to design
  features to provide accessibility for persons with disabilities; non-discriminatory
  lending and funding for persons who modify their dwellings to accommodate
  disabilities; visibility and universal design; how to specify and bid construction work;
  and how to enter into and manage construction contracts including actions to address
  the non-performance of contractors.

. Reverse Mortgage. Counseling related to reverse mortgage origination. The Federal
  Housing Administration’s reverse mortgage product is the Home Equity Conversion
  Mortgage. See Chapter 4 of this Handbook.

  Homeless Assistance. Includes information regarding emergency shelter; other
  emergency services; and transitional housing.

. Rental housing counseling. Counseling related to the rental of residential property,
  which may include counseling regarding future homeownership opportunities when
  provided in connection with HUD’s Housing Counseling Program or required under
  or provided in connection with HUD Programs as defined in 24 CFR § 5.111. Rental
  housing counseling may also include the decision to rent, the benefits of moving to
  well-resourced areas of opportunity, responsibilities of tenancy, affordability of
  renting, and eviction prevention. Rental topics may include HUD rental and rent
  subsidy programs; other federal, state, or local rental assistance; fair housing; housing
  search assistance; landlord tenant laws; lease terms; rent delinquency; budgeting for
 rent payments; and assistance with locating alternative housing. The payment of
 rental assistance on behalf of a client, and the collection of rent or loans, in and of
  themselves, have never been categorized as housing counseling.

. Disaster or National Emergency Related Assistance Counseling. Education and
  counseling services, where the need for services is created by a disaster or national
  emergency, either pending or occurred. A disaster may be a natural or man-made
  event that is local, regional, or national in scope. These services may be preparedness
  (pre-disaster) or recovery (post-disaster). Participating agencies can offer these
  services through group workshops or one-on-one counseling, or both. The duration of
  such housing counseling may be short- or long-term.

  1.   Preparedness Assistance Housing Counseling and Education. Includes
       preparedness education and housing counseling that occurs before a disaster. It
       can be group education or one-on-one counseling, or both. This education and
       housing counseling provides clients the tools and information necessary to
       prepare and implement a home and family emergency preparedness plan.




                                                                                           35
                                                                                   Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                           04/2024


           2.   Recovery Assistance Housing Counseling. Includes recovery assistance housing
                counseling and education that occurs post disaster. It can be group education or
                one-on-one counseling. Recovery assistance housing counseling will focus on the
                relocation, re-housing, and rebuilding process for those clients impacted by a
                disaster.

3-7   Fair Housing and Civil Rights Requirements


      A. Nondiscrimination under 24 CFR §§ 5.105 and 214.503. All participating agencies
         must comply with federal civil rights and fair housing statutes and HUD’s
         implementing regulations which protect against discrimination on the basis of race,
         color, religion, sex (including sexual orientation and gender identity), national origin,
           familial status, age, and disability. 24 CFR § 5.105. Additionally, agencies should be
           aware that the Violence Against Women Act (“VAWA”’) protects survivors of
           domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault and stalking in covered housing
           programs in which the agency’s clients may participate or to which they may apply.
           34 U.S.C. § 12491(a)(3).

      B.   Promoting Fair Housing and Protecting Civil Rights. All participating agencies must
           affirmatively further fair housing.

           Participating agencies’ endeavors to affirmatively further fair housing must include
           marketing and outreach activities directed at those populations least likely to seek
           counseling services. Affirmative marketing and outreach activities include but are not
           limited to the following: public service advertising, conducting informational sessions
           with community-based organizations and in public facilities (such as libraries or town
           halls) and direct marketing to persons least likely to know about the existence and
           availability of housing and housing related services in particular housing markets.
           The persons least likely to be aware of or pursue housing opportunities within a
           particular housing market area are likely the ones who need housing counseling
           services the most.

           Examples of the components of an affirmative marketing and outreach plan include:
           advertising the availability of services with an emphasis on certain populations
           (including translating ads into various languages) through internet, social media,
           radio stations, flyers, newspapers, public television, message boards, and seminars
           that are known to be used by those populations within a market area; outreach to local
           organizations across the market area with ties to a wide range of people, such as
           community gathering places (e.g., libraries, schools, recreation centers, senior centers,
           places of worship), employers, faith-based communities, social service providers, and
           other advocacy and community-based organizations advertising and outreach in non-
           English languages to ensure meaningful access for limited English proficient (LEP)
           individuals; advertising and outreach using alternative formats and auxiliary aids and
           services to ensure effective communication with individuals with disabilities; and
           marketing housing opportunities and housing related services to advocacy groups




                                                                                                  36
                                                                            Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                    04/2024


 such as fair housing organizations and disability or veterans groups on the availability
 of housing or housing services.

 In addition to marketing and outreach, reasonable steps to affirmatively further fair
 housing may include housing counseling to make persons aware of discriminatory
 practices, education about housing design or construction to increase access for
 persons with disabilities, language assistance services to persons with limited English
 proficiency (on the basis of national origin), affirmative fair housing marketing, or
 encouraging and assisting clients to seek housing in locations that afford greater
 housing choice or access to educational, service, or employment opportunities. For
 more examples of housing counseling services that may affirmatively further fair
 housing, see Paragraph 3-7(C) below.

  1.   Reporting--Participating agencies should maintain records of their activities to
       affirmatively further fair housing. Such records should describe the activities that
       took place, and, to the extent possible, describe the impact of the activities.
       Participating agencies are obliged to maintain records on the race, ethnicity,
       disability status and familial status of the beneficiaries of HCS programs.

. Fair Housing Counseling, Education and Outreach Activities. The following are
  examples of fair housing counseling, education, and outreach topics that participating
 agencies may provide to, and discuss with, clients in accordance with HUD’s
 regulations at 24 CFR § 214.300 — especially clients in groups that have experienced
 systematic discrimination or other impediments to fair housing choice:

  1.   Pre-purchase/Home buying--including, but not limited to: advice regarding
       readiness and preparation, fair housing rights of applicants and clients, identifying
       housing and lending discrimination and predatory lending;

 2.    Resolving or preventing mortgage delinquency--including, but not limited to:
       preventing default and foreclosure; borrower rights; identifying discriminatory or
       predatory loan terms or modification programs; loss mitigation; assistance with
       budgeting; and credit;

  3.   Home maintenance and financial management for homeowners--including but not
       limited to, the preservation of accessible housing features; and federal, state, or
       local resources available to improve the environmental conditions (e.g., air
       quality, mold, lead paint, energy efficiency) or disaster resilience of a home; and

 4.    Rental topics--including, but not limited to, HUD rental and rent subsidy
       programs; other federal, state or local assistance; the benefits of and tips for
       finding housing in well-resourced areas of opportunity; how to appeal denials of
       rental applications, including those based on credit, eviction, or criminal records;
       fair housing and civil rights laws; housing search assistance; landlord tenant laws;
       the housing rights of survivors of domestic violence, dating violence, sexual




                                                                                          37
                                                                               Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                       04/2024


          assault, or stalking; lease terms; rights of applicants and clients, rent delinquency;
          reasonable accommodations and modifications for individuals with disabilities.

D. Responsibilities of intermediaries and sub grantees. HUD-funded grant recipients,
   including subgrantees, are obligated under various laws not to discriminate in the
   administration of any housing, services, or other program or activity directly or
   indirectly based on race, color, religion, sex (including sexual orientation and gender
     identity), age, national origin, familial status, or disability. HUD regulations further
     require that recipients of Federal financial assistance comply with Civil Rights-
     Related Program Requirements (CRRPRs) that affect nearly every aspect of each
     program. (In the case of participating housing counseling agencies, such agencies
     must adhere to these CRRPRs whether they receive Federal financial assistance or not
     as a condition of their participation in HUD’s Housing Counseling Program. 24 CFR
     § 5.105.) All intermediaries and sub grantees are held to the same nondiscrimination
     and equal opportunity responsibilities of direct recipients of Housing Counseling
     Services program funds or resources, including but not limited to:

     1.   Maintaining records and actions taken. Refer to Chapter 5, Paragraph 5-13 of this
          Handbook.

     2.   Training of staff with applicable civil rights laws and their applications. Refer to
          Paragraph 3-7(A) above, and

     3.   Education and Outreach Activities. Refer to Paragraph 3-7(C) above.

     Contracts and agreements between participating agencies and their affiliates or sub
     grantees must include terms to this effect.

E.   How to File a Discrimination Complaint with HUD. For complaints under the Fair
     Housing Act (42 U.S.C. § 3601, et seg.) (nondiscrimination because of race, color,
     national origin, sex (including sexual orientation or gender identity), religion,
     disability, or familial status) clients of participating agencies may file a discrimination
     complaint if they believe that they have been subjected to unlawful discrimination.
     Participating agencies or a client’s representative may file a complaint on the client’s
     behalf. For complaints filed with HUD, the complaint must be filed no later than one
     year after the last alleged discriminatory act occurred.

     If a participating agency has a client that needs fair housing assistance, the agency
     should refer the client to HUD or a state, county, or municipal fair housing agency.
     Discrimination complaints that arise in a jurisdiction that administers a law that HUD
     has certified as substantially equivalent to the Fair Housing Act will be referred by
     HUD to the respective state or local government agency. For these certified agencies,
     the statute of limitations for filing a complaint may vary.

     For other civil rights complaints such as those under: Title VI of the Civil Rights Act,
     42 U.S.C. 2000d et seq.; 24 CFR part 1, (prohibits discrimination on the basis of race,



                                                                                                 38
                                                                                  Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                          04/2024


          color, and national origin); Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, 29 U.S.C.
          794; 24 CFR part 8, or the Americans with Disabilities Act, 42 U.S.C. 12131 et seq;
          28 CEFR part 35 (both prohibit discrimination based on disability); and the Violence
          Against Women Act of 2022 (VAWA),         34 U.S.C. 12291 et seqg.; 24 CFR part 5,
          Subpart L (prohibits discrimination based on domestic violence, dating violence,
          sexual assault and stalking); the Age Discrimination Act, 42 U.S.C. 6101 — 6107
          (prohibits age discrimination); Title [X of the Education Amendments Act of 1972 20
          U.S.C. 1681-83, 1685-88 (prohibits sex, sexual orientation, and gender identity
          discrimination in education programs and activities) clients of participating agencies
          may file a discrimination complaint if they believe that they have been subjected to
          unlawful discrimination. Participating agencies or a client’s representative may file a
          complaint on the client’s behalf.

          While complaints filed pursuant to Title VI of the Civil Rights Act, Section 504 of the
          Rehabilitation Act of 1973, the Americans with Disabilities Act, the Age
          Discrimination Act, and Title [IX must be filed within 180 days of the alleged act of
          discrimination, HUD may extend the time for filing and accept a complaint after the
          180 days.

          HUD offers multiple ways to file a complaint. The client, agency or a representative
          may: (1) file a written complaint with the nearest HUD office; or (2) call the nearest
          HUD office; or (3) use the following link to access HUD’s Fair Housing complaint
          form to file online: File a Complaint.

          Please contact HUD’s Office of Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity for additional
          information. A list of HUD local offices and their contact information is available at
          Contact FHEO.

3-8    Marketing and Outreach Initiatives. Participating agencies may conduct marketing and
       outreach, including, providing general information about housing opportunities,
       conducting information campaigns, and raising awareness about critical housing topics
       such as predatory lending and fair housing topics.

3-9    Affirmative Fair Housing Outreach. Outreach must be directed at those populations least
       likely to have access to counseling services. To do so, it may be necessary to broaden the
       target areas. Agencies must ensure meaningful access for individuals with Limited
       English Proficiency by providing translation and interpretive services in languages other
       than English in order to reach a greater variety of racial and ethnic groups. See Paragraph
       3-2 and 3-7 above for more information. Outreach must ensure effective communication
       with individuals with disabilities, including through the provision of appropriate auxiliary
       aids and services. See 24 CFR § 214.103(1)(3) and 24 CFR § 8.6.

3-10   Debt Management or Liguidation. HUD considers debt management or liquidation
       service as an activity apart from the housing counseling process. HUD recognizes that a
       client may enter a debt management plan as a result of housing counseling.
       Administration of client debt management plans is not housing counseling and must not



                                                                                                   39
                                                                                    Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                            04/2024


       be included in an agency’s housing counseling work plan or counseling activity
       reporting.

3-11   Knowledge of HUD Programs. The agency's housing counselors must have working
       knowledge of HUD housing and fair housing programs including FHA Single Family
       mortgage programs, other State and local programs available in the community,
       Consolidated Plans and the local housing market. The staff should be familiar with
       housing programs offered by conventional mortgage lenders and other housing or related
       programs that may assist their clients in accordance with 214 CFR § 214.103(h). HUD
       staff may briefly assess an agency’s staff knowledge of HUD programs when conducting
       on-site performance reviews.

3-12   Referrals to Community Resources. Agencies must demonstrate that they have
       established working relationships with private and public service agencies to assist clients
       when additional services not offered by the agency are needed.

3-13   Discussion of For-Profit Entities. Helping clients resolve their housing problems may
       include a discussion about certain for-profit entities such as lenders or real estate
       professionals. If a client requests information about for-profit housing-related entities or
       asks questions about a particular for-profit entity, or if the counselor feels that having
       information about a specific for-profit entity is in the best interest of the client, the
       agency may discuss the entity, but must also identify and discuss a minimum of three
       reasonable alternative for-profit entities, if available.

       Counselors must not advise or steer clients to any specific for-profit entities. Their role is
       to simply make clients aware of their options. Safeguards and disclosures must be used as
       described in Chapter 6, Paragraphs 6-1(F), (G) and (H) of this Handbook, to avoid a
       conflict of interest. See Chapter 4, Paragraphs 4-1(1), 4-1(J) and 4-2(H) of this Handbook,
       for more information on discussing lenders with reverse mortgage clients.

3-14   Client Satisfaction Survey. HUD may administer a client survey to solicit feedback from
       housing counseling clients on their experience with the services received from HUD
       participating agencies. Clients may anonymously respond to questions regarding the
       service received from the agency.




                                                                                                      40
                                                                                 Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                         04/2024


              CHAPTER 4. REVERSE MORTGAGE                 HOUSING COUNSELING

4-1   Reverse Mortgages. A reverse mortgage is a mortgage that pays a homeowner loan
      proceeds drawn from accumulated home equity and that requires no repayment until a
      future time.

      Reverse mortgage counseling assists clients who seek to convert equity in their homes
      into income that can be used for any purpose such as, but not limited to, ongoing property
      taxes, property insurance, home repairs and improvements, medical costs, and living
      expenses.

      The requirements in this section apply to housing counseling for reverse mortgages
      generally. Additional specific requirements relating to FHA-insured Home Equity
      Conversion Mortgages (HECM) counseling are introduced in Section 4-2 below and
      covered in detail in Appendix 1: HECM Protocol.

      A. Types of Reverse Mortgages. There are three types of reverse mortgages shown in the
         chart below.

      Single purpose reverse mortgage     Typically offered by state and local government agencies to be
                                          used in only one specific way, for example, home repairs.
      Proprietary reverse mortgage        A reverse mortgage that is not insured by the Federal Housing
                                          Administration.
      Home Equity Conversion               A reverse mortgage insured by the Federal Housing
      Mortgage (HECM)                     Administration.

      B.   Reverse Mortgage Counseling Providers. All housing counseling, including reverse
           mortgage counseling, provided by participating agencies must be performed by a
           HUD certified housing counselor. While HUD certified counselors may provide
           information to clients about proprietary reverse mortgages and provide counseling on
           reverse mortgage default, only counselors who are HUD certified and on the HECM
           Roster can provide HECM counseling and issue a form HUD-92902, Certificate of
           HECM Counseling.

      C.   Group Education or Marketing and Outreach. Participating agencies may provide
           general group education on reverse mortgage financing programs. Agencies are
           encouraged to conduct marketing and outreach to educate clients on various housing
           options.

           The participating agency shall not use group education to address individual client
           needs that require confidentiality and prudent use of private information.

           HECM Counselors may not issue a Certificate of HECM Counseling to a client for
           participation solely in a group education session but may only issue following the
           completion of one-on-one Counseling, as provided in Paragraph 4-2(J) and (K),
           below.


                                                                                                 41
                                                                            Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                    04/2024



D. Reverse Mortgage Counseling Methods. All participating agencies that provide
   reverse mortgage counseling must have the capacity to conduct in-person counseling.
   Counselors must be familiar with state and local requirements for reverse mortgage
   counseling. All agencies are required to provide a thorough and complete session that
   covers all the requirements outlined in this Handbook.

   The agency must indicate the service methodologies that it will provide in its
   approved housing counseling work plan as outlined in Chapter 3, Paragraph 3-2 of
   this Handbook.

   Agencies are required to make reasonable accommodations that may be necessary for
   individuals with disabilities, including with respect to the method of counseling. For
   example, an individual may have a disability-related need for a specific type of virtual
   meeting if in-person counseling is not available, such as a video meeting.

   Additionally, agencies must take appropriate steps to ensure effective communication
   with individuals with disabilities, which means taking appropriate steps that may be
   necessary to ensure that communications with individuals with disabilities are as
   effective as communication with individuals without disabilities. This is often
   provided through the use of appropriate auxiliary aids and services.

   Agencies are also must take reasonable steps to ensure meaningful access to assisted
   programs for persons with limited English proficiency (LEP). Reasonable steps
   include the provision of meaningful language assistance, which may include
   translation of documents and interpretation services.

   1.   In-Person Face to Face. Clients may choose to meet at:

           a.   The agency’s office;

           b.   The client’s residence if service is available from the agency; or

           c.   A mutually agreed upon alternative site, e.g. area offices on aging,
                municipal offices, etc.

   If the agency is unable to accommodate a request for in-person counseling, the
   counselor should refer the client to a local agency providing in-person reverse
   mortgage counseling.

   Counselors should document the client’s location choice in the client’s case file.


   2.   Telephone Counseling, including Use of Virtual Meeting Providers. Participating
        agencies must also define within its work plan the geographic area in which they
        will conduct counseling. HUD permits nationwide counseling if it is defined in
        the agency’s approved work plan.



                                                                                          42
                                                                               Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                       04/2024


          Participating agencies must ensure that any virtual or remote method used allows
          for the session to be conducted in privacy.

          Counselors should document the client’s preferred method of communication in
          the client’s case file, including any reasonable accommodations requested such as
          auxiliary aids, closed captioning, translation services, etc.

E.   Content of Reverse Mortgage Origination Counseling. Counselors providing one-on-
     one reverse mortgage counseling must meet the requirements of Chapter 3, Paragraph
     3-1 (Basic Requirements), Chapter 3, Paragraph 3-5 (Counseling Services), and this
     section of this Handbook, with the exception of the creation of a written action plan,
     which is not required for reverse mortgage counseling.

     HUD encourages counselors to ensure that all one-on-one reverse mortgage
     counseling complies with HECM-related policies in this chapter and in Appendix 1:
     HECM Protocol. This ensures that, though the client is provided with options on a
     variety of reverse mortgage products, the client will receive form HUD-92902,
     Certificate of HECM Counseling as proof that HECM counseling was completed,
     should the client decide to apply for a HECM.

     1.   Information Packet before Reverse Mortgage Counseling. Agencies must provide
          clients with an information packet prior to the reverse mortgage counseling
          session. The client should have at least one day to review the materials and
          prepare questions before the counseling session. In cases where emergency
          counseling is necessary (see 4-1(G) below), the counselor must send the
          information to the client immediately after completing the counseling session and
          document in the file the reason for the emergency session. The counselor must
          document when they provided the information packet to the client. Counselors
          must confirm the client's receipt and review of the advance information.

          All communications should include instructions on how to contact the agency via
          TTY, relay, or other assistive means for persons with hearing impairments. All
          communications should also inform clients and prospective clients about
          translation or interpreter services. In addition, all communications should ask
          clients and prospective clients whether they need assistance for mobility
          impairments, visual or hearing impairments, or other disabilities. In situations
          where a client requires an interpreter or translator, the agencies must utilize one
          that is under direct control of the agency.

          The information packet can be sent via regular mail, priority mail, fax, or email.

          The following information must be in the information packet:

              a.   Agency disclosure form and fee schedule for reverse mortgage counseling;




                                                                                                43
                                                                            Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                    04/2024


        b.    “Preparing for Your Counseling Session”- See HECM Protocol
              Attachments;

         c.   Printout of loan comparisons relevant to the client’s situation, to facilitate
              the counseling session;

         d.   Printout of Total Annual Loan Cost (TALC) available on the HUD
              designated calculation software that counselors use to prepare loan
              printouts and TALC printouts;

         e.   Reverse mortgage amortization schedule; and

        f.    Reverse mortgage booklet designated by HUD, in hard-copy form or
              online. Access to the current booklet must be provided to the client on the
              HUD Exchange.

        These items must be provided by the counselor, independent of the lenders’
        documents.

2.   Required Information during Counseling. Counselors must provide clients with all
     the information outlined below. It is the role of the counselor to explain the
     concepts of a reverse mortgage and answer any questions the client may have and
     discuss other options.

     Unless the housing counseling agency is a non-profit legal service or legal aid
     provider and the counselor is licensed to practice law in the subject jurisdiction,
     they must not provide legal advice on any issues during the course of providing
     counseling. In such circumstances, the counselor should refer the client to other
     assistance as appropriate under Chapter 3, Paragraph 3-5, Counseling Services.

     Agencies should make sure their disclosure addresses limitations on legal and
     financial advice.

     Alternatives and Options

     The counselor shall review information on the client’s other options as available
     and appropriate based both on the client’s short and long-term needs.

     Reverse Mortgage Information
     The counselor shall review the following basic information on reverse mortgages
     with each client as applicable to the client’s unique situation:

         a.   This is a loan that must be repaid;

        b.    Rising debt, falling equity;




                                                                                           44
                                                                          Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                  04/2024


        c.   Repayment requirements, including when and how much;

        d.   Obligations, especially property taxes and insurance (Provide a copy of
             the “Reverse Mortgage Borrower Obligations” in Appendix 1);

        e.   Eligible Non-Borrowing Spouse obligations and deferral period (if
             applicable);

        f.   Ineligible Non-Borrowing Spouses (if applicable);

        g.   Mortgage insurance premiums, fees, and fee financing;

        h.   Nonrecourse limits (the ability of a lender to take legal action against the
             borrower for default on the loan);

        i.   Remaining equity (@mplications for Borrower, and Non-Borrowing spouse,
             if applicable, and their heirs);

        j.   Factors that determine loan amounts and loan limits;

        k.   Retention of title and other title issues;

        1.   Impact on public benefits, using HUD’s designated web-based software;

        m. Refinancing a reverse mortgage (if applicable);

        n.   Using reverse mortgages for purchase (if applicable); and

        o.   Relevant homeownership counseling topics, including the providing of
             home inspection materials, if applicable.

Financial Implications

The counselor shall review the financial implications of reverse mortgages to help
clients assess whether the reverse mortgage proceeds will be sufficient to meet their
financial obligations, including taxes and any required insurance.

The counselor may reference printouts, which can include proprietary loan
comparisons if such products are available, as appropriate. Financial overview and
printout topics may include:

   a.   Cash advances including limitation of initial disbursements and itemized
        costs;

   b.   Individual loan amortization schedule(s);




                                                                                            45
                                                                          Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                  04/2024


     c.   Potential impact due to financial assessment requirements;

     d.   Future projections and comparisons (including total cash advances, total dollar
          costs, leftover equity, and total annual average rates); and

     e.   Loan and annuity combinations (counselors may give clients the brochure
          entitled “Using a Reverse Mortgage to Buy an Annuity” in Appendix | and
          advise them that they are not required to purchase an insurance, annuity, or
          other similar product).

Client Concerns and Questions

Next Steps and Follow-Up after the Reverse Mortgage Counseling Session

Counselors must make a reasonable effort to have follow-up communication with the
client, when possible, to assure that the client is progressing toward their housing
goal, to modify or terminate housing counseling, and to learn and report outcomes.
For all reverse mortgage counseling clients, the counselor must ensure that the
follow-up meets the requirements of Chapter 3 and is documented to reflect whether
the client needs additional assistance, obtained a reverse mortgage, or utilized other
options discussed during the counseling session.

The counselor must explain to the client follow-up process and next steps, including:

          a.   Ongoing access to counselor and other resources;

          b.   Instructions to client to make and keep copies of all documents,

          c.   Loan processing and expected timelines; and

          d.   The counselor-signed copy of the Certificate of HECM Counseling, form
               HUD-92902, if HECM counseling was provided.

3.   Reverse Mortgage Printouts. In addition to any lender-provided printouts,
     counselors must utilize and provide to the client computer printouts generated by
     HUD-designated online tools available to all HECM counselors. HUD-designated
     calculation software, as described in Appendix 1, provide independent and
     unbiased calculations on the maximum funds available to borrowers, provides
     payment plan options, amortization schedules, and Total Annual Loan Cost
     Calculations (TALC).

     Using the HUD-designated calculation software, counselors will be able to show
     clients how variations in different reverse mortgage products may affect clients’
     access to equity, amortization schedules, loan balances, and/or loan costs. The
     HUD-designated calculation software will not generate the principal limits for any
     specific proprietary reverse mortgage product.



                                                                                         46
                                                                                Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                        04/2024



          Counselors may discuss loan printouts and amortization schedules given by
          lenders to clients. Counselors should answer questions about the loan printouts
          and product features. Counselors should provide a balanced view by only
          providing individually customized loan printouts to clients on:

             a.   HECM loans that are widely available from a majority of HECM lenders;

             b.   Proprietary reverse mortgage products, if available, that are broadly
                  offered by reverse mortgage lenders; and

                  Proprietary reverse mortgage or HECM products that have been offered to
                  that client by a reverse mortgage lender.

          The printouts should include:

             a.   Future remaining credit line projections based on credit line draws
                  specified by the client (if the client selects a credit line);

                  A comparison of estimated loan details at closing;

                  Projected loan comparisons at various future times, including projected
                  figures for total cash received, cash remaining, and total cost expressed in
                  terms of total dollars and a total annual average rate; and

                  Amortization projections for selected products with year-by-year details
                  (the loans negatively amortize as the loan balance increases, equity
                  decreases).

             When sending documents to the client, the counselor may send these
             documents by regular mail, priority mail, fax, or email, taking care to protect
             sensitive client information and making reasonable accommodations as
             necessary for individuals with disabilities.

F.   Fraud Prevention and Elder Abuse. Counselors must educate prospective reverse
     mortgage borrowers about how to avoid becoming victims of fraud. Counselors must
     cover the following with their reverse mortgage clients:

     1.   The potential of mortgage fraud with the borrowers;

     2.   The standard ways in which borrowers can access their loan proceeds;

          Warnings against signing over their funds to loan officers or other parties
          involved in the mortgage transaction;




                                                                                               47
                                                                          Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                  04/2024


 4.   Recognizing and reporting predatory lending practices; and

 5.   Recognizing and reporting potential elder abuse to appropriate authorities.

 HUD may monitor compliance through performance reviews, mystery shoppers, and
 other tools.

. Emergency Counseling. Emergency counseling is reverse mortgage counseling that
  occurs without the client scheduling an appointment or receiving the reverse
  mortgage information packet in advance.

 The counselor must document the client file regarding the meeting of the
 requirements for emergency counseling noted below. The circumstances listed below
 are the only emergency counseling situations permitted. The client may receive
 emergency counseling by any approved counseling method if:

      e   The client is in imminent danger of losing his or her home and can provide
          supporting documentation; or

      e   The client requires impending medical treatment or emergency in home care,
          and they are not able to obtain treatment or care without obtaining loan
          proceeds from a reverse mortgage.

. Prohibition on Dissemination of Specific Loan Product Cost Information. A
  counselor must not provide information on the specific costs charged by any
  individual lender on reverse mortgages. Costs may vary due to variables like market
  conditions and individual client circumstances.

 The counselor should tell the client that the lender is the best source of information
 about the origination and servicing fees and third-party closing costs they charge. If a
 client presents a counselor with detailed information on a variety of loans offered by
 multiple lenders, the counselor may help the client compare the costs but must remain
 impartial and make no product recommendations.

 HUD does have limitations on third-party charges for HECMs. See Appendix 1,
 Section V.C: HECM     Protocol, Loan Features for information on limitations on
 charges on HECMs.

 Lender Steering and Disclosure. Housing counseling agencies must provide unbiased
 and impartial advice based on an evaluation of the client’s individual circumstances.
 Housing counselors must not promote, represent, recommend, or speak for any
 specific lender, or presume that the client wants to contact a lender.

 Upon the client’s request, the counselor may provide a list of HUD-approved Reverse
 Mortgage Lenders that is adjusted geographically for the client. The counselor may


                                                                                        48
                                                                                      Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                              04/2024


           also include in the list alternative or proprietary reverse mortgage products, subject to
           the requirements of Chapter 3, Paragraph 3-2. Counselors should not provide any
           information on which lenders are offering specific HECM variations or proprietary
           products.

           The agency must provide reverse mortgage clients a disclosure form acknowledging
           any relationship or agreements between the agency and any lending institutions and
           retain in client files. This disclosure must meet all the requirements for disclosure
           outlined in Chapter 6 of this Handbook.

      J.   Counselor Steering by Lenders. Counselors should be aware that reverse mortgage
           lenders may not steer, direct, recommend or otherwise encourage a client to seek the
           services of any one particular counselor or counseling agency.

      K. Reverse Mortgage Client File Record Retention. Chapter 5 of this Handbook lists all
         information that must be maintained for the reverse mortgage client's file and the
         duration of record retention. HUD recommends that where the counselor is aware of a
           client case that is involved in litigation, the file should be maintained until litigation is
           concluded.

      L.   Concerns or Complaints Regarding a Reverse Mortgage Lender or Counselors. If a
           consumer, lender, counselor, or representative from the housing industry has a
           concern regarding housing counseling, they should contact HUD’s Office of Housing
           counseling at Housing.Counseling @hud.gov.

           Complaints about HECM lenders (origination or servicing) should be sent to
           Answers @hud.gov or 1-800-225-5432. In addition, complaints should be filed with
           CFPB at consumerfinance.gov/complaint or call 855-411-2372.

4-2   Home Equity Conversion Mortgages (HECM). This section provides general guidance on
      HECMs. In addition to the requirements for reverse mortgage counseling detailed in
      Section 4-1, counselors providing HECM counseling must comply with HECM-related
      policies in this chapter and in Appendix 1: HECM Protocol and any updated guidance
      published by FHA and/or HUD’s Office of Housing Counseling.

      A. HECM Features. FHA insures a type of reverse mortgage known as a Home Equity
           Conversion Mortgage (HECM). Section 255(d) of the National Housing Act states
           that all prospective HECM Borrowers and Non-Borrowing Spouses must receive
           reverse mortgage counseling consistent with the information required under NHA §
           255(f) as implemented at 24 CFR § 206.41 before the Borrowers obtains a HECM.

           This counseling must be provided by counselors who are on the HUD-approved
           HECM Counselor roster and working for a participating agency. Only counselors
           active on the HECM Counselor Roster may issue a form HUD-92902, Certificate of
           HECM Counseling.




                                                                                                      49
                                                                               Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                       04/2024


B.   HECM Counseling Providers

     1.   Housing Counseling Agencies. For an agency to provide HECM Counseling, that
          agency must employ a HECM counselor and include HECM counseling in its
          HUD-approved housing counseling work plan, including the specific geographic
          areas the agency will provide such counseling. HECM counselors must also
          comply with the certification requirements in 24 CFR 214.103(n).

          An agency may provide telephone counseling nationwide provided this is
          included in the housing counseling work plan but must meet the requirements of
          Paragraph 4-1(C) of this Chapter. All agencies must meet applicable state and
          local requirements. For example, some states require that counseling be conducted
          in-person or that the counseling agency be domiciled within the state.

          HUD may include, as part of its agency quality control measures, “mystery
          shopping” and other methods of assessing the quality of housing counseling
          services in which trained personnel act as prospective clients, and other actions as
          determined by HUD.

          HUD HECM Counselors. Only counselors active on HUD’S HECM Counselor
          Roster may provide HECM counseling and issue form HUD-92902, Certificate of
          HECM Counseling.

          To be placed on the HECM         Counselor Roster, a counselor must meet the
          following regulatory criteria:

              a.   Is employed by a HUD-approved housing counseling agency or an
                   affiliate of a HUD-approved intermediary or State housing finance agency,

             b.    Successfully passed the standardized HECM Counselor exam
                   administered by HUD or a party selected by HUD within the prior three
                   years;

              c.   Received training and education related to HECM within the prior two
                   years;

              d.   Have access to technology that enables HUD to track the results of the
                   counseling offered to each HECM      client;

              e.   Is not listed on:
                        1. The General Service Administration's Suspension or Debarment
                           List or Excluded Parties List,
                      2.   HUD's Limited Denial of Participation List, or
                      3.   HUD's Credit Alert Interactive Response System;

              f.   Successfully pass the HUD housing counseling certification exam; and,



                                                                                            50
                                                                                  Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                          04/2024



                 g.   Complies with registration, license, or certification requirements of the
                      state or local authority, as applicable.

C.   HECM        Counselor Continuing Education and Training. To remain on the HUD-
     approved HECM Roster, a counselor must:

                 a.   Be employed by a HUD-approved housing counseling agency or an
                      affiliate of a HUD-approved intermediary or State housing finance agency,

                 b.   Provide to HUD proof of HECM-related training or continuing education
                      every two years; and

                 c.   Pass the HECM exam every three years.

     These timeframes are effective from the date the counselor is approved and accepted
     for the HECM roster. It is the counselor’s responsibility to be aware of their roster
     approval date.

     HECM counselors are not required to retake the HUD Housing Counselor
     certification exam required by 24 CFR § 203.214(n).

     For a continuing education course to be acceptable for the purpose of meeting the
     regulatory training and education requirement, the course should meet the following
     criteria:


                 a.   Cover HECM-related topics in the areas of counseling, loan origination,
                      servicing or HECM    default;

                 b.   Have a method to track course attendance and completion;

                 c.   Issue a certificate of completion for attendees;

                 d.   May be conducted in a classroom or alternative online format; and

                 e.   May include a course final exam.

D. Use of FHA Connection to Manage Roster. Participating agencies and counselors
   must use FHA Connection to manage their HUD Certification and HECM roster
   status.

E.   Applying for the HECM Counselor Roster. Detailed instructions on how to apply for
     the HECM         Counselor Roster are available on the Office of Housing Counseling’s
     HECM        website.




                                                                                                  51
                                                                               Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                       04/2024


F.   Maintaining the HECM Counselor Roster Profile. All counselors must maintain their
     profiles on the HUD HECM Counselor Roster. This includes the responsibility to
     make updates to the following within the timeframes set in Chapter 5, where
     applicable:

              e     completed continuing education courses;
              e     the HUD-Approved Counseling Agency where they are employed; and
              e     contact information including the most current email address.

     Detailed instructions on how to update counselor profiles are available on the Office
     of Housing Counseling’s HECM website.

G.   Removal from the HECM         Counselor Roster. HUD      can remove counselors from the
     Roster for cause, which may include:

     1.   Providing misrepresentations or fraudulent statements;,

     2.   Misconduct during the HECM exam;

     3.   Promoting, representing, or recommending a specific lender;

     4.   Failure to pass the HUD Housing Counselors Certification Exam;

     5.   Failure to comply with education and training requirements;

     6.   Failure to respond to HUD inquiries and requests for documentation within a
          reasonable time;

     7.   Failure to comply with applicable fair housing and civil rights requirements;

     8.   Failure to comply with applicable statutes, regulations, or HUD requirements;

     9.   Failure to provide information to clients on:

                    options other than HECMs,
             oP




                    the financial implications of a HECM,
                    the tax consequences of a HECM, and
             ao




                    any other information required by HUD or requested by the applicant;

     10. Failure to maintain registration, license, or certification requirements of the
          applicable state or local authority;

     11. Failure to provide satisfactory counseling to HECM applicants; or

     12. Any other reason HUD determines serious enough to justify an administrative
          action.



                                                                                               52
                                                                         Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                 04/2024



 HUD will provide the HECM counselor with written notice of the proposed removal
 with the reason for and the duration of the proposed removal. The counselor has 30
 days from the date of receipt of the notice to submit a written appeal and, if desired, a
 request for a conference.

 HUD will review the appeal and respond within 30 days after receiving the appeal, or
 if the HECM   counselor has requested a conference, within 30 days after the
 conference.
 If the counselor does not submit a timely written response to HUD’s notice of
 proposed removal, the removal will be effective 31 days after the date of HUD’s
 initial removal notice. If the counselor submits a written response, and the removal
 decision is affirmed or modified as a result, the removal will be effective on the date
 of HUD’s notice affirming or modifying the initial removal decision.

 The maximum time period for removal from the roster is twelve months from the
 effective date of removal. A counselor who has been removed must apply for
 reinstatement to the HECM Roster after the period of removal has expired. HUD may
 require the counselor to retake and pass the HECM exam.

. HECM Counselor Steering by Lenders. HECM counselors should be aware that
  lenders may not steer, direct, recommend, or otherwise encourage a client to seek the
 services of any one particular counselor or counseling agency.

 HECM lenders are required to provide a list that meets certain requirements stated in
 HUD Handbook 4000.1, H.B.1.a. Required Referral for HECM           Counseling.

 Should the counselor determine that a lender is steering, directing, recommending, or
 encouraging a client to seek their or their agencies’ services, the counselor must
 notify the Office of Housing Counseling.

 Group Education or Marketing and Outreach. Agencies may provide general reverse
 mortgage, including HECM, program information to clients through group education
 or marketing and outreach.

 The agency shall not issue the Certificate of HECM Counseling, form HUD-92902, to
 a client who attends only a group education or marketing and outreach session but
 may only issue following the required one-on-one counselling, as provided in
 Paragraph 4-2(J) and (K), below.

 In-Person One-on-One Counseling. To meet the statutory requirements for obtaining
 a HECM, the prospective borrower and other parties requiring counseling must
 receive one-on-one HECM counseling and be issued the form HUD-92902,
 Certificate of HECM Counseling. The counselor issuing the Certificate of HECM
 Counseling must be on the FHA HECM roster.




                                                                                           53
                                                                               Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                       04/2024


         Counselors are permitted and encouraged to provide the HECM counseling to a
         prospective borrower’s heirs. While FHA prefers that all prospective HECM
         Borrowers and Non-Borrowing spouses participate in face-to-face interviews with a
         HECM counselor, this procedure may create a hardship for some prospective
         borrowers, particularly those living in rural areas or with limited mobility.

         HUD will allow prospective HECM borrowers the option of utilizing the methods
         described in 4-1D, Reverse Mortgage Counseling Methods, to complete mandatory
         counseling.

         Counselors should check state and local requirements regarding acceptable methods
         of HECM counseling. Similarly, HUD will allow prospective HECM borrowers
         alternative HUD-approved options of communication when working with HUD-
         approved HECM lenders to complete loan origination activities.

       . Content of One-on-One Counseling. HECM counselors must meet the requirements
         of Chapter 3, Paragraph 3-1 (Basic Requirements), and Chapter 3, Paragraph 3-5
         (Counseling Services). Additionally, HECM counselors must meet the requirements
         of Appendix 1, HECM Protocol.

       . HECM    Counseling Certificate. Form HUD-92902, Certificate of HECM       Counseling,
         is used for the HECM Counseling Certificate. A HECM Counseling Certificate is
         issued through a system designated by HUD, to demonstrate to the lender that the
         statutorily required counseling was provided. No alterations to this form are
         authorized.

         Issuing a certificate does not indicate whether the counseling agency recommends or
         does not recommend the client for a HECM or proprietary reverse mortgage.

         Other reverse mortgage products and programs may also require a certification of
         reverse mortgage counseling. The counseling agency’s issuing of a Certificate of
         HECM Counseling attests only to the fact that the client attended and participated in
         the required HECM counseling, that the HECM counselor provided statutorily
         required counseling for a HECM, and is not intended to satisfy the counseling
         requirements for other proprietary reverse mortgages.

4-3   Fees for HECM and Reverse Mortgage Counseling. HUD-approved housing counseling
      agency or an affiliate of a HUD-approved intermediary or State housing finance agency
      providing HECM and reverse mortgage counseling may charge a fee for these counseling
      services as long as the cost:

                e   is reasonable and customary;
                e   is commensurate with services provided;
                e   does not create a financial hardship for the client;




                                                                                                 54
                                                          Handbook 7610.1
                                                                  04/2024


if for default or homeless counseling services, meets the requirements of
Chapter 7, Paragraph 7-5, Fees for Housing Counseling and Related
Services; and
if for HECM counseling, meets the other requirements of HECM
regulations.




                                                                            55
                                                                                  Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                          04/2024


                     CHAPTER 5. RECORDKEEPING               AND REPORTING

5-1   Introduction. All participating agencies must comply with applicable recordkeeping and
      reporting requirements including, 24 CFR §214.315, §214.317, and 2 CFR Part 200, as
      well as those reporting requirements contained in applicable NOFOs, grant agreements
      and HUD Housing Notices to participating agencies. All client files must be easily
      accessible to HUD for monitoring and auditing purposes.

5-2   Recordkeeping System. Each participating agency must maintain a recordkeeping system
      so that client files (electronic or a combination of electronic and paper) can be reviewed
      and annual activity data for the agency can be verified, reported and analyzed. The
      system must permit HUD to easily access all necessary information for a complete
      performance review. This system must meet the requirements of 2 CFR part 200, 24 CFR
      § 1.6 (Compliance Information), and 24 CFR part 121 (Collection of Data).

5-3   Client Management System (CMS). A CMS is an existing online tool that automates
      much of the housing counseling process, including client intake, file maintenance,
      financial and housing affordability analysis, outreach, client notification, and reporting.
      See Chapter 1, Paragraph 1-4 (D) of this Handbook. All Participating Agencies are
      required to use a CMS that interfaces with HUD’s databases for the collection and
      reporting of agency and client-level data.

      To interface with HUD’s database, each participating agency must use a CMS with the
      following capabilities:

      A. Required Data. Capture all mandatory data elements listed on the HUD Housing
         Counseling website for one or more unique types of counseling and education. This
         data listing can be found in the latest interface control document.

      B.   Text Fields. Include text fields in which counselors can input an activity log and
           client action plan; and

      C.   File Access. Allow HUD on-site, read-only access, in coordination with Participating
           Agencies, to review entire electronic client files for the purpose of conducting agency
           monitoring.

5-4   File Retention Requirements. Financial records, supporting documents, statistical records
      and all other pertinent records, in both electronic and paper form, must be retained for a
      period of three years from the date the case file was terminated for housing counseling.

      If the participating agency is a recipient of a HUD housing counseling grant award, then
      the client files attributed to the housing counseling grant must be retained for a period of
      three years from the date the final grant invoice was paid by HUD.

      HUD reserves the right to request documentation relating to compliance with the
      requirements of this Handbook.



                                                                                                    56
                                                                                  Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                          04/2024



5-5   Client Data Collection. Race, Ethnicity, Religion, Sex, Familial Status, Income,
      Disability Data. The Fair Housing act, at 42 U.S.C. § 3608(e)(6), in relevant part, states
      that the Secretary of HUD shall annually “report to the Congress, and make available to
      the public, data on the race, color, religion, sex (including sexual orientation and gender
      identity), national origin, age, handicap, and family characteristics of persons and
      households who are applicants for, participants in, or beneficiaries or potential
      beneficiaries of, programs administered by the Department.

      To enable the Secretary to fulfill this requirement:

      A. Race, Ethnicity and Income Data. Participating Agencies must report race, ethnicity
         and income data to HUD for recipients of counseling and education, regardless of
         funding source for the service provided. Participating Agencies must maintain current
           and accurate databases on the race, ethnicity and income of their counseling clients
           and education participants, unless otherwise not required by law.

           Limited English Proficiency (LEP): Individuals who are Limited English Proficient
           are persons who, as a result of national origin, do not speak English as their primary
           language and who have a limited ability to speak, read, write, or understand English.
           Participating Agencies must report to HUD the LEP status for all recipients of
           counseling and education, regardless of funding source.

           Rural Area Status. Participating agencies that serve rural clientele, as defined by the
           U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) at 7 CFR. § 3550.10, are required to report
           this data to HUD for all recipients of counseling and education, regardless of funding
           source.

5-6   Confidentiality of Records and Credit Reports.


      A.   Confidentiality. Participating agencies must take affirmative measures to protect the
           confidentiality of their clients’ personal and financial information, including
           electronic and paper records, CMS or other electronic system data, and credit reports,
           whether the information is received from the client or from another source. Hard
           copies of client files must be kept in locked filing cabinets and electronic files must
           be kept secure and accessed only by authorized individuals.

           Each participating agency must ensure that neither the agency nor their CMS vendor
           discloses any confidential client information to anyone, except authorized agency
           personnel and HUD, or unless otherwise required by law. Participating Agencies must
           also ensure that their CMS maintains the confidentiality of this information as well.
           Note that recipients of housing counseling services may expressly grant permission to
           disclose of otherwise confidential and protected information.




                                                                                                    57
                                                                            Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                    04/2024


 HUD staff may not disclose to anyone, except to authorized HUD personnel, the
 information contained in individual case files that may be sampled as part of
 monitoring or received as part of reporting.

 Failure to maintain the confidentiality of, or improper use of, credit reports may
 subject the agency to penalties pursuant to 24 CFR Part 16.

. Use of Credit Report Information. If a Participating Agency contracts with a credit
 bureau for credit reports, whether or not disclosure can be made depends on the terms
  of the contract between the Participating Agency and the credit-reporting bureau.

  Counselors must secure a client’s authorization prior to ordering a credit report.

. Breach of Confidentiality. Participating agencies must comply with all applicable
  privacy laws, and, if needed, seek legal counsel on the pertinent laws. Participating
  Agencies must also provide assurances that confidential data will not be shared with
  any entities other than HUD, the participating agency, or other federal agencies as
  required by law, unless explicitly instructed to do so by the client themselves, and in
  the case of agency information, the housing counseling agency.

  1.   Personally Identifiable Information. Participating Agencies may not release
       Personally Identifiable Information to unauthorized recipients.

       a.   Personally Identifiable Information (PII) means information which can be
            used to distinguish or trace an individual’s identity, for example, name, social
            security number, etc., alone or when combined with other personal or
            identifying information which is linked or linkable to a specific individual,
            such as date and place of birth, mother’s maiden name, etc.

       b.   Sensitive Personally Identifiable Information (SPIT) means PII that when lost,
            compromised or disclosed could substantially harm an individual, for
            example, Social Security or driver’s license numbers and bank account or
            credit card numbers.

  2.   Compliance. Participating Agencies should take the following steps to help ensure
       compliance with the Privacy Act requirements and other applicable privacy-
       related laws:

       a.   Limit collection and use of PII. Do not create, use, collect or maintain
            sensitive PII without proper authorization. Collect only the PII that is needed
            for the purposes for which it is collected. PII must only be maintained for as
            long as is necessary to accomplish the purpose;

       b.   Manage access to Sensitive PII;




                                                                                              58
                                                                                 Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                         04/2024


                 Only share or discuss SPII with those who have a need to know to perform
                 their official duties;

                 Do not distribute or release SPII to others except where there is authorization
                 to release to specific individuals;

                 For client files where multiple parties are involved, redact SPII/PII before
                 sharing file with client(s);

                 Before discussing SPII on the telephone, confirm the identity of the individual
                 or authorized person specified by the client and inform them that the
                 discussion will include SPII. Do not leave messages containing SPII on
                 voicemail;

                 Avoid discussing SPII if there are unauthorized persons in adjacent areas who
                 may overhear the conversation;

                 Hold meetings in secure spaces if SPII will be discussed;

                 Ensure confidentiality of hard copy and electronic files containing Sensitive
                 PII. Clearly label all files containing SPII and lock hard copy files containing
                 SPII in secured file cabinets. Do not leave SPII in open areas unattended.
                 Destroy hard-copy PII by shredding. Protection of electronic files includes
                 encryption, implementing of enhanced authentication mechanisms such as
                 two-factor authentication, limiting the number of people allowed access to the
                 files; and deleting electronic PII by the emptying computer “recycle bin’; and

                 Ensure confidentiality of electronic transmission of Sensitive PII via fax,
                 email, etc. When sending by fax, verify that the intended recipient is available.
                 When sending SPI by email or other unsecured information system, ensure
                 the information and attachments are encrypted. Encryption is mandatory for e-
                 mail transmission of SPII to HUD personnel.

             Notification and Incident Response. Participating Agencies must promptly report
             all suspected compromises of PII or SPII to their HUD Point of Contact (POC)
             and HUD’s National Help Desk at 1-888-297-8689

5-7   Counseling File. The housing counseling agency must maintain a separate confidential
      file documenting each unique, distinct provision of counseling services provided to a
      client, as described in 24 CFR §214.300 and Chapter 3 of this Handbook. The client file
      may be for an individual or household or for a group of clients with the same housing
      need, such as tenants of an apartment complex with the same complaint against their
      landlord. The file may be paper or electronic, or a combination of both. The file must
      include the following items:




                                                                                                   59
                                                                            Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                    04/2024


. Required Data. All required fields are listed on the Housing Counseling website. The
  CMS website contains the Agency Reporting Module (ARM) Requirements listing of
  all required data fields;

. File Number. A file number for the unique specific counseling service provided.

. Financial and Housing Affordability Analysis. Evidence of an analysis of the client’s
  unique financial and housing affordability situation must be documented in the client
  file in accordance with Chapter 3, Paragraph 3-5 (D) of this Handbook.

. Activity Log/Client History Log. A recording of the date, time, duration, and
  description of each interaction or activity performed on behalf of, and by, the client.

. Action Plan. For all counseling, except for reverse mortgage counseling, the client
  file must include an action plan. The housing counselor prepares an individual
  housing counseling action plan. The plan clearly identifies the client’s need or
  problem, and outlines what the agency and the client will do in order to meet the
  client’s housing goal(s). A copy of the action plan must be given to the client and
  maintained in the client’s file.

. Follow-up. A record of all follow-up communication efforts, as outlined in Chapter 3,
  Paragraph 3-5(F) of this Handbook, with the client must be documented. This
  documentation should also include an account of all written and verbal attempts made
  to contact clients, when possible, in order to conduct follow-up sessions. In certain
  cases, if follow-up with a client is not possible, the client file should include
  documentation stating why the follow-up was not possible.

. Pertinent Documents. Pertinent documents refers to copies (electronic or paper) of
  records or correspondence received from the client or created on their behalf and
  related to the housing counseling services provided.

. Agency Disclosure to Clients. A copy of the disclosure statement provided to each
  individual client or a notation of the date that the disclosure statement was verbally
  provided during live video or telephone counseling. The wording of the disclosure
  statement must comply with see Chapter 6, Paragraph 6-1(G) of this Handbook.

  Termination. The Participating Agency must document in the client’s file when
  housing counseling services are terminated. The housing counselor must notate the
  client’s file with the date and cause or explanation of termination. Client files must
  not remain open indefinitely. (See Chapter 3, Paragraph 3-5(H) of this Handbook for
  additional information on client termination).

  Results. Documentation of the results of counseling.

. Fees. If applicable, Participating Agencies must document the amount and source of
  fees paid by clients or other parties such as lenders, except in the case of HECM



                                                                                            60
                                                                            Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                    04/2024


  lenders. See NHA     section 255(d)(2). The counseling file of each client charged fees
 must document that the client was advised of the amount of the housing counseling
 fee and the agency’s policy for a reduction or waiver of fees prior to the provision of
 counseling services. The file must also demonstrate that the counseling agency
 assessed the client’s ability to pay and reduced or waived the fee if necessary, in
 accordance with the written procedures established in the agency’s HUD-approved
 Housing Counseling Work Plan. If the client is unwilling to provide the information
 necessary to assess their ability to pay, the counselor must document the client file to
 reflect the client’s refusal to provide the requested information. For more information
 on fees for housing counseling and related services, see Chapter 7, Paragraph 7-5.

. HUD Housing Counseling Grant Activity. If the client’s housing counseling services
  were partially or fully funded by a HUD housing counseling grant funding, document
  the funding source(s), time spent counseling, and the amounts to which the
 counseling activity is attributed. Grantees are prohibited from receiving duplicate
 payments for the same counseling activity. If a client is charged a fee, the file must
 also state the amount charged in addition to the amount charged to the HUD grant,
 and other funding sources, when applicable.

. Discussion of Alternatives. A list of any service providers, product vendors, products,
  features, services or properties about which information was discussed with the client.
  (See Chapter 6, Paragraph 6-1(1)

. Client Authorization to Order Credit Reports. Documentation indicating client
  authorization to order a credit report, if applicable.

. Miscellaneous. Other information obtained during the intake and subsequent housing
  counseling session(s) not mentioned above, which is relevant to the housing
  counseling services provided to the client.

  Reverse Mortgage Counseling. Additional documentation required for reverse
  mortgage client files:

  1.   List of people other than the borrower(s) that attended the reverse mortgage
       counseling session and a description of their relationship to the client(s);

  2.   Signed and dated HECM counseling certificate, if applicable;

  3.   Client Authorization. If applicable, the file should include documentation of the
       client’s authorization to send a copy of the counseling certificate to a third party,
       such as a lender. The counselor must not directly or indirectly steer or appear to
       steer the client to a particular lender;

  4.   Power of Attorney or other documents relating to legal competency, if applicable;
       and




                                                                                               61
                                                                                     Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                             04/2024


           5.   Total Annual Loan Cost Analysis

                a.    Amortization schedules for reverse mortgage loan options;

                b.    Notation of any brochures or handouts on the reverse mortgage lending
                      process, procedures, timelines, reverse mortgage lenders, and/or alternatives
                      to a reverse mortgage provided to client, and

                c.    Documentation demonstrating that all required counseling content and
                      information (see Chapter 4) was provided.

      Q.   HUD       Certification. The client file must include the name and certification ID number
           of the HUD Certified Housing Counselor. Additionally, HUD Certified Housing
           Counselors who provide HECM counseling must also meet the HECM Roster
           certification requirements at 24 CFR 206, subpart E and as outlined in Chapter 4 of
           this Handbook.

5-8   Group Education File. The participating agency must maintain a separate confidential file
      for each course provided. The file may be electronic or paper, or both. The file must
      include the items identified below. An individual file does not need to be established for
      each group education attendee. However, if a client has an existing individual file and
      attends a group education workshop, the client’s participation in the workshop must be
      documented in his/her counseling file.

      A.   Group File Number. A file number identifying the group education workshop session.

      B.   Data. All required fields which may be found on HUD’s website in the latest
           Interface Control Document.

      C.   HUD Housing Counseling Grant Activity. A record of the activity and amount that
           was funded by a HUD Housing Counseling Program grant funds, when applicable. If
           any costs were paid for with such funds, document the funding source or sources and
           amounts to which the group activity is attributed. If the Grantee charges both the
           HUD Housing Counseling Program grant and another funding source for the group
           education, the group file must clearly demonstrate the total cost of the activity and the
           amounts charged to each source of funding.

      D.   Course Description. Course title, course outline or established curriculum; and
           instructional goals.

      E.   Instructors. Name of each housing counselor, instructor, or presenter.

      F.   Course Logistics. The date, place, and duration of each session.




                                                                                                      62
                                                                                    Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                            04/2024


       G. Participant Information. List of participating households and the race, ethnicity,
            income data, Limited English Proficiency status (LEP), and Rural Area Status, for
            each household.

       H. Agency Disclosure to Client. The disclosure statement provided to each household
            that is relevant to the subject of the session. (See Chapter 6, Paragraph 6-1 (G).

       I.   Fees. Participating Agencies may charge reasonable and customary fees for group
            education, as long as the cost does not create a financial hardship for the client. A
            Participating Agency’s fee schedule must be posted in a prominent place that is easily
            viewed by clients and be available to HUD for review. If applicable, the amount paid
            through group education fees and a copy of the receipt provided to the clients.
            Additionally, document the amount and source of funding from other parties to cover
            the expense of fees. (e.g., lenders).

5-9    Financial Records. Participating agencies must maintain and make available to HUD
       upon request evidence that leveraged funds cited in the participating agency’s grant
       application were actually provided to the agency. Participating agencies must also
       provide evidence that the total housing counseling budget reported by the agency was
       accurate and used for housing counseling purposes.

5-10   Supporting Documentation. Participating agencies must maintain and make available to
       HUD upon request operational expense documentation such as time sheets, paid invoices,
       and payroll records in support of expenses assessed to a HUD housing counseling grant.
       Housing counseling grant or sub-grant recipients must maintain additional documentation
       and must comply with requirements identified in the applicable Notice of Funding
       Opportunity (NOFO) and grant agreement.

5-11   Reports to HUD. Participating agencies must submit complete, accurate and timely
       activity reports. The reports must be submitted through the participating agency’s CMS
       in the format, by the date, and in a manner prescribed by HUD. Participating agencies
       that are also recipients of HUD grant funding are required to submit additional reports as
       described in their grant agreements.

       Participating agencies must comply with the reporting requirements of this Handbook. If
       a Participating Agency fails to comply with the reporting requirements, the
       noncompliance will be documented as a finding in the agency’s performance review
       report or in the agency’s official file maintained by HUD. If the agency fails to submit the
       required reports, the agency may be terminated or placed on an inactive status. HUD may
       take other corrective action as deemed appropriate when agencies are noncompliant with
       reporting requirements.

       A. Required Reports. Participating Agencies must make the following reports:

            1.   Housing Counseling Agency Activity Report. This form HUD-9902 report
                 collects client-level and program-activity data. All Participating Agencies must



                                                                                                    63
                                                                                   Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                           04/2024


                 submit this report quarterly as directed by HUD. See also the Housing Counseling
                 9902 Online Toolkit for assistance completing the form HUD-9902.

            2.   Client-Level Data. Reflects counseling and group education activity with all
                 sources of funding, that must be transmitted to HUD quarterly through the
                 participating agency’s Client Management System (CMS). Client-level data
                 transmitted by the participating agency through its CMS will be compiled and
                 aggregated in HUD’s Housing Counseling System (HCS), where it must be
                 verified by the participating agency.

            3.   Independent Audit. The most recent independent audit of the Participating
                 Agency’s financial records must be made available to HUD during a performance
                 review. Recipients of housing counseling grant funding shall be subject to the
                 audit requirements contained in 2 CFR § 200.501, and must submit to HUD         a
                 copy of the independent audit report within 30 days of completion.

            4.   Other Reports. HUD may require that participating agencies submit additional
                 reports as clarified in this Handbook.

       B.   Additional Reports Required for Housing Counseling Grantees.

            Grantee Activity Reports. Recipients of HUD Housing Counseling Grants are
            required to report activities under the grant award in a format prescribed by HUD and
            within the designated time frames required by the applicable NOFO and grant
            agreement.

5-12   Notification of Agency Updates, Actions Requiring Prior Approval and Required
       Disclosures. Participating Agencies must notify HUD in writing of any required
       disclosures, program or organizational profile changes or changes that impact the
       agency’s purpose or function. These notifications must be in writing and from the
       participating agency’s Authorizing Official or designated agent.

       A.   Certified Counselor Employment Status. Participating Agencies must report to HUD
            whenever a HUD     Certified Housing Counselor is either hired, terminated, or has
            otherwise left their employment within 15 days. Participating Agencies must also
            update FHA Connection to reflect this staff change within the same 15-day period.

       B.   Agency Profile Changes. Participating Agencies must ensure that their current contact
            and profile information is included in the HCS database. Any changes to such
            information must be submitted to the HCS database through the agency’s CMS. In
            addition to reporting changes in contact and profile information through their CMS,
            Participating Agencies must also notify their HUD Point of Contact (POC) of the
            changes through a written communication signed by an authorized officer or agent of
            the agency within 15 days of the occurrence of change. Participating Agencies must
            report any of the following:




                                                                                                     64
                                                                               Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                       04/2024


     1.   The agency loses or changes its either its nonprofit or tax-exempt status.

     2.   The agency no longer complies with Housing Counseling Program requirements
          or any other Federal, state, or local laws.

     3.   Changes to any of the items below:

          a.   Physical and mailing address(es) of the Participating Agency’s main office,
               and/or the address(es) of its Branches or Affiliates. This includes office
               closures or relocations,

               Telephone numbers of the main office, Affiliates, and/or Branches, or

               Staff personnel responsible for the administration of housing counseling
               services such as the housing counselors, management staff, new employees,
               resignations, or terminations of housing counselors. The participating agency
               must update FHA Connection when a HUD certified housing counselor is no
               longer employed by the agency and notify the HUD POC.

     4.   Any other aspect of the participating agency’s purpose or functions that may
          impair its ability to comply with HUD Housing Counseling Program
          requirements, or any applicable terms or conditions of a NOFO or grant
          agreement.

C.   Agency Changes That Require Notification to HUD          or HUD’s   Prior Approval. All
     Participating Agencies must notify HUD in advance of any of the following changes:

          1.   Mergers, acquisitions, or other changes in form or organizational structure
               must be reported no later than sixty (60) days prior to the implementation of
               such changes to the HUD POC.

               In the case of a merger, the new or merged entity may be eligible to receive
               Grant Funds made to the original Grantee, provided they meet Housing
               Counseling Grant NOFO requirements, and are able to receive HUD approval
               as a housing counseling agency.

               a.   The new or merged entity demonstrates that its application, Housing
                    Counseling Work Plan, target community, and personnel provide the
                    services for which the grant was given, to the population identified and
                    must meet the regulatory and NOFO standards for a Participating Agency.

                    Note to grant recipients: If a grantee changes their name or files for a
                    “doing-business-as” designation but does not change any other aspect of
                    the business structure or organizational documents, HUD may modify the
                    grant to reflect the organization’s new name.




                                                                                               65
                                                                                      Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                              04/2024


               2.   Any potential conflicts of interest by a person listed in 24 CFR § 214.303(f)
                    (e.g., director, employee, officer, volunteer) that might result in, or create the
                    appearance of, administering the housing counseling operation for personal or
                    private gain, as described in Chapter 6, Paragraph 6-2 within fifteen (15) days
                    of the occurrence.

               3.   Housing Counseling Work Plan. Changes to a participating agency’s Housing
                    Counseling Work Plan must be in accordance with Chapter 3, Paragraph 3-
                    2(B). For Intermediaries and State Housing Finance Agencies (SHFAs), any
                    changes to the agency’s housing counseling network, Branches and Affiliates,
                    whether or not funded by a HUD housing counseling grant, must be reported
                    to the HUD POC.

                    SHFAs that do not apply for HUD housing counseling funding or do not
                    receive a HUD housing counseling grant funds must notify the HUD Point of
                    Contact (POC) of their intent to continue participation in HUD’s Housing
                    Counseling Program and submit a form HUD-9900 Housing Counseling
                    Program Application to the Office of Housing Counseling by email to
                    housing.counseling @ hud. gov.

5-13   Failure to Comply with Recordkeeping and Reporting Requirements. Failure to comply
       with any of HUD’s housing counseling recordkeeping and reporting requirements could
       result in delayed payment of vouchers under a HUD housing counseling grant; the
       grantee’s forfeiture of all remaining funds in the grant account; the grantee’s future
       housing counseling grant applications being adversely rated because of this failure;
       placement in inactive status, or termination of the agency’s approved or participating
       status and deletion from the list of HUD-approved and participating agencies. For further
       guidance, please see Chapter 2, Paragraphs 2-2.

5-14   HUD Review and Analysis of Agency Reports. HUD’s Office of Housing Counseling
       will use the agencies’ reports as follows:

       A. Monitoring. HUD’s Office of Housing Counseling retains all reports for reviewing
          and monitoring the agency's program participation and compliance under a HUD
          housing counseling grant program, if applicable.

       B.   Performance Indicators and Program Appropriations. Annually, HUD’s Office of
            Housing Counseling may make available to the public, through HUD’s website, data
            regarding program activity.

            Data obtained from agency reports will be used to demonstrate the impact of the
            housing counseling program; to justify annual appropriations; and to develop and
            report on performance indicators and efficiency measures.

       C.   Grant Application Scoring. Agency reports will be used in the scoring of HUD
            housing counseling grant applications.



                                                                                                         66
                                                                                    Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                            04/2024


                 CHAPTER 6. PERFORMANCE              CRITERIA AND MONITORING


6-1   Performance Criteria. In addition to continuing to meet the application approval criteria set
      forth in 24 CFR § 214.103 and Chapter 2, Paragraph 2-2, a participating agency that
      provides housing counseling and education services directly must meet the following
      performance criteria. If an agency fails to comply with the performance criteria set forth in
      this handbook, the noncompliance issue will be documented in the agency’s file or
      documented as a finding on the agency’s performance review report. Additionally, if the
      agency fails to correct the noncompliance issue the agency can be terminated from the
      Housing Counseling Program or placed on an inactive status.

       A. Workload. During each 12-month period, the participating agency must provide
          housing counseling in accordance with 24 CFR part 214. Agencies that offer only
          housing counseling services limited to reverse mortgages, including home equity
          conversion mortgages (HECMs), are exempt from the annual 30-client minimum
          client requirement.

       B.   Agency’s Housing Counseling Work Plan. The participating agency must
            implement its housing counseling work plan as outlined in Chapter 3, Paragraph
            3-2(A) and demonstrate reasonable achievement of the outcome objectives
            approved by HUD. If the agency has modified its activities since HUD approved
            the work plan, or did not implement the work plan fully HUD will not issue an
            unconditional re-approval (provided all other aspects of the review are
            acceptable) or continued participation, until the agency complies with one of the
            two options identified below:

            1.   Agency commences full implementation of the work plan within sixty (60) days
                 of HUD's written notice to the agency to that effect and notifies HUD in writing
                 that it has complied, or

                 Agency prepares and deliver to HUD a revised work plan no later than fifteen
                 (15) days after the reviewer's written notice to the agency to that effect. HUD
                 expects that, over time, work plans will be modified to accommodate changes in
                 housing market conditions within an agency's targeted area or geographic area
                 where its housing counseling services are provided. The agency may begin
                 operating under its revised plan immediately after the agency receives a letter
                 stating that the corrective action plan has been accepted.

            Any aspect of the work plan can be amended as outlined in Chapter 3, Paragraph 3-
            2(B). This includes proposed changes in how the agency will address the needs and
            problems of the target population; services to be offered; fee structure; and
            geographic boundaries.

       C.   Nondiscriminatory Practices. The agency must administer its housing counseling
            activities pursuant to Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, the Fair Housing Act,



                                                                                                     67
                                                                           Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                   04/2024


  Executive Order 11063, Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, the
  Americans with Disabilities Act, Title LX of the Education Amendments Act of 1972,
  and the Age Discrimination Act of 1975. These laws prohibit discrimination because
  of race, color, religion, sex (including sexual orientation or gender identity, national
  origin, disability, familial status or age.

  All housing counseling agencies are required to affirmatively further fair housing in
  accordance with HUD regulation” as specified in Chapter 3, Paragraph 3-7 of this
  Handbook.

. Client Referrals from HUD and Other Participating Agencies. Except as described in
  this paragraph, all clients who contact the agency as a result of these referrals must be
  served. In cases where the agency does not offer the unique services requested by the
  client, is unable to effectively communicate with the client, does not have sufficient
  resources, is required to serve certain clients only per other HUD program
  requirements or if the client is outside the geographic jurisdiction of the agency, the
  agency must refer the client to another participating agency, preferably an agency in
  the client’s area. If there is not a participating agency available, the agency must make
  a reasonable effort to refer the client to another agency that can help them meet their
  needs.

. Real Estate Settlement Procedures Act. A participating agency must be in full
  compliance with the Real Estate Settlement Procedures Act of 1974 (12 U.S.C. §§
  2601, et seq.) or RESPA.

  Conflicts of Interest. The participating agency must comply with the conflict of
  interest provisions in Chapter 6, Paragraph 6-2 and is responsible for ensuring that
  its directors, employees, officers, contractors and agents understand and comply
  with these requirements.

. Disclosure to Clients. A participating agency must provide to clients a disclosure
  statement that identifies the agency and explicitly describes the various types of
  services provided by the agency, as well as any exclusive, financial or other
  relationships between this agency and any other industry partners, that are relevant to
  the client. The counselor shall initially determine what disclosures are relevant to the
  client's service plan. However, while conducting performance reviews, HUD staff
  will assess files to determine if proper disclosures were made.

  Disclosures must clearly state that the client is not obligated to receive, purchase or
  utilize any other services offered by the organization, or its exclusive partners to
  receive housing counseling services. For clients with whom the agency meets face-
  to-face, a written disclosure must be provided. For clients receiving counseling via
  another format, for example telephone or video counseling, the agency must verbally
  or electronically provide a disclosure that meets the requirements in this paragraph.




                                                                                             68
                                                                         Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                 04/2024


 Disclosure statements must be retained in the counseling or group education file. A
 note indicating the date of verbal disclosure, or documentation of electronic
 disclosure, must be retained in the files of all those counseled.

. Fee Schedule. Participating agencies must inform counseling and education clients
  of any fee schedule/structure and the agency’s policy for reducing or waiving fees
  in advance of providing housing counseling services. Additionally, an agency's fee
  schedule must be posted in a prominent place in the agency’s office or on the
  agency’s website that is easily viewed by clients; however, participating agencies
  should also verbally communicate the fee schedule directly to the clients. Agencies
  must not refuse to provide counseling services if a client cannot afford to pay fees.

 Document this communication in the counseling or education file, for example with
 a copy of the written fee schedule and a note indicating communication including
 that the agency assessed the client’s ability to pay and reduced or waived the fee, if
 necessary. A note indicating the date of verbal fee schedule disclosure, or
 documentation of electronic fee schedule disclosure, must also be retained in the
 files of all those counseled. HUD may review the agency's fee structure to ensure
 compliance with all program requirements outlined within this handbook and 24
 CFR part 214.

 Alternative Information about Services or Products. If the counselor provides
 information about a specific service, program, feature or product, the counselor must
 also provide information on relevant alternatives as described in Chapter 3, Paragraph
 3-5(B). The counselor must document in the client file the information provided to the
 client on additional products available.

 Staff Experience and Certification. The agency must have one or more HUD-
 Certified housing counselors on staff to provide housing counseling services. Agency
 staff must be trained in housing counseling, and at least half of the counselors must
 have at least six months experience in the position they hold in the agency's Housing
 Counseling program. In addition, if HUD discovers during a performance review that
 less than one half of the agency’s counselors have the required experience, this will
 be documented on the agency's performance review report as a finding and
 documented in the agency's official file maintained by HUD. If the agency fails to
 maintain certified and experienced staff, the agency can be terminated or placed on an
 inactive status until required staffing levels are met.

. Staff Supervision. Supervisors of housing counselors must monitor the work of the
  housing counselors by reviewing client files with the housing counselor to determine
  the adequacy and effectiveness of the housing counseling. Supervisors must also
  verify HUD Housing Counseling Program regulations and requirements are being met
  by the counselor including delivery of counseling as required under Chapter 3,
  Paragraph 3-5 and maintaining client files in accordance with program requirements
  as outlined in Chapter 5, Paragraph 5-7 of this Handbook. The agency must document




                                                                                          69
                                                                          Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                  04/2024


  these monitoring activities and make the documentation available to HUD upon
  request.


. Funding. The agency must maintain a level of funds that enables it to provide
  housing counseling to at least the required workload of clients every year whether
  or not the agency receives HUD funding.

. Audit. In accordance with 2 CFR part 200, Subpart F, grant recipients and sub-grant
  recipients that expend $750,000 or more in a year in Federal awards must have a
  single or program-specific financial audit conducted for that year. Participating
  housing counseling agencies that are subject to this requirement must submit for
  such fiscal year a financial audit conducted by the agency's Independent Public
  Accountant, certifying that the agency maintains internal controls over Federal
  awards; complies with applicable laws, regulations and contract or grant
  provisions; and prepares appropriate financial statements. The audit must be
  conducted in accordance with the provisions provided in 2 CFR part200, subpart F.
  Agencies should reference 2 CFR part 200 for additional requirements.

  Housing Counseling agencies that expend federal grant funds but less than
  $750,000 in federal grants per year can submit a single or program specific audit or
  can send their OHC POC other audited financial statements. Housing counseling
  agencies must meet the ongoing requirement to have funds immediately available,
  or provide a written commitment of funds, to cover the cost of carrying out their
  workplan for 12 months. See 24 CFR § 214.103(g)(1). Grantees may be subject to
  additional requirements outlined in the grant agreement. Housing counseling
  agencies that expend less than $750,000 per year in federal grant funds cannot use
  housing counseling grant funds to pay for a single or program specific financial
  audit.

  Housing counseling agencies that do not expend federal grant funds must still meet
  the ongoing requirement to have funds immediately available, or provide a written
  commitment of funds, to cover the cost of carrying out their workplan for 12 months.
  See 24 CFR § 214.103(g)(1). To demonstrate compliance with this requirement,
  examples of documentation agencies may submit may include, but are not limited to,
  a single or program specific audit, other audited financial statements, and/or letters of
  funding showing written commitments.

  HUD must be provided a copy of all audit reports within 30 days of completion.

. Training. Participating agencies are encouraged to send their housing counselors to
  formal training courses. Information on training is available at the Housing
  Counseling webpage.

. Reporting. The agency must submit to HUD complete, accurate, and timely activity
  reports as described in 24 CFR § 214.317 and Chapter 5, Paragraph 5-11 of this
  Handbook.



                                                                                         70
                                                                                    Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                            04/2024



6-2   Conflicts of Interest. In accordance with 24 CFR § 214.303(f A director, employee,
      officer, contractor, or agent of a participating agency shall not engage in activities that
      create a real or apparent conflict of interest.

      Conflict of Interest means a real or seeming incompatibility between the private or
      personal interests of an agency director, employee, officer, contractor, or agent, and their
      fiduciary duties and responsibilities to the counseling agency and its clients.

      A.   Aperson in a Position of Trust including a director, employee, officer, contractor, or
           an agent of a participating agency, must avoid any action that might result in, or
           create the appearance of, administering the housing counseling operation for
           personal or private gain.

           It is a conflict of interest for any of the above parties to provide preferential
           treatment to any organization or person, or to undertake any action that might
           compromise the agency's ability to ensure compliance with the Conflict of Interest
           requirements stated herein and to serve the best interests of its clients.

      B.   Direct Interest. For the purposes of this section, a direct interest shall be defined as
           administering the housing counseling operation for personal or private gain. This
           would include receiving anything of value, including compensation on a
           commission basis, for any of the above-referenced services to the client related to
           the matter on which the client is being counseled.

           However, it shall not preclude a director, employee or officer, who provides
           multiple affordable housing services on behalf of the participating agency, being
           compensated in the form of a reasonable salary from that participating agency.

           A conflict of interest would arise if the director, employee, officer, contractor, or
           agent of a participating agency, or the spouse, child or business partner of any
           individual holding these positions of trust or any organization in which these
           persons serves as an employee (other than with the participating counseling
           agency), or with whom he or she is negotiating future employment, has a direct
           interest in the client by virtue of their role:

           1.   As the client's landlord;

           2.   As the client's real estate agent or broker;

           3.   As the client's creditor;


           4.   As the client's mortgage broker;




                                                                                                      71
                                                                              Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                      04/2024


  5.   Loan originator; having a financial interest in, servicing, or underwriting a
       mortgage on the client's property;

  6.   Owning or purchasing a property that the client seeks to rent or purchase;

  7.   Serving as a collection agent for the client's mortgage lender, landlord or creditor.

  Participating agencies or their counselors are prohibited from providing HECM
  counseling services to a prospective borrower if the participating agency or
  counselor is, either directly or indirectly involved in origination or servicing of the
  HECM, funding the HECM         loan, or the sale of annuities, investments, long-term
  care insurance, or any other type of financial or insurance product.

. Referrals. It is a conflict of interest for a director, employee, officer, contractor, or
  agent of a Participating Agency to refer clients to entities that provide a service to
  the client related to the matter that the client is being counseled about in which
  they, or their spouse, child, or general partners, have a financial interest, including
  but not limited to:

  1.   Landlords;

  2.   Real estate agents or brokers;

  3.   Creditors;

  4.   Mortgage brokers;

  5.   Loan originators;

  6.   Property owners-seeking to sell or rent to clients; or

  7.   Collection agents for the client's mortgage lender, landlord, or creditor.

  It is also a conflict of interest for the director, employee, officer, contractor, or
  agent of a participating agency to accept a fee or any other consideration for
  personal or private gain for referring their housing counseling client(s) to any of
  those parties, or to acquire the client's property from the trustee in bankruptcy, or
  to accept a fee or any other consideration for referring a client to the parties listed
  above.

. HUD may investigate agency practices and may take action to inactivate or
  terminate the agency's approval or participation in the Housing Counseling
  program.

. Participating agencies must notify HUD of conflicts of interest not later than 15
  calendar days after the conflict is discovered and report to HUD on the corrective



                                                                                              72
                                                                                  Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                          04/2024


           action taken to cure the conflict. The report of the conflict of interest discovered
           must be submitted in writing by letter or e-mail to the participating agency's HUD
           POC. If the participating agency fails to comply with this program requirement, the
           agency may be terminated or placed on an inactive status until the agency
           implements a corrective action to address the conflict of interest.

6-3   Performance Reviews. HUD may conduct periodic on-site or desk performance reviews
      of all participating agencies. The performance review consists of a review of the
      participating agency's compliance with program requirements, including applicable civil
      rights requirements, and the agency's ability to deliver quality counseling services. HUD
      may assess a participating agency’s compliance with such requirements by utilizing the
      responses provided on the form HUD-9910 or other electronic medium. Agencies
      scheduled to undergo a performance review may receive advance notification regarding
      the scope of the review. Review of the agency may consist of but is not limited to the
      requirements set forth in Chapter 6, Paragraphs 6-1 and 6-2.

      A. Access to Information. The participating agency must allow HUD staff to obtain the
         necessary information to complete performance reviews and provide any information
         that HUD requests. When information is needed for those purposes, the POC will
         generally request the information via official correspondence with required dates and
         times for submission. HUD staff assigned to review the housing counseling activities
         of a participating agency may request from the agency specific client files and group
         education files for review. These files, in paper or electronic format, or a
         combination, must be provided to the HUD reviewer. Other documentation that may
           be requested includes, but is not limited to, the most recent housing counseling work
           plan; evidence of leveraging; financial statements; documentation supporting draws
           or allocations on grants or sub-grants; and audit reports. Participating agencies must
           also provide the names, addresses and other uniquely identifying information of
           clients when requested to do so by the HUD office conducting the review. Most
           information and files will be viewed by HUD staff while on-site conducting
           performance reviews. However, on occasion HUD staff may ask an agency to send
           required information or files to the HUD POC prior to an on-site review or as
           preparation for a desk review.


      B.   Confidentiality of Client Records. HUD staff conducting the review will protect the
           confidentiality of all client records maintained by the agency. HUD staff will not
           disclose information to any person or entity outside of HUD or to anyone that is not
           an agent of HUD, unless directed to do so by a duly constituted legal authority such
           as a court of law or if an official investigation is being conducted with HUD's Office
           of Inspector General or similar law enforcement agency. The only exception is noted
           in Paragraph 6-3 (D) below.

      C.   Falsified Records or Fraud. Derogatory findings indicating the possibility of falsified
           records or fraud may be reported by the reviewing HUD office to the appropriate




                                                                                                    73
                                                                                    Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                            04/2024


           Office of the Inspector General and the Deputy Assistant Secretary for Housing
           Counseling.

6-4   Results of a Performance Review. Based on the performance review, HUD may
       determine whether to renew the approval or continue participation unconditionally,
       conditionally, temporarily change status to inactive, or terminate approval or
       participation of the agency. Additionally, the findings of a performance review may
       also serve as a basis for determining the eligibility of the agency for future grant
       funding for the Housing Counseling Program.

      A.   Unconditional Re-approval or Continued Participation for affiliate
           organizations. If the agency is in full compliance with programmatic
           requirements, HUD may re-approve the agency unconditionally for up to three
           years or allow continued participation of the affiliate organization. HUD will
           notify the agency of its re-approval or continued participation.

      B.   Conditional Re-approval    or Continued Participation for affiliate organizations. If the
           agency fails to comply with programmatic requirements, but the failure does not
           seriously impair the agency's counseling capability as required in this handbook and
           applicable regulations, HUD may extend the agency's approval or allow continued
           participation for up to one hundred and twenty (120) calendar days. HUD will notify
           the agency of its conditional approval or participation.

               1.   HUD may grant this conditional extension only if the agency agrees to
                    attempt to correct its program deficiencies within the period of the extension.
                    Otherwise, HUD may terminate the approval or the continued participation of
                    the agency. HUD will notify the agency and again specify the deficiencies.

                    Once HUD receives what it considers an acceptable letter documenting
                    the required corrections of deficiencies, HUD may conduct a follow-up
                    review to determine if the deficiencies have been corrected.
                    HUD may grant unconditional approval or continued participation if the
                    deficiencies have been corrected. HUD will make a determination as to
                    whether the deficiencies have been corrected by either: a review of the agency
                    response; documents submitted; an on-site follow-up review, or a combination
                    of any of these. If HUD determines that the deficiencies have been corrected,
                    HUD will then send a re-approval letter and a new certificate of approval to the
                    agency or a communication granting continued participation.

                    If the agency fails to reply within the deadline or if HUD determines that
                    the response is inadequate, HUD may terminate approval or participation
                    of the agency, notify the agency and again specify the deficiencies.

      C.   Inactive status. HUD may temporarily change an agency’s status to inactive. See
           Paragraph 6-5 below for more information on this status.




                                                                                                   714
                                                                                   Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                           04/2024


      D.   Termination of HUD-approved      or participation status and grant agreements. HUD
           may terminate approval or participation of the agency. See Paragraph 6-6 below for
           more information on this status.

6-5   Inactive Status. Under 24 CFR § 214.200, HUD may change a Participating Agency's
      status to inactive, in lieu of terminations of HUD-approved status or removals from the
      list of HUD-approved agencies, if an agency is experiencing certain circumstances that
      may temporarily impair an agency from complying with its housing counseling work
      plan. An agency's status may be changed to inactive on a case-by-case basis for a period
      not to exceed six months unless an extension is provided by HUD. HUD may change
      any agency's status through either a request submitted to HUD or as a result of
      information obtained by the Department.

      A.   Conditions For This Action. Some of the conditions under which inactive status
           may be considered include but are not limited to:

           1.   Agency lacks certified counselor(s);

           2.   Damage to facilities by natural disasters that renders the agency unable to
                function properly;

                Significant, unexpected loss of funding;

                Relocation of the agency;

                Other circumstances caused by reasons beyond the agency's control;

                Results of performance review;

                Unresponsive agencies;

                HUD detects any questionable business practices or conflict of interest; or

           9.   Fair Housing violations.

      B.   Process for Requesting Inactive Status. Agencies that seek inactive status must
           submit a request to HUD in writing. Documentation of evidence of the
           condition(s) that rendered the agency incapable of carrying out its housing
           counseling work plan must be submitted along with the request, if possible.

      C.   HUD Response. Upon receipt of the request, HUD will review and notify the agency
           of approval or rejection. If approved, the agency's name and contact information will
           be temporarily removed from the HUD-approved web list of agencies and
           participating agencies and the telephone referral system.




                                                                                                 75
                                                                                   Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                           04/2024


      D. Temporary Conditions Remedied. The agency must notify HUD in writing and
         provide supporting documentation or evidence when it is ready to resume operation
         or no later than the end of the inactive period. After review and acceptance by
         HUD, the agency's contact information may be restored to the web list of HUD-
         approved and Participating Agencies and the toll-free telephone referral system.

      E.   Extensions. At HUD's discretion, if the condition(s) still exists after six months, an
           extension of the inactive period may be considered, or the agency may be
           terminated or removed from the Housing Counseling program. HUD will notify the
           agency in writing of its decision.

      F.   Action Not at Agency's Request. If HUD obtains information of circumstances that
           may temporarily impair an agency from complying with its housing counseling plan,
           or if HUD is made aware of questionable business practices, HUD may initiate an
           agency status change to inactive until a full investigation can be completed.
           Notification to the agency will be in writing and will provide the manner in which
           the agency may respond. See Chapter 8 for information regarding an agency's appeal
           rights.

6-6   Terminated Status. When HUD determines that the agency's program deficiencies
      seriously impair the agency's ability to comply with this handbook or applicable
      regulations including any non-discrimination or Fair Housing requirements, HUD may
      terminate approval or participation of the agency. HUD may also terminate approval or
      participation when the agency fails to correct the deficiencies identified during the
      review. HUD sends a notice to the agency of the determination to terminate approval or
      participation. If HUD does not reinstate the approval, or terminates participation, the
      agency may file an appeal, as discussed in Chapter 8.

      HUD may terminate an agency's approval, remove an SHFA or other units of local,
      county or state government, remove one or more branches or affiliates from the HUD
      portion of an intermediary's, Multi-State Organization's (MSO), or SHFA's housing
      counseling program, and terminate any grant agreements (if applicable) upon
      confirmation of any of the following reasons:

           1.   Non-compliance with all program and regulatory requirements; including
                noncompliance with housing counselor certification requirements;

           2.   Noncompliance with Federal fair housing and civil rights requirements;

           3.   Failure to implement in whole or in part the agency's approved housing counseling
                work plan; failure to notify HUD of changes in the agency's housing counseling
                work plan; or failure to accept HUD decisions regarding work plan;

           4.   Lack of the capacity to deliver the housing counseling activities described in its
                approved housing counseling work plan;



                                                                                                    76
                                                                                  Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                          04/2024


         5.   Failure to achieve outcomes described in the work plan;

         6.   Misuse of grant funds;

         7.   Providing grant funds to an organization that has been convicted for a violation
              under Federal law relating to an election for Federal office, or any organization that
              contracts with or employs individuals convicted if such crimes; or

         8.   HUD determines that there is other good cause.

      If a determination is made that the agency did violate the requirements of the housing
      counseling program in any way, HUD may terminate the agency’s approval or participation
      and may impose sanctions in accordance with 2 CFR parts 180 and 2424.

      Suspension, Termination, Debarment and Limited Denial of Participation. In cases
      where HUD has found fraud, misuse of funds constituting a material violation, election
      law violations, misrepresentation or any other act or activity that HUD determines to be
      unsatisfactory, HUD may exercise its ability under 2 CFR parts 180 and 2424 to
      suspend, debar, terminate or impose a limited denial of participation of a program
      participant.

6-8   Agency Withdrawal. The participating agency may withdraw from the Housing
      Counseling program at any time. The agency must notify HUD in writing of its intent
      to withdraw. Unexpired agency certificates of approval must be returned and cannot
      continue to be displayed, if applicable.

6-9   Post-Termination, Post-Withdrawal Requirements. All terminations by HUD, or an
      agency’s withdrawal, must be communicated in writing. When a termination or
      withdrawal occurs, the agency must return its “Certificate of Approval” to the HUD POC.
      A terminated or inactive agency cannot continue to display the certificate. HUD will also
      discontinue displaying the agency as a HUD-approved housing counseling agency on
      HUD’s website and update its status in HCS. If HUD has determined that an agency will
      be terminated from participating in the Housing Counseling program, and an agency does
      not voluntarily withdraw, then HUD may follow the provisions found in 2 CFR parts 180
      and 2424.




                                                                                                  77
                                                                                   Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                           04/2024


                                        CHAPTER 7. FUNDING


7-1   HUD        Housing Counseling Grants.


      A. Housing Counseling Grant Program Notice of Funding Opportunity (NOFO). If funds
         become available that are to be competitively awarded, HUD will notify the public
         through a Notice of Funding Opportunity (NOFO) in the Federal Register and by
         means of the Internet or other electronic media. The NOFO will set forth application
         instructions. It is the housing counseling agency's responsibility to ascertain when
         publication of the NOFO occurs.

       . Who May Apply:

         e        HUD-approved Local Housing Counseling Agencies (LHCAs);
         e        HUD-approved national and regional intermediaries (Intermediaries);
         e        HUD-approved Multi-State Organizations (MSOs); and
         e        State Housing Finance Agencies (SHFAs).

       . How        to Apply


            1.    Grants.gov. HUD requires its housing counseling grant applicants to submit their
                  applications electronically through grants.gov.

         2.       SAM.gov. Grant applicants must have a current registration in the System for
                  Award Management, SAM. gov, in order to apply for grants with the Federal
                  government. Applicants must verify that the agency is authorized to submit and
                  that its SAM. gov registration will not expire before the application deadline.

       . HUD        Approval or Program Participation Does NOT     Guarantee Funding from HUD.
         Funding for the Housing Counseling program is contingent upon receipt of
         appropriations from Congress, and is awarded competitively under Federal law and
         HUD regulations and policies governing assistance programs, including Sections 102
         and 103 of the Department of Housing and Urban Development Reform Act of 1989
         (42 U.S.C. 3535(d), 3537a, and 3545).

         Agency Program Funds. HUD housing counseling funds awarded under a NOFO are
         NOT intended to cover all expenses incurred by an agency to deliver housing
         counseling services. All agencies that receive HUD housing counseling grant funds
         are expected to use other sources of funding, both private and public, to supplement
         HUD grant funding. Grantees are required to demonstrate that leveraged funds were
         provided to the agency.

         Duplicate Billing. Grantees must not request reimbursement from HUD for full or
         partial housing counseling service costs under a HUD housing counseling grant and
         charge other funding sources for the same full or partial service to the same client.


                                                                                                    78
                                                                              Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                      04/2024


   Additional guidance can be obtained in the applicable NOFOs and grant agreements.
   Examples of billing include but are not limited to:

   1.   The agency may use multiple sources of funding to pay for a specific counselor or
        specific counseling activities, provided the combined funding does not exceed the
        actual cost. For example, if anon-HUD grant program reimburses at a fixed rate
        on a per household counseled basis, and the rermbursement does not cover the
        true cost of counseling the agency may bill HUD for the balance of the cost.

   2.   Ifan agency charges a client a fee for a housing counseling service and the fee
        charged does not cover the full cost of the session, only the portion of the session
        not covered by the fee can be billed to the HUD Housing Counseling grant.

G. Limitation on distribution of funds due to Election Law Violations. Participating
   agencies shall not employ an individual who has been convicted of a violation under
   Federal law relating to an election for Federal office. In addition, no funds shall be
   distributed to:

   1.   Any organization that has been convicted for a violation under Federal law
        relating to an Election for Federal office or any organization that employs
        applicable individuals. For the purposes of this section, applicable individual
        means an individual who is:

           a.   Employed by the organization in a permanent or temporary capacity;

           b.   Contracted or retained by the organization; or

           c.   Acting on behalf of, or with the express or apparent authority of, the
                organization; and

           d.   Has been convicted for a violation under Federal law relating to an
                election for Federal office.

           e.   For the purposes of this Paragraph (G)(1), a violation under Federal law
                relating to an election for Federal office includes, but is not limited to, a
                violation of one or more of the following statutory provisions related to
                Federal election fraud, voter intimidation, and voter suppression: 18
                U.S.C. §§ 241-242, § 245(b)(1)(A), 18 U.S.C. §§ 592-611, and 42 U.S.C.
                § 1973.

           f.   For more information on Election laws, visit the Federal Election
                Commission’s    website.


H. Limitation on distribution of funds due to lack of HUD certification. No Housing
   Counseling Grant Funds shall be distributed to a participating agency that provides




                                                                                                79
                                                                                   Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                           04/2024


           housing counseling services, through counselors who are not HUD certified housing
           counselors in accordance with 24 CFR § 214.103(n).

      I. Misuse of Funds. If any participating agency that receives funds under the Housing
          Counseling Program is determined by HUD to have used funds in a manner that
          constitutes a material violation of applicable statutes and regulations, or any
          requirements or conditions under which such funds were provided:

           1.   HUD shall require that, within 12 months after the date of the determination of
                such misuse, the agency shall reimburse HUD for such misused amounts and
                return to HUD any such amounts that remain unused or unobligated for use; and

           2.   Such agency shall be ineligible, at any time after the date of such determination of
                material misuse, to apply for or receive further funds under the Housing
                Counseling Program.

           3.   The remedies listed in (1) and (2) above are in addition to any other remedies that
                may be available under law.

      Whether a misuse of Housing Counseling Program grant funds is considered by HUD to
      constitute a material violation will depend on the facts along with the applicable statutes,
      Notice of Funding Opportunity (NOFO), HUD Handbooks and other policy guidance,
      and the HUD housing Counseling Program grant agreement.


7-2   Grant Administration. HUD’s Office of Housing Counseling administers housing
      counseling grants awarded to the following types of agencies: Local Housing Counseling
      Agencies (LHCAs), Multi-State Organizations (MSOs), State Housing Finance Agencies
      (SHFAs), as well as national and regional Intermediaries. Agencies awarded grant funds
      under the Department’s Housing Counseling program must comply with all funding
      requirements provided in this handbook, the applicable grant agreement, 24 CFR part
      214, 2 CFR part 200, and the applicable Notice of Funding Opportunity (NOFO).

      A.   Appointment of Point of Contacts (POC).      Points of Contact (POC) are responsible
           for grant administration. For the definition of POC see Chapter 1, Paragraph 1-4.

      B.   Requesting Reimbursement from HUD Under A Housing Counseling Grant. The
           housing counseling grant agreement provides specific instructions on how to request
           reimbursement from HUD for payment under a housing counseling grant award
           through a payment system administered by HUD.

      C.    Point of Contact (POC) Approval of Vouchers. Only the POC or their designee may
           approve payment request vouchers submitted by grantees.

      D. Voucher Request Approval. The POC or their designee may approve the grant
         voucher payment request only if the agency is in compliance with the grant




                                                                                                  80
                                                                                  Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                          04/2024


         agreement. Refer to the applicable grant agreement for specific requirements
         concerning drawing down funds.

       . Non-Approval. Pursuant to the applicable grant agreement, if there are outstanding
         reports due, or if a voucher is incorrect, it is grounds for the POC or their designee to
         not approve the voucher.

         Grantees seeking information about the status of a voucher must contact the POC          or
         their designee.

        . Payments by HUD to Grantees. HUD makes direct-deposit payments to the grantee’s
          financial institution. Part of the grant-award process includes the grantee'’s completion
          of Standard Form 1199A (SF-1199A), Direct Deposit Sign-up Form. This form can be
          accessed at this link. The SF-1199A is also available at local banking institutions.

        . Documentation of Expenses.    Grantees must maintain source documentation of costs
         (invoices, cancelled checks, salary reports, etc.) to support all requests for payment.
         This information must be made available to HUD upon request. Financial records,
         supporting documents, statistical records and all other pertinent records, both
         electronic and on paper, shall be retained for a period of three (3) years from the date
         the case file was terminated for housing counseling. Housing Counseling Grant
         recipients must retain files (financial records, supporting documents, statistical
         records and other pertinent records) for three (3) years from the date the final grant
         invoice was paid by HUD.

         Specific Conditions. In addition to criteria provided in 24 CFR part 214, HUD may
         impose additional requirements or special conditions on a Grantee, subject to 2 CFR
         part 200, which demonstrates the characteristics or behavior specified in 2 CFR §
         200.208. If applicable, such specific conditions would be documented in the grant
         agreement.

         Noncompliance and Remedies. Refer to Grant Agreement on specifics on
         noncompliance and remedies.

        . Audit. Housing counseling grant recipients and sub-recipients shall be subject to the
          audit requirements contained in 2 CFR part 200. HUD must be provided a copy of the
          audit report within 30 days of completion.

       . The Drug-Free Workplace Act of 1988. The Act requires grantees of federal agencies
         to clarify that they will provide drug-free workplaces. Each potential grantee must
         certify that it will comply with drug-free workplace requirements in accordance with
         24 CFR part 21. See the CFR for specific requirements.

7-3   Alternative Funding Sources. HUD recommends approved agencies and participating
      agencies seek and secure funding from various other potential funding sources that may
      include local and state governments, private foundations, lending or real estate



                                                                                                       81
                                                                                  Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                          04/2024


       organizations, and individual donations. Agencies must also assure that such
       arrangements do not violate the provisions regarding conflicts of interest described in 24
       CFR § 214.303(f) and in Chapter 6, Paragraph 6-2.

7-4   Lender Funded Counseling Services.

      With the exception of reverse mortgage counseling, lenders may pay agencies for
      counseling services, through a lump sum or on a case-by-case basis, provided the level of
      payment does not exceed a level that is commensurate with the services provided, is
      reasonable and customary for the area, and does not violate requirements under Federal
      Law, including the National Housing Act and the Real Estate Settlement Procedures Act
      (12 U.S.C. §§ 2601 et seq). These transactions and relationships must be disclosed to the
      client as required in 24 CFR § 214.303(g) and in Chapter 6, Paragraph 6-1(G). Agencies
      must also assure that such arrangements do not violate the provisions regarding conflicts of
      interest described in 24 CFR § 214.303(e) and in Chapter 6, Paragraph 6-2.

      The Real Estate Settlements Procedure Act_ provides for disclosures and protections for
      consumers during the process of closing a mortgage loan. For additional information visit
      the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB).

      If a housing counseling agency has decided to enter into a relationship with a particular
      lender, HUD requires that the housing counseling agency enter into an agreement, signed
      by both parties, to formalize the relationship. The purpose of the document is to outline the
      expectations of both parties. The terms of the agreement should be outlined to ensure
      compliance with RESPA requirements. In addition, the agency’s agreement should specify
      that the counselor will provide information on three comparable products and the fee
      income is based on services rendered, not on the amount of the loan.

7-5   Fees for Housing Counseling and Related Services.

      Participating agencies may charge reasonable and customary fees for housing education
      and counseling services (including HECM counseling, see additional guidance below) as
      long as the cost does not create a financial hardship for the client. Participating agencies
      must assess a client’s household income and monthly expenses to determine if charging the
      client a fee for service will create a financial hardship. The agency should examine factors
      including, but not limited to, household income and debt obligations to determine a client’s
      ability to pay for counseling services including when additional services are required to
      fulfill reasonable accommodation requests. If the client is unwilling to provide this
      information, the agency is not obligated to provide a reduced counseling fee.

      If an agency serves a client with an annual household income at or below 200 percent of
      the Federal Poverty Level, the agency should consider waiving the fee in its entirety or
      reduce the fee to an amount the client can afford to pay.

      Additionally, fees must not be charged for education or counseling provided in the
      following services areas: mortgage delinquency, default or homelessness.



                                                                                                  82
                                                                               Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                       04/2024



An agency’s fee schedule must be posted in a prominent place, easily viewed by clients,
and must be available to HUD for review. Agencies must inform clients of the fee structure
in advance of providing services. Agencies may request reimbursement from a client for
the cost of obtaining a copy of the client’s credit report if this does not cause a hardship for
the client. If an agency receives a discount for the cost of credit reports, this discount must
be passed on to the client. If an agency charges fees for credit reports those fees must be
clearly documented on the fee schedule. In addition, the fee schedule must be
communicated verbally to all potential counseling and education recipients prior to the
provision of services.

Agencies that have fee schedules must document communication regarding the fee
schedule in the counseling or education file.

Only the portion of the counseling or education session not covered by fees can be charged
to the HUD Housing Counseling NOFO grant if fees charged to the client do not cover the
full cost of the session. Clients cannot be charged for the initial client intake (See Chapter
3, Paragraph 3-3). Clients can only be charged a fee for housing counseling and education
services provided as described in Chapter 3.

A. If an agency chooses to charge fees, the agency must conform to the following
guidelines:

1.    Provide counseling without charge to persons who cannot afford the fees,

2.    Fees must be commensurate with the level of services provided and be reasonable
      and customary for the area,

3.    Agencies may not impose fees upon clients for the same portion of or for an entire
      service that is already funded with HUD grant funds; and

4.   The agency must verbally disclose all fees that will or may be charged to the client,
     prior to the beginning of counseling services.

B. Additional guidance on fees for HECM clients - In accordance with the regulations at
24 CFR § 214.313, the Federal Housing Administration (FHA) has determined that
agencies participating in HUD’s Housing Counseling program may charge a fee for HECM
counseling services as long as the cost is reasonable and customary, does not create a
financial hardship for the client, and meets the other requirements of the regulation. The
housing counseling agency must make a determination about a client’s ability to pay,
which should include factors, including, but not limited to, income and debt obligations.
The housing counseling agency must have written procedures in place for determining
ability to pay. Such procedures should support that a determination is based on objective
criteria, and not a subjective determination. The counseling file of each client charged fees
should include documentation demonstrating that the cost does not create a financial
hardship.



                                                                                              83
                                                                                  Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                          04/2024



      A client must not be turned away because of an inability to pay. Moreover, the housing
      counseling agency may not withhold counseling or the Certificate of HECM Counseling
      based on failure to pay. See HECM   Protocol, Section 1.4.

7-6   Debt Management Service Fees. HUD considers debt management service as an activity
      related to, but apart from, the housing counseling process. It involves the client turning
      funds over to the agency that then distributes the funds to creditors via agency checks.
      Paragraph 7-3 of this Chapter does not apply to charges for debt management services even
      if the clients are also housing counseling clients. If both debt management fees and housing
      counseling fees are charged to the same client, the agency must clearly differentiate
      between the two.




                                                                                                84
                                                                                Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                        04/2024


                                    CHAPTER 8. APPEALS

8-1   Right to Appeal. If HUD renders any adverse decisions pursuant to an agency making an
      application for approval, an approved or participating agency seeking re-approval or
      continued participation, an agency issued a letter terminating HUD approval or
      participation, or an agency placed in inactive status involuntarily, the agency shall have
      the right under 24 CFR § 214.205 to appeal that adverse decision.

8-2   Appeal Process. An appeal must be in writing unless a reasonable accommodation is
      granted for a disability related need. An applicant or participating agency may make a
      formal written appeal by following the instructions in the adverse decision letter. The
      appeal may include a request for a meeting with the appropriate HUD personnel.

8-3   Timeliness of Appeals. HUD must receive notice of an appeal within 30 calendar days of
      the date of the HUD decision letter to the applicant agency. If the due date falls on a
      Saturday, Sunday, or Federal holiday, the notice will be accepted if received the
      following business day. HUD is not bound to review appeals received after this period.

8-4   Other Action. Nothing in this section prohibits HUD from taking such other action
      against an agency as provided in 24 CFR part 24 Governmentwide Debarment and
      Suspension (Nonprocurement) or from seeking any other remedy against an agency
      available to HUD by statute or otherwise.




                                                                                                85
                                                                                                              Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                                                          04/2024

                                      APPENDIX 1: HECM                 Counseling Protocol

                                                     Table of Contents

I.         Objectives Of HECM Counseling 00... eeccceessecceccecessssssnnaeceeceeeeeeesnneeeeceesceeeseeaaeeeeeeeees 88
II.        HECM Counselor Roles and Responsibilities .................ccccsseeseeeseessessenseaseaaecaecceeeeeeeeeeees 90
     ILA.       Role of the HECM Counselor ......... ccc cccscccccceccssessenneceeeceeeeesnneceeceeseeseseennaeeeeseeseneneas 90
     II.B.      Responsibilities of the HECM Counselor ................ccccccsseseessessenssnnscaeaaeeeeceeceeseeeeeeees 90
Ill.       The HECM Counseling SeSsion ..........cccccccccessssseceeeessneceecceseeeeeccsseaceceesssaaeceeeessaeeeseneeaaaees 95
     IIl.A. Establishing HECM Counseling Processes .............cccsccccccccceeessennneeeeeeeecesesssaaeeeeceeeees 95
     II.B.      Steps in the HECM Counseling Process...........eeeecsssscccccceeeesesnnececeeecesessenaeeeeeeeeeees 103
     TIL.C. Counseling Session Protocol oe eeeessscccccecceeeesessnnececeeeceeeesenneeeeceesceseseeaeeeeeeeees 103
IV.        Client Needs and Circumstances .0.....ccccceceesssssnncecceeeeeeesennneeeeceesceeeseeaaeeeeceessesessnaaeeeees 120
     IV.A. Property Value’s Effect on Available Equity... ceeeeeesssseceeeceeceeeesennaeeeeeeeeeees 120
     TV.B. Borrower’s Age ....cccccccccccccssssssnnnecceeceecesesssneaeceeeceseeesnneaeeceeeceseeseaaeeeeseeseessseeaaaeeeeeeeees 120
     IV.C. Income Requirements: Effect on Reverse Mortgage...........eeeeessscccecceecesssennteeeeeeeeeees 120
     IV.D. Credit Requirements: Effect on Reverse Mortgage...........eeeecsssccceceeeeesssennteeeeeeeeeees 121
     IV.E. Length of Time Remaining in the Home: Effect on Costs and Obligations............. 121
     IV.F.      Payment Plan Options and Their Effect on Current and Future Financial Obligations
                121
     TV.G. Non-Borrowing SpouSes.........cccccccccccessssesnneececeeceeseseenaaeceeceeecesennneeeeceseeeseeseaaaeeeeseeeees 123
     IV.H. Borrower’s Heirs and Estate... ececcssscccecceccssesssnceececceeeeeeqnneeeeeeeseeseeeeaneeeeceeseees 123
V.         Features of a Reverse Mortgage ..........ccccccccccessssennnecceceescesessnaeeceecceeeseesaeeeecesseeseseeaaaeeees 124
     V.A.       Overview of Reverse Mortgage Programs and Product Features.............cccsccceeeeeees 124
     V.B.       Eligibility for HECMS 2000... eeeecceessnceeessneccesseeeeesaneeceseeeessaeeecesaaeccesneeeeseaaeeseeaaeees 125
     VC.        Loan Features oe ceccecesssnnneccecceeeesesnnaaeceeeeeeeeeesnneeeeceeseeseeeeaaeeeeceseseseseeaaaeeeeeeeees 128
     VD.        After CIOSING 0... ccccccesssssnnneeeeeceecesesnnaneceeceeeeeeenaeeeeceeeeeeeeeeaaeeeceesseseeeeaaaeeeeeesees 138
VI.        HECM for Purchase o.oo... ceccscccccceecsssssnnecceeeeeeesesnneececeeecesessenaaeeeeceeeceseeeeaaaeeeeeeeseeeeneas 140
     VILA. HECM for Purchase Program Guidance ............cccececsscccecceeeeeennneeeeeeeceesesseaaeeeeeeeeeees 140
     VIB. Required Topics for Counseling ...........eececccscccecceeeesesssnececcecceeessenneeeeceeseeseseaaeeeeeeeees 140
     VIC.       Other Liems On Property ....... ccc ccccceccesssssnnecceceeeeeeeseneececesceseeeeaneeeeceeeeeeeeeeaaeeeeeeeees 141
     VI.D. Investment Requirement: Effect on HECM for Purchase oo... ccccccccccceeeeeeeeeeees 141
VII.       Financial Alternatives and Supplementts...................ccccceseeeseeseessessenssnaecaecaeceecesceseeeeeeeees 142
     VILA. Selling and MOVING ...........ccceeecccccceccesessennneececcecessessenaaeeeeceeeeseenaeeeeceeseeseeeeaaeeeeeeeeeees 142
     VILB. Services provided through the Aging Network ...........eeeesssseeeeceeeeeeeseenaeeeeeeeeeees 143
     VILC. State and Local Programs 2.0... ecceessssnnceceecceeeeeensneececesceseesenaeeeeceeseeeeseeaaaeeeeeeeees 144
     VIED. Public Benefits... eececessscccecceecesesssneaeeeeceeeeeeesnneeeeceeeceeeeesnaaeeeseeseeseseeaaaeeeeeeeees 144
VII.       Reverse Mortgage Counseling Tools... ceecceesnnneccecceeeesensnececeeeceseseeanneeeeceesseeeeaaas 146
     VILA. SOftWArC 0... cceccsssecceessssecceeeesseceeccsseaeeceesesaaeeeeesseeeeeeeseaaeeecesesaaeeeesesaaeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeas 146
     VIULB. Product Printouts and Discussion ............cccccccccccesssssnnneccecceeeeeennneeeeceescesesseaaeeeeceeeeees 146
IX.     = Refimancing a HECM.Q.......     eee ccccccceecessssnneceeeeeeeeeesnneaceceeecesesseqnaeeeeceesceseeseaaeeeecesseeeeseas 147
     IX.A. Cost Considerations in Refinancing a HECM uu... ceeceeesnseececceeeesesennaeeeeeeeeeees 147
     IX.B. Lender-provided DOCUMERS ..............ccceecesseeseeseeeseessensennnaaaaecceeeeceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeneenees 147
     IX.C. Waiver of Housing Counseling for HECM Refinance...                                          ee eeeseeeeeeeeeneeeeeees 147
X.         Property Charge Default Counseling for HECM 0.0.0... ec ccesccccccccceeeseennteeeeeeeenseetenaaeees 148
                                                                                                     Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                                                 04/2024

    X.A.   Property Charge Default... eeccssscncccceceeeeseensneececeeceseeeennaeeeeceeseeeeeeeaaeeeeeeeees 148
    X.B.   Eligibility to provide Default Counseling 2.0.0... eeeccccccecceeeeeennneeeeceeseeseseenaaeeeeeeees 148
    X.C.   HECM Default Counseling Session Protocol... cceeeesessseeceeceeeeseessnneeeeeeeeeees 148
XI.     HECM Protocol Attachment ..........cccccccccccessssceccesensecceesssneceeceseeeecessesaeeeeesssneeeesseenaees 152
    Attachment A: Resources for Counselors............cccccccccccceseesessnnececeecceeessenneeeeceesceseeseaaeeeeeeees 153
    Attachment B: Required Handouts for Clients ...............cccccceeeseessessenssnnsenncaeceeceeceeseeeeeeeeeeees 159




                                                                                                                        87
                                                                                     Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                             04/2024


I.     Objectives of HECM       Counseling

The purpose of this protocol is to provide standardized guidance for HECM counselors providing
counseling on FHA Home Equity Conversion Mortgages (HECM), as required by National
Housing Act Section 255(f) (12 U.SC. 1715z-20). Counselors must comply with this guidance to
issue a Certificate of HECM Counseling.

References to counselors in this protocol are for counselors on the HECM Roster, unless
otherwise noted. This protocol provides limited guidance on discussion of reverse mortgages
other than HECMs.

The objective of HECM counseling is to educate clients on:
    e how HECMs and other proprietary reverse mortgages work;
    e the implications of and alternatives to a HECM or other reverse mortgage; and
    e the appropriateness of a HECM or other reverse mortgage for the clients being counseled
       considering their unique personal and financial situation.

Generally, in every HECM counseling session, counselors must thoroughly cover the following
topics:
      1. Client needs and circumstances;
     2. Features of reverse mortgages;
     3. Borrower and property eligibility for HECMs and other reverse mortgages;
     4. Options available to the homeowner other than a HECM or other reverse mortgage,
         including housing, social service, and health and financial options;
     5. Home equity conversion options that are or may become available to the homeowner,
             such as other reverse mortgages, HECM   for Purchase, sale-leaseback financing, deferred
          payment loans, and property tax deferral;
          Borrower and Non-Borrowing Spouse responsibilities under a HECM,
          Costs to obtain a HECM or other reverse mortgage;
     SO ND




          Financial implications of entering into a HECM or other reverse mortgage;
          A disclosure that HECMs and other reverse mortgages may have tax consequences, affect
          eligibility for assistance under federal and state programs, and impact the estate and heirs
          of homeowners;
      10. Whether the homeowner has signed a contract or agreement with an estate planning
          service firm that requires, or purports to require, the borrower to pay a fee on or after
          closing that may exceed amounts permitted by the Secretary or in Part 206 of the HUD
          regulations at 24 CFR;
      11. The extent to which services provided under an estate planning contract or agreement
          may not be needed or may be available at nominal or no cost from other sources,
          including the lender;
      12. Warnings about potential HECM and reverse mortgage or insurance fraud schemes and
          elder abuse; and
      13. End of loan issues and required timing of repayment.

Additional resources for counselors are in Attachment A.




                                                                                                    88
                                                     Handbook 7610.1
                                                             04/2024


Required handouts for clients are in Attachment B.




                                                                  89
                                                                                 Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                         04/2024


Il.   HECM   Counselor Roles and Responsibilities

ILA. Role of the HECM Counselor
A HECM counselor is a HUD certified housing counselor who meets and maintains the
regulatory requirements for placement on HUD’s HECM Counselor Roster (see Chapter 4 of
HUD Handbook 7610.1).

The HECM counselor’s role is to educate the client about the features of HECMs and reverse
mortgages and the appropriateness of a HECM, reverse mortgage, or other financial options to
meet the client’s needs. The counselor should not tell the client whether to proceed with a
HECM or reverse mortgage or which reverse mortgage product to use but should provide
guidance and resources to enable the client to make an informed decision. The counselor must
provide ongoing support to the client and follow-up throughout the process.

II.B. Responsibilities of the HECM Counselor
I1.B.1 Compliance with the HECM Protocol and HUD Guidance

Counselors must follow this Protocol when counseling their clients. Counselors must ensure that
clients receive HUD’s required handouts (listed in Attachment B, Required Handouts for
Clients) and any additional information the clients need to assist in their decision-making. The
agency must also agree in its housing counseling plan to HUD’s quality control measures, which
may include mystery shopping, performance reviews, or other actions as determined by HUD.

Counselors are also responsible for understanding and complying with relevant HECM program
requirements, including regulations at 24 CFR part 206, HUD Handbooks, and Mortgagee
Letters.

II.B.2   Client Education on HECMs, Reverse Mortgages, and Relevant Financial and
         Housing Options

To provide the most appropriate housing options, the counselor must assess the client’s financial
situation by following the requirements of Attachment A.5: Using Client Budget and Resource
Identity Tool (CBRIT).

The counselor must discuss with the client HECMs, reverse mortgage products. and other
financial, social services, and housing options within the context of the client’s financial
situation. The counselor must counsel the client on reverse mortgage features covered in the
section “Features of Reverse Mortgages” and provide an overview of financial and/or housing
alternatives provided in “Financial Alternatives and Supplements.”

Clients who demonstrate a detailed knowledge of HECM and reverse mortgage features may
receive a summary overview of the required topics. The counselor must ensure that the client
understands the features of the specific HECM or reverse mortgage in which he or she is
interested.




                                                                                                90
                                                                                    Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                            04/2024


II.B.3   Objectivity, with No Conflicts of Interest

The counselor must consider each client’s unique needs and circumstances when discussing the
appropriate options for the client. The counselor must remain objective when discussing these
products and options and must not steer the client in a particular direction.

Counselors must not participate in sales or lending transactions as real estate agents, loan officers
or appraisers, or as agents who sell long-term health insurance policies or annuities. National
Housing Act section 255(0) (12 U.S.C. 1715z-20(0)) prohibits lenders or any other party from
requiring HECM borrowers to purchase insurance, annuities or any other similar products as a
requirement or condition of eligibility for a HECM loan except for title insurance, hazard, flood,
or other peril insurance, or other such products that are customary and normal under subsection
(c), as determined by the Secretary. Counselors must not perform, or offer to perform, any
services that conflicts, or appear to conflict, with the best financial interests of the client.


II.B.4   Sensitivity to Clients’ Circumstances

Counselors must be sensitive to a client’s engagement in the counseling session. If the counselor
believes that the client is not benefiting from the counseling session because of hearing
deficiencies, lack of language comprehension, or other significant impairment, the counselor
must recommend that the session be re-scheduled with an accompanying family member, trusted
friend, or advisor or until the agency can provide auxiliary aids or another needed
accommodation (interpreter, translation services, etc.). Counselors should also be sensitive to
any cultural issues that interfere with the client’s understanding of the counseling session and
ensure adequate language assistance to clients with limited English proficiency. The counselor
must not issue a certificate when these issues prevent the client from benefitting from the
counseling.

All communications should include instructions on how to contact the agency via TTY, relay, or
other assistive means for persons with hearing impairments. All communications should also
inform clients and prospective clients about translation or interpreter services. In addition, all
communications should ask clients and prospective clients whether they need assistance for
mobility impairments, visual or hearing impairments, or other disabilities. In situations where a
client requires an interpreter or translator, HUD encourages agencies to utilize one who is under
direct control of the agency.

II.B.5   Issuance of the Certificate of HECM     Counseling

Counselors may issue the form HUD-92902, Certificate of HECM Counseling, to clients who
satisfactory complete HECM counseling. See Article III of this Appendix -for certificate
information and processes.

Counselors must withhold the Certificate of HECM Counseling if they reasonably believe that
the client:




                                                                                                   91
                                                                                        Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                                04/2024


     1.   does not have an adequate understanding of a HECM, its implications for the client’s
          unique situation, and their responsibilities as a HECM borrower, as evidenced by the
          client’s failure to answer five of the ten questions correctly in the first counseling session;
     2.   is being coerced into obtaining a HECM; or
     3.   is a potential victim of fraud.

II.B.6    Reviewing the Client’s Level of Understanding

To review a client’s understanding of HECMs, counselors must ask ten questions interspersed
throughout the session, in accordance with the guidance in Section III.C.2, Step 2: Conducting
the Counseling Session, of this HECM Protocol. These questions must be relevant to the client’s
situation and will cover:
     1. The basic mechanics, requirements, and implications of a HECM and other reverse
          mortgages;
     2.   The impact on the client’s personal financial situation of the particular loan in which they
          are interested;
    3.    The client’s responsibilities and requirements for residency under the mortgage;
    4.    The client’s responsibilities for payment of all property charges consisting of taxes,
          ground rent, flood and hazard insurance premiums, and special assessments; and
     5.   If applicable, the responsibilities of the client’s Non-Borrowing Spouse.

If the client cannot answer five of the ten questions correctly in the first session, the counselor
should withhold the certificate and note in the client file that the certificate was withheld and
why. The counselor must then provide one of the alternatives below to the client:
     1. Offer to call the client back at another time, e.g. the next day at a different time of day,
     2. Ask if there is someone else the client could bring with them that they trust or who could
         join them in a live video or phone conversation, or
     3. Suggest that the client meet face-to-face with another counselor and assist the client with
         finding another HECM counselor.

After all options are exhausted and the client is still not able to answer five out of ten questions
correctly, the counselor will offer them additional time to further understand HECMs. A
Certificate of HECM Counseling should not be issued until the client correctly answers five out
of the ten questions in one session.

I1.B.7    Following Up with Clients

The counselor must follow up with clients to answer any additional questions and to determine
the outcome of the counseling session. Counselors must make a reasonable effort to follow up
with the clients to ensure that they are progressing toward their housing goals and meeting their
financial needs, to modify or terminate housing counseling, and to learn and report outcomes to
HUD. Section HI, The Counseling Session, of this HECM Protocol provides further details and
timeframes for following up with the client.

II1.B.8   Detection and Prevention of Fraud and Elder Abuse

Identifying Elder Abuse



                                                                                                       92
                                                                                   Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                           04/2024


Signs of elder abuse may include abuse that is physical, emotional, sexual or financially
exploitive and also involve situations involving neglect or abandonment.

Financial exploitation may include the illegal or improper use of a person’s funds, property, or
assets, and can include the illegal or improper use of conservatorship, guardianship, or power of
attorney.

Counselor Action
Many states require certain parties, including human services professionals, to report suspected
abuse, including financial exploitation, of older people. All states provide statutory immunity to
those who report a problem in good faith.

The counselor must be sensitive to the client’s intentions for obtaining a reverse mortgage and
the client’s particular needs and circumstances. Counselors should caution clients against signing
over their funds to loan officers or other parties involved in the mortgage transaction and ensure
that clients understand the standard ways in which they can access their loan proceeds.

If the counselor believes that the client is being pressured by a family member, a lender, an
investment or financial consultant, an insurance agent, or any other party, the counselor may
request that other individuals who have no financial interest in the HECM or reverse mortgage
be present during the counseling session (e.g. family members, attorney, trusted advisor, etc.) to
help protect the client’s best interests. The counselor must remind the client that it is their
decision to go forward with a HECM or reverse mortgage and not the decision of others.

If a counselor suspects that a conservatorship, guardianship, or power of attorney may be invalid
or that fraud, elder abuse, exploitation, or coercion is occurring, the counselor must contact the
HUD Office of Housing Counseling or HUD’s Office of Inspector General as listed in HECM
Protocol II.B.9, Reporting Questionable HECM Counseling Practices, and other authorities as
required by state or local law.

The counselor should provide clients with the elder abuse hotline in that client’s state. Hotline
numbers can be found at the National Center for Elder Abuse at:ncea.acl.gov

II.B.9   Reporting Questionable HECM       Counseling Practices

The Protocol provides specific instances, including suspected fraud, elder abuse, exploitation, or
coercion that must be reported to either HUD or HUD’s Office of Inspector General. Counselors
should contact HUD for required further policy guidance and local authorities as appropriate.

Contact: Office of Housing Counseling at housing.counseling @hud.gov

For more about HUD’s Office of Inspector General please go to the website at
Hotline | Office of Inspector General, Department of Housing and Urban Development
(hudoig.gov)

Reports can be made through Hotline Form | Office of Inspector General, Department of
Housing and Urban Development (hudoig.gov)


                                                                                                    93
                                                                                Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                        04/2024


To contact the HUD Office of Inspector General Hotline call toll free (800) 347-3735
Persons with hearing or speech impairments may access this number via TDD/TTY at (800) 877-
8339 TTY/ASCII (American Standard Code for Information Interchange).




                                                                                             94
                                                                                     Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                             04/2024


II. The HECM        Counseling Session

Counselors must understand HECMs and reverse mortgage products and remain aware of
market trends. They must also be able to work with a diverse group of potential borrowers with
varying levels of education and financial literacy. Each counseling session must consist of a
discussion of HECM and reverse mortgage features that is tailored to the client’s specific
abilities, needs and financial goals.

This section provides:
    A. Establishing HECM Counseling Processes
    B. Steps in the HECM Counseling Process
    C. HECM Counseling Session Protocol (Procedures that counselors must follow to set up,
        conduct, and follow up on the reverse mortgage counseling session)

HI.A.Establishing HECM Counseling Processes
III.A.1 Paying for Counseling

Establishing Fees
Counseling agencies may establish a fee structure for HECM counseling as long as the fee:
    1. is reasonable and customary,
    2. does not create a financial hardship for the client,
    3. is commensurate with the counseling services that are provided, and
    4. 1s not being charged to pay for the same portion of or for an entire service that is already
       funded with HUD housing counseling grant funds or any other funds received for HECM
       or delinquency counseling.

The housing counseling agency must establish written procedures for determining the client’s
ability to pay. These procedures must be applied consistently and in a nondiscriminatory manner
to every client including when additional services are required to fulfill reasonable
accommodation requests. Counseling agencies charging a fee must:

    1.   Use objective criteria to develop a written policy for determining a client’s ability to pay
         based on client’s:
             a. income
             b. debt obligations, and
             c. other expenses
   2.    Describe how this hardship policy will be implemented and monitored in its housing
         counseling work plan and,
   3.    Inthe client’s file, document:
            a.    determination of ability to pay in the client’s file,
            b.    that the client was advised of the amount of the counseling fee the client may be
                  charged at loan closing;
             c.   disclosure of its hardship policy to the client, and
             d.   if the client requested a hardship-based fee waiver, the information the agency
                  reviewed to make the decision.




                                                                                                      95
                                                                                      Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                              04/2024


The maximum amount an agency may charge is the actual cost of counseling. HECM counseling
agencies may adjust counseling fees based on actual costs as long as the fees are reasonable and
customary. Agencies may charge a higher fee for clients needing multiple, prolonged, or in-home
counseling sessions, if commensurate with services provided. However, this higher fee may only
cover the actual cost of the services provided. If a client has a disability-related need for
multiple, prolonged, or in-home counseling sessions to have meaningful access to HECM
counseling, Agencies must provide necessary reasonable accommodations.

All agencies charging fees for HECM counseling must document the actual cost of providing the
counseling session in the client file.


Fees for Other Individuals Participating ina HECM Counseling Session
Agencies may charge a reasonable and customary fee for each HECM counseling session
provided to all other parties related to the client including spouses, children, trustees, and trust
beneficiaries who either choose to participate or are required to participate in the counseling
session.

If counseling for related parties takes place during the same session as that of the client, the
agency may only charge a one-time counseling fee. At the client’s request, Agencies must
provide a single session for clients and other parties.

If counseling for related parties occurs in sessions that are separate from the client’s session, the
fee charged must be considered reasonable and may be charged for each of these separate
sessions.

Collection of Fees
Agencies must inform clients of the fee structure in advance of providing services. The housing
counseling agency must make a determination about a clients ability to pay based on factors
including, but not limited to, income and debt obligations. Counseling agencies must not turn
away clients because of an actual or prospective inability to pay.

Counseling agencies choosing to charge HECM fees may collect the counseling fees in advance
of the scheduled session. However, agencies must not offer a discount on counseling charges
based on the client’s ability to pay for the counseling services upfront. Clients who pay for
counseling services out of the proceeds must not be penalized for doing so.

Agencies should not collect a fee at the time of the counseling session from a client whose
income is below 200 percent of the federal poverty level. Clients are responsible for proving
their income is less than 200 percent of the federal poverty level by providing proof of income
such as Social Security payment stubs, income tax returns, or other forms of income verification.
Agencies may charge these clients a HECM counseling fee at closing if the client has been
advised during the counseling session of the amount of the fee.

The HECM counseling charges may be paid in two ways:
    1. The HECM counseling client or related parties can pay counseling fees directly to the
       agency. The fee may be collected at the outset or at the conclusion of the session.


                                                                                                       96
                                                                                 Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                         04/2024


   2.   The clients can pay the counseling fee out of a HECM loan proceeds. In this case, the
        lender, the borrower, and the counseling agency must agree that the closing agent
        assumes responsibility for remitting payment to the counseling agency at closing. This
        payment must be reflected on the Closing Disclosure.

Provision of Counseling and Certificate of HECM Counseling and Payment of Fees
Participating agencies may not delay or otherwise negatively impact the availability of
counseling or withhold a Certificate of HECM Counseling based on the client’s inability to pay.

Lender Payment of Fees
A HECM lender’s funding or servicing the HECM loan may not pay for HECM origination
counseling either directly or indirectly.

HI.A.2 Client Privacy and Communication

The counseling agency must hold in strict confidence all client information regardless of the
source or sources from which it is received.

To safeguard further the privacy of their clients, counselors must not:
    1. accept counseling requests by anyone “on behalf of’ consumers, except for persons who
       are legally authorized to represent the counseling client; and
   2. provide information on the scheduling, progress, or outcome of any counseling case to
       anyone without the client’s express prior signed permission as documented by the
       counselor in the client’s record.

When sending documents to the client, the counselor may send these documents by regular mail,
priority mail, fax, or email, taking care to protect sensitive client information.

II].A.3 Working with Lenders

HUD policy and regulations restrict lender activities regarding HECM borrowers. Counselors
must have an understanding of appropriate and inappropriate lender activities prior to counseling
so that they may inform clients on how to avoid predatory practices.

Lender Responsibilities
No lender or party associated with or acting on behalf of the lender may contact a counseling
agency on a client’s behalf.

Lenders and their representatives, including brokers and their agents may not be present or
participate in counseling sessions. Lenders may not provide clients with advance copies of
answers to borrower review questions used to assess whether the client fully understands the
HECM loan.

Lenders may perform the following activities prior to HECM counseling:
    1. Explain the HECM program or proprietary products,
    2. Discuss whether the prospective borrower is eligible for HECM financing,



                                                                                                 97
                                                                                    Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                            04/2024


   3.   Provide information regarding fees and charges associated with HECMs and reverse
        mortgages,
   4.   Describe the potential financial implications of a HECM or reverse mortgage,
   5.   Provide the prospective borrower with copies of the HECM security instrument, note, and
        loan agreement,
   6.   Order a limited (but not a full) title search, which is performed from the date of the search
   7.   back to the most recent deed on record,
   8.   Use automated valuation models (AVMs) to perform a preliminary estimation of the
        value of the property that will serve as security for the reverse mortgage. The AVM,
        however, does not take the place of an appraisal. Regardless of whether or not a
        prospective borrower closes on a HECM, the prospective borrower must not be charged a
        fee for the AVM,   and/or
   9.   Order a credit report.

Lenders are prohibited from performing the following activities prior to completion of
counseling:
    1. Begin to process a loan application,
        Order an appraisal,
   WN




        Request a full title search from the date of search back to the original deed,
        Obtain an FHA case number, and/or
   We




        Collect any application fees or any other HECM-related service charges.

Once the counseling session is completed and the counselor has provided the client a HECM
Counseling Certificate, the lender may communicate with the counselor if it receives either
verbal or written permission from the client. This communication must be restricted to the
following:
     1. The name and property address that will be utilized for the FHA Connection case number
        origination field;
    2. Fax number for transmitting the signed HECM Certificate of Counseling; or
    3. Any concerns regarding elder abuse not revealed at initial intake, for possible referral to
        local authorities, HUD, or the National Center for Elder Abuse as appropriate.

Additionally, a lender should not pressure the borrower to move forward with HECM         financing
or other reverse mortgage or discourage the participation of family or trusted advisors. Lenders
also may not cross-sell other financial products to borrowers. Specifically, lenders cannot steer
clients toward specific products and cannot encourage clients to purchase specific investment
products such as annuities with the loan proceeds.

Counselor Responsibilities When a Client is Referred by a Lender
Clients must contact a counseling agency directly and personally to initiate the counseling
process and schedule an appointment.

Counselors must make clear that:
    1. they have a relationship with the client not the lender and discussions between the client
        and counselors are confidential;
   2.   that the role of the counselor is separate from that of the lender; and



                                                                                                      98
                                                                                    Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                            04/2024


    3.   that the counselor’s job is to provide information without bias.

Counselors must not accept counseling requests directly from lenders on behalf of clients or
provide information to lenders about the scheduling, progress, or outcome of any counseling
session without the client’s permission.

If a client has already been in contact with a lender, the counselor must respect that established
relationship by neither encouraging nor discouraging the continuance of the relationship.
Counselors should note the client is not obligated to pursue a HECM loan from a lender who
takes the initial application or discusses the HECM program with them prior to the completion of
counseling. It is appropriate for counselors to discuss the features presented as they apply to the
client. The counselor must continue to focus on the client’s unique financial circumstances.
Counselors must use a reverse mortgage loan comparison tool to compare proposed products
with other available mortgages. Counselors must discuss the results of the comparison with
clients and must not steer clients toward or away from specific lenders or reverse mortgage
products.

Counselors must confirm that clients understand that lenders may take, but not process a loan
application, or charge for any application-related services until the lender receives a signed copy
of the counseling certificate from the client.

Communication between Lender and Counselor
The lenders are prohibited from promoting, encouraging, or otherwise pressuring the counselor
in recommending a HECM or other reverse mortgage loan. Lenders shall only provide
information requested by the counselor.

The lender may not contact a counselor or counseling agency to:
    1.   Schedule a counseling session for a potential client(s);
         Discuss a client’s personal information, including the timing or scheduling of the
         counseling, without the client’s permission;
   3.    Request information regarding the topics covered in a counseling session;
   4.    Check on the progress of the counseling session; or
   5.    Advocate or encourage counselors to support or recommend the client obtain HECM
         financing.

If a lender directly contacts a counseling agency to schedule an appointment on behalf of a
client, the counselor must advise the lender of the prohibition against this activity and if it
continues, the counselor should contact the Office of Housing Counseling.

To report instances where the lender is attempting to influence the outcome of the counseling
session, the counselor should contact HUD’s Office of Inspector General as listed in Section
II.B.9, Reporting Questionable Practices, of this HECM      Protocol.

A counselor may initiate contact with the lender, provided that:
    1.   authorization from the client to communicate with a lender and access the borrower’s
         records is obtained and accepted by the lender;



                                                                                                     99
                                                                                      Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                              04/2024


    2.   only the lender specifically identified by the client may be contacted;
    3.   The counselor must document the reason for lender contact. Permission to contact lenders
         must not be routinely requested from all clients; and
    4.   There must be a valid reason for the contact.

The counselor should ensure that all communication, as well as any signed authorizations,
between counselor and lender is documented in the client file.

Counselor Communication with the Lender After Intake
A counselor may contact the lender to obtain additional information after completion of client
intake. The HECM counselor must limit any discussion with the lender to obtaining the specific
information deemed necessary to conduct the HECM counseling session. This information may
include, but is not limited to:
    1.   Name and property address to be used on the Certificate of HECM Counseling as
         required to match the FHA Connection case number request;
    2.   Initial estimated property value the lender is using at client intake, if not available from
         other sources;
    3.   Identity of any other individual(s) who may need to be counseled such as a Non-
         borrowing spouse, Attorney-in-Fact, trust beneficiaries or remaindermen;
    4.   Potential credit issue that may impact the financial assessment by the lender;
    5.   The potential need for a full or partially funded set-aside or repair escrow.

Counselors shall not provide the following information to lenders during any pre-counseling
discussions without the permission of the client:
    1. The date and time of the HECM counseling session;
    2.   The name(s) of other parties scheduled to attend the counseling session with the client;
    3.   Information concerning fees to be charged the client or whether the counseling fee will be
         waived; or
    4.   Client personal information.

Counselor Communication with the Lender after Counseling
After the date of the counseling session and before loan closing, counselors may contact the
lender designated by the client during the post-counseling stage to obtain additional information
either not provided during a pre-counseling call, if one was made, or to clarify information
provided during the counseling session.

Counselors shall not reveal any information discussed during the counseling session, without the
permission of the client and unless it is relevant to the request for additional information or
clarification. Counselors may contact the lender if requested by the client should questions arise
after loan origination.

Prohibition on Lender Steering
Lender steering means inducing a client to contact, select or to avoid a specific lender or lenders.
Lender steering results in a real or apparent conflict of interest on the part of a counseling agency
or counselor.




                                                                                                        100
                                                                                   Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                           04/2024


Counselors must provide their clients with the handout in Attachment B.2: Important
Information about Home Equity Conversion Mortgage (HECM) and Other Reverse Mortgage
Counselors, in addition to adhering to the following guidelines:

Counselors must not:
   1.   Promote, represent or recommend any specific lender or lenders;
   2.   Speak for any lender or lenders about what they charge clients for origination or servicing
        fees or third-party closing costs;
            a. by providing information on the specific origination or servicing fees being
                charged by any specific lender or lenders;
            b. by suggesting that a client not agree to pay more than any specific amount (other
                than the maximums established by HUD) for origination or servicing fees or
                third-party closing costs; or
            c. by providing loan printouts based on the specific origination or servicing fees or
                third-party closing costs that a counselor identifies as being the amounts currently
                being charged by any specifically named lender or lenders, unless the client has
                independently obtained this information and requested its inclusion.
        Presume that a client wants to contact specific lenders.
   »




        Induce a client to contact a specific lender or lenders. For example, counseling agencies
        must not provide a lender name or list to a client who has not asked for help in finding a
        lender or lenders or discuss with clients any prior experience with specific lenders.

Counselors must explain to their clients that:
    1. Counselors do not promote, represent, or recommend any specific lender or lenders.
    2. Counselors do not speak for any lender or lenders regarding what they charge clients for
       origination or servicing or third-party closing costs and do not provide information on the
       specific origination or servicing fees or third-party closing costs being charged by
       lenders. Lenders are the best source of information about the origination and servicing
       fees and third-party closing costs they charge.
       All lenders may charge the same mortgage insurance premium (MIP) on HECM loans.
   »




       HECM and other reverse mortgage product interest rates, origination and servicing fees,
       and third-party closing costs can vary from lender to lender. They may also vary from
       one borrower to another and may be negotiable.
       HECM origination and servicing fees may not exceed the maximum amounts established
       by HUD, which the counselor will also provide.
       HUD limits third-party closing costs to what is “usual and customary” in a given area.
       The client must receive a current estimated total of all such costs, noting that the total
       actually charged by any given lender is likely to be “in the general vicinity of the
        estimate, but may be more or less than that amount.”

HUD HECM lenders can be found on HUD’s website available at HUD Lender List | HUD.gov /
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD)




                                                                                                 101
                                                                                 Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                         04/2024


Impact of Lender Referrals and Market Conditions
Counselors must be aware of the client’s level of knowledge about HECMs and other reverse
mortgages, as well as any biases or concerns the client may have concerning reverse mortgages
in general or to any specific product.

III.A.4 Face-to-face Counseling

HUD encourages face-to-face counseling, and certain states require face-to-face counseling for
all borrowers considering a HECM or other reverse mortgage. Counselors who meet with clients
face-to-face may be better able to assess client needs and comprehension. Counselors who are
unable to meet with clients face-to-face and who instead engage in live video or telephone
counseling must be particularly aware of the client’s engagement in the session and
understanding of the topics covered.

IIT.A.5 Telephone Counseling

Clients may receive telephone and live video counseling unless such counseling is prohibited in
their state. Telephone and live video counseling must not commence until the client has received
HUD’s required handouts (Attachment B) and has had adequate time to review the documents.
Because the counselor may have difficulty gauging the client’s engagement in the counseling
session, the counselor must be particularly sensitive to a client’s level of understanding. The
counselor must prompt the client for questions, concerns or points of confusion during and after
the counseling session.

Counselors must assess whether a client has adequate ability to participate in the counseling
session, to make reasonable decisions based on the information provided by the counselor, and to
understand the risks and consequences of their decisions regarding a HECM. Counselors must
make clients aware of the various auxiliary aids and services available to them to make a
telephone call accessible.

II].A.6 Emergency Counseling

HUD permits emergency counseling without a prior appointment. Emergency counseling is
HECM counseling that occurs without the client scheduling an appointment in advance. The
client may receive emergency counseling by phone, live video, or in person only if:
     e The client is in imminent danger of losing their home or
     e The client requires access to funds for impending medical treatment, and they are not
        able to access these funds without obtaining proceeds from a HECM.

HUD requires that the borrowers provide documentation that the emergency counseling 1s
necessary. The documentation should indicate that the client’s home is in imminent danger of
being foreclosed or that the client needs impending medical treatment.

HUD recognizes that, in emergency circumstances, it is unlikely that the client has received
HUD’s required handouts. Therefore, unlike scheduled face-to-face, live video or telephone
counseling, counselors who are offering emergency counseling are not required to provide
required materials to clients prior to the counseling session. Although counselors may be able to


                                                                                               102
                                                                                    Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                            04/2024


describe product features to clients throughout the session, clients will not have HECM or other
reverse mortgage materials unless a lender has provided them previously. Accordingly,
counselors must provide all clients who receive emergency counseling with HUD’s required
handouts and other resource material during or immediately after the session. Required handouts
for clients are in Attachment B of this HECM protocol.

II.B.Steps in the HECM Counseling Process
There are four required steps in the counseling process:
I.   Intake
II. Counseling session
Ii. Client file update
IV. Follow up

III.C.Counseling Session Protocol
II.C.1Step 1: Client Intake

The first step in the counseling process is an initial client screening and intake of client
information. Intake may be completed by a trained assistant or the counselor and must include
the following topics:

Client information
1.    Client Name(s), address, date(s) of birth
2.    Estimated home value, location, type
3.    Existing debt on home
4.    Any unpaid federal debt

Client objectives
    1. Determine the client’s main reason(s) for researching reverse mortgages
    2. Discuss the client’s personal and financial goals

Disclosures by counselor
    1. Counselors must disclose the fee structure for the counseling session at the beginning of
          the session, or at intake.
     2.   Counselors must determine if paying the HECM fees will cause the client financial
          hardship and advise the client that agencies cannot withhold counseling or the Certificate
          of HECM Counseling based on inability to pay at time of counseling.

Client    assistance discussion
    1.    Hearing, vision or other disability that may require accommodation
    2.    Limited English Proficiency
    3.    Legal capacity
    4.    Power of attorney

Counseling process overview
The counselor must inform the client of the counselor’s role and of the topics to be covered in
reverse mortgage counseling. The counselor must advise the client that they have a choice to



                                                                                                  103
                                                                                  Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                          04/2024


have a face-to-face counseling session, live video or a telephone session. This choice should be
documented in the client’s case file.

Individualized information
At intake, the counselor must stress the benefits of having the client receive and review the
materials in the “Required Handouts for Clients” section below thoroughly before the counseling
session.

 Loan printouts must be relevant to the client’s situation to facilitate the counseling session.
Counselor may also provide links to HUD’s HECM site at HECM | HUD.gov / U.S. Department
of Housing and Urban Development (HUD)

The counselor must establish that the client has received and reviewed the educational materials
before the counseling session and note in the client file.

Except in situations where emergency counseling is necessary, clients may not proceed with the
counseling session until they have received the required informational packet (from either the
counselor or a reverse mortgage lender) and have had sufficient time to review it. If the client
received emergency counseling, the counselor must send out the materials immediately after
completing the session.

Participants in HECM Counseling Sessions
The following are guidelines on who is required to attend and who may benefit from
attending a HECM counseling session. It is important that counselors convey this information to
every client so that the client can seek additional assistance from friends or family when
appropriate.

Who Must Receive HECM Counseling and sign the HECM certificate:
   1. Prospective Borrowers, including Non-Borrowing Spouses and Non-Borrowing Owners:
      The borrower, any Non-Borrowing Spouse, and any non-borrowing owner must receive
      counseling.
   2. Current Trust Beneficiaries: Current trust beneficiaries or individuals who are eligible
      HECM borrowers and seeking a HECM loan must attend reverse mortgage counseling
      and sign the HECM certificate.
   3. Borrower’s Legal Representative (Incompetent Borrower): For any prospective borrower
      who is not legally capable of decision-making (as determined by a court of law), the
      counseling session must be conducted with a person holding a power of attorney or with
      a court-appointed conservator or guardian on behalf of the homeowner.
   4. Durable Power of Attorney: The counseling session may be conducted with a person
      holding a durable power of attorney specifically designed to survive incapacity.
   5. Conservatorship If a court has judged the homeowner to be legally incompetent, the loan
      documents may be executed by a court-appointed guardian/conservator and the reverse
      mortgage counseling may be conducted with the guardian/conservator present.
   6. The counselor must obtain a copy of the durable power of attorney or court order as part
      of the client file. Counseling should not take place until the power of attorney is received
      by the housing counseling agency.



                                                                                               104
                                                                                  Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                          04/2024


   7.   Ifthe counselor suspects that the power of attorney is fraudulent or that the agent is
        abusing the use of the power of attorney, the counselor must refer the matter as
        appropriate under Section II.B.8. Detection and Prevention of Fraud and Elder Abuse.

Who May Receive HECM Counseling:
The Borrower has the option to allow or disallow optional participants in the counseling session.

Optional participants include:
    1. Persons with a future interest in the property, or Trustees and Trust Beneficiaries:
        Counseling is not required for persons with a future interest in the property, or trustees
        and trust beneficiaries that are not HECM borrowers. FHA strongly encourages these
        individuals to seek reverse mortgage counseling. The following provisions apply:
            a. Counselors should provide counseling if requested by persons with a future
                interest in the property or are trustees and trust beneficiaries.
            b. Persons with a future interest in the property, or trustees and trust beneficiaries
                may go to a HUD-approved housing counseling agency of their choice.
            c. Counseling for these individuals does not have to take place at the same agency
                that provided reverse mortgage counseling to the original client.
            d. When counseling services are rendered to persons with a future interest in the
                property, or to trustees and trust beneficiaries that are not HECM borrowers, they
                 do not need to sign the HECM certificate.
            e. Persons with a future interest in the property, or trustees and trust beneficiaries
                who do not attend reverse mortgage counseling, should nonetheless be familiar
                with the program requirements for the FHA-insured HECM.
    2. Children of the homeowner
    3. Children of a prospective HECM borrower who do not qualify for a HECM but who
        currently reside on the property, or who are on the deed for the property under the reverse
        mortgage, but will be removed from the deed prior to closing, are not required to receive
        reverse mortgage counseling but are permitted and strongly encouraged to attend
        counseling. Counselors should note family member attendance in the client file. If
        requested, HECM counseling will be made available by a HUD-approved housing
        counseling agency. Counseling for the children of a prospective borrower does not have
        to take place at the same agency that provided reverse mortgage counseling to the
        borrower.
    4. Persons whose attendance is requested by the homeowner: Members of the homeowner’s
        family, the homeowner’s attorney, friends of the homeowner, and other staff from the
        HUD-approved housing counseling agency may attend the housing counseling session, if
        requested by the homeowner and not otherwise prohibited.

Prohibited Participants:
Lenders are prohibited from participating in the HECM counseling session. Any representatives
of the lending entity or any third party involved in the origination and processing of the HECM
loan may NOT participate directly or indirectly in a borrower’s counseling session. Counselors
shall not contact the lender once the counseling session has commenced.




                                                                                                 105
                                                                                  Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                          04/2024


Required Handouts for Clients before Counseling
Except in cases of emergency counseling or as otherwise provided under this Protocol, agencies
must provide clients with an information packet prior to the HECM counseling session so that
the client has at least one day to review the materials and prepare questions before the counseling
session. In cases where emergency counseling is necessary, the counselor must send the
information to the client immediately after completing the counseling session and document in
the file the reason for the emergency session. The counselor must document when they provided
the information packet to the client. Counselors must confirm the client’s receipt and review of
the advance information.

Mandatory Information
The following information must be in the information packet:
    1. Agency disclosure form and fee schedule for reverse mortgage counseling
    2. “Preparing for Your Counseling Session” and the other required handouts in Attachment
       B of this HECM Protocol
    3. Printout of loan comparisons. Loan printouts must be relevant to the client’s situation to
       facilitate the counseling session
   4.   Printout of Total Annual Loan Cost (TALC) — This calculation is available on the HUD
       designated calculation tool that counselors use to prepare loan printouts and TALC
       printouts.
    5. Loan amortization schedule
    6. Booklet designated by HUD, in hard-copy form or online. Access the current booklet to
       be provided to the client on the HUD Exchange.
These items must be provided by the counselor, independent of the lenders’ documents.

Optional Information
In addition to required handouts for clients, HUD encourages counselors to provide any of the
following handouts to clients as supplements to the required handout. This information may be
provided to clients before, during or after counseling. These handouts for clients are provided in
Attachment B and include:
     1. Important Information about Home Equity Conversion Mortgage (HECM) and Other
         Reverse Mortgage Counselors
    2. Reverse Mortgage Eligibility Requirements
    3. Steps in the HECM Lending Process
    4. Reverse Mortgage Considerations for Consumers
    5. Questions to Ask Your Lender about HECMs and Other Reverse Mortgages
    6. HECM Borrower Obligations
    7. Reverse Mortgage Borrower Obligations: A Checklist for Borrowers
    8. Using a Reverse Mortgage to Buy an Annuity
    9. Reverse Mortgage Counseling Frequently Asked Questions
     10. How You Can Access Your Home’s Equity with a Reverse Mortgage: Payment Options

II.C.2 Step 2: Conducting the Counseling Session

The counselor is required to discuss each of the protocol elements, with attention to the relevance
of each element to the client’s specific situation. The counselor must ensure that the client
understands each element and its implications.


                                                                                                106
                                                                                      Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                              04/2024


Considering the complexity of the HECM program, counselors should spend no less than 60
minutes conducting the counseling session. If the counselor completes a counseling session
pursuant to the policies detailed below in under 60 minutes, the counselor must include in the
client file an explanation on why the session did not last at least 60 minutes.

Confirm client data
Gather any additional client data not recorded in initial client intake and confirm any previously
recorded client data.

Find out client concerns and interest in HECMs          and other reverse mortgages
   1.    Determine the main reason(s) for investigating reverse mortgages.
   2.    Discuss personal and financial goals that may affect decisions about applying for a
         reverse mortgage.
         Help the client understand how a HECM or other reverse mortgage may affect his or her
         financial situation, including income, assets, liabilities and debts, and current or potential
         expenditures. Some clients may be uncomfortable discussing their financial situation. If
         so, the counselor should explain to the client that some financial information is necessary
         to discuss reverse mortgages and other alternatives.
         Address concerns about preserving assets.
         Discuss the length of time the client plans to remain in his or her home.
   NS




         Discuss the condition of the home and whether repairs or modifications to address.
         Discuss mobility/health-related issues, as well as future maintenance, which are likely to
         be necessary.
         Determine whether the client intends to secure an investment or annuity with the reverse
         mortgage loan.
         Notify the client that lenders and HUD do not require estate planning services to obtain a
         HECM.
    10. Create a budget based on the client’s income, assets, debt and expenses.
    11. Discuss potential effect on eligibility for public benefits and suggest the client seek
        additional financial or tax advice as needed.
    12. Provide information on fair housing, fair lending, predatory lending, and, as appropriate,
        other topics as detailed in section 3-7 (Fair Housing and Civil Rights Requirements).

Discuss client needs and circumstances
    1.   This section presents many of the most common client situations. All counselors should
         become familiar with these common issues and potential solutions. It is not necessary to
         review this entire section with a client.
         Counselors should use printouts from HUD’s online tools (See Attachment A.4: HECM
         Calculation Software and Attachment A.5: Using Client Budget and Resource Identity
         Tool (CBRIT)) to walk their clients through their preferred loan examples. They should
         help clients understand what a reverse mortgage requires; the timing of payments in a
         reverse mortgage; and the purposes and benefits of the loan, as well as discuss other
         relevant examples. If the client is seeking general information only, then the counselor
         should use loan examples. If the client is interested in a particular loan or loan feature, the
         counselor should use this information in addition to providing examples of loans with
         different features for comparison.



                                                                                                     107
                                                                                   Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                           04/2024


Discuss client and property eligibility
While the counselor can generally describe basic borrower, eligible Non-Borrowing Spouse, and
property eligibility requirements for a HECM or other reverse mortgage, only an eligible lender
is authorized to make eligibility determinations.
     1. Borrower-related requirements, including age and property restrictions;
     2. Power of Attorney and Conservator or Guardian (if applicable);
     3. Property eligibility requirements for a HECM or other reverse mortgage
            a. Property charges including, but not limited to property taxes, hazard insurance,
                homeownership fees, and other property assessments. It is the responsibility of the
                borrower to review statements and monitor disbursements for property charges.
            b. Counselors must address the responsibility of the borrower, and if applicable, the
                Non-Borrowing Spouse, for payment of property charges, including the
                availability of a partial or fully funded life expectancy set aside.
            c. The counselor must cover the borrower’s responsibility to ensure lender has paid
                the assessment, as well as the obligation to continue payment after the set aside is
                fully expended.
        Residency and allowed time away for health reasons and time spent at a vacation home.
        Required repairs including, if applicable, the 15% rule;
   NS




        Properties held in trust (if applicable);
        Eligible Non-Borrowing Spouse’s obligations and deferral period for HECMs (if
        applicable); and
        Lender requirements to comply with financial assessment and an explanation of the
        purpose of the partial and full life expectancy set aside when client’s circumstances
        indicate it may be required:
            a. Partially funded life expectancy set-asides are to assist the borrower in paying
                property charges themselves.
            b. Fully funded life expectancy set-asides are for the lender to pay property charges
                on behalf of the client.

Introduce general reverse mortgage features
   1.    Rising debt/falling equity
   2.    Retention of title
   3.    Obligations that could result in the HECM being due and payable, including when the
         borrower no longer occupies the home as a principal residence or when there is no longer
         an eligible borrower or Non-Borrower Spouse in property
         Closed or open-ended funding
   NWS




         Factors that determine principal limit
         Payment plan options, including the ability for the borrower to request a change at any
         time during the life of the loan with the exception of initial limitations in the first 12
         months. (Only applies to adjustable rate mortgages)
         Leftover equity (implications for Borrower and Non-Borrowing Spouse and heirs (if
         applicable))
   8.    Loan balance
   9.    Growth rate of payment plans
    10. Individual loan negative amortization schedule(s)
    11. Future projections and comparisons



                                                                                                 108
                                                                                            Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                                    04/2024


     12. Non-recourse financing

Discuss HECM              and other reverse mortgage loan costs
     1.        Origination fees
               Mortgage Insurance Premium
   WD




               Third party closing costs including appraisal fee, credit report, and title search
               Servicing fee and set aside
               Interest rate
   AMR




               Loan costs
               Counseling fees and the option to pay up-front or to pay from loan proceeds.

Discuss ongoing responsibilities and reverse mortgage implications after closing
    1.         Repairs
    2.         Taxes and insurance and if applicable, the requirement that eligible Non-Borrowing
               Spouses continue to pay taxes and insurance during a deferral period. (HUD does not
               require, as a condition of a Deferral Period for Eligible Non-Borrowing Spouses, that the
               Non-Borrowing Spouse possess or demonstrate the ability to obtain good and marketable
               title to the property or a legal right to remain in the property for life)
    3.         Financial implications
    4.         Changes in borrower relationships, including those with Non-Borrowing Spouses

Provide information about financial alternatives
     1.        Selling and moving
               Deferred payment and home repair loans
   SO PANNWY




               Home equity loans
               Social service alternatives
               Property tax deferral and relief
               Supplemental Security Income and Medicaid
               Medicare (QMB/SLMB,       Part D, etc.)
               Other housing options (congregate housing, assisted living, etc.)
               If applicable to the client’s individual circumstances and needs, the entire process of
               homeownership

Provide information on reverse mortgage                  refinancing
    1.         Refinance for a lower interest rate
    2.         Refinance to take advantage of home value appreciation and access to a greater amount
               of equity
    3.         More information regarding refinancing can be found in Section IX, Refinancing a
               HECM.

Provide information on HECM                for Purchase, if applicable
     1.        Counselors conducting sessions with clients who are interested in purchasing a residence
               with a HECM should refer to:
    2.         the borrower and property requirements provided in HUD Handbook 4000.1; and
    3.         the required topics for counseling in VI. HECM for Purchase of this HECM Protocol.




                                                                                                         109
                                                                                       Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                               04/2024


Discuss purchasing an annuity with a HECM or other reverse mortgage
Annuities
Generally, an annuity is a contract between a buyer and an insurance company.

Counselor action regarding annuities
This step is optional if all HECM or other reverse mortgage proceeds will be used to pay off the
forward mortgage.

The counselor must ask the client if he or she is considering using the loan proceeds to purchase
an annuity and should be prepared to explain these products.

If the client is considering an annuity, the counselor must discuss with the client:
   1.   The features and purpose of an annuity
   2.   Other methods of obtaining an annuity other than through a reverse mortgage.
   3.   the costs and implications of purchasing an annuity with the proceeds from a reverse
        mortgage.
   4.   Resisting pressure from insurance agents, financial advisors or other individuals
        concerning the use of loan proceeds to purchase an annuity or to invest in a risky venture;
        only reverse mortgage borrowers themselves can determine how to use the loan proceeds.

If the client still expresses an interest in purchasing an annuity with the loan proceeds, the
counselor must give the client a copy of Attachment B.9, Using a Reverse Mortgage to Buy an
Annuity.

Required Documentation
The Federal Truth-in-Lending Act (TILA) recognizes the unique difficulty of evaluating the total
cost of a reverse mortgage that is used to purchase an annuity. Counselors must supplement
specialized TILA cost disclosures for these two-part transactions by giving clients who are
considering annuities the document in Attachment B.9 of this protocol.

Review client understanding of session contents
Part of the counselor’s role is to review, during and at the end of every session, whether the
client has been adequately informed and has a level of understanding indicating the client grasps
the fundamental facts of a HECM. Understanding product features is critical. The counselor must
disclose to the client that questions will be asked during the counseling session to determine if
the client understands the information being discussed.

To assess client understanding, the counselor must review the topics of the session and ask the
client open-ended questions listed below or chosen from HUD’s 10 question feature using HUD
designated software. These questions help ensure that the client understands the information and
is able to make an informed decision.

HUD intends these questions to be interspersed throughout the session. Therefore, the counselor
will ask questions as review throughout the counseling session, rather than an exam at the end of
the session, in order to avoid intimidating or insulting the client.




                                                                                                   110
                                                                                    Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                            04/2024


When selecting and asking questions, the counselor must:
   1. include those relative to a client’s specific situation. For example, clients who maybe
      considering a HECM with an NBS must be asked questions from that list in addition to
      other general questions.
   2. ask general questions regarding the use of a Life Expectancy Set-Aside.
   3. Not ask the questions as a written test, unless the client requests this type of
      accommodation
   4. not present the questions as something the client has to “pass” in order to get the loan.
      This means that counselors must be familiar with the set of questions provided, so that
      they can ask the questions conversationally, framed as a review of the most important
      concepts presented during the session. This also gives the counselor a way to emphasize
      some key aspects of a reverse mortgage. Here’s question number |. When will you need
      to pay back your HECM?” If a client answers incorrectly, the counselor can discuss the
      concept further and ask the question again;
   5. avoid yes/no questions, whenever possible.

Clients should answer no fewer than five of the ten questions correctly to receive the Certificate
of HECM Counseling.

Tailoring Questions to Clients
Counselors must be aware of financially savvy clients when posing questions and adopt the
appropriate tone and delivery of these questions.

For clients who seem to be having trouble remembering the information, the counselor may give
prompts to assist the client in answering the questions. If the client gets a question wrong or only
partially right, the counselor should try to prompt or rephrase the question to see if that helps,
and then briefly review the right answer before going on to the next question.

Reviewing Understanding of Multiple Clients
If there are two or more borrowers, the counselor may request that each client alternate
answering questions. In addition, if one client appears to be quieter and less involved during the
session, the counselor may direct the questions entirely to that client, while asking the other
client to allow the opportunity for the other to respond. If one of the clients can’t respond, then
the counselor may allow the other one to answer the question. The counselor must avoid
allowing one client to completely take over the question and answer exchange.

Reviewing Understanding When Non-Borrowers are Present
When counseling a client with an adult child or other non-borrowing advisor present, the
counselor must direct questions to the homeowner and ask the other person to allow the
homeowner to respond. It may be necessary in some cases to ask the other person to leave the
session in order to get a good idea of whether the client has understood the essential features of
the HECM.

If the client is accompanied by a legal representative (e.g., someone who has durable power of
attorney), direct the questions to the client whenever possible, asking the agent to allow the client
the opportunity to respond. If the client is unable to respond adequately, the certificate should be



                                                                                                  111
                                                                                     Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                             04/2024


signed by the legal representative only and should include the notation that the client was unable
to fully participate in counseling.

Question List
Counselors are permitted to ask additional question from the list if they feel it beneficial to the
client(s):

General questions about HECMs and other reverse mortgages
    1. When you have a HECM, who owns your house (whose name is on the title/deed)? When
        does the loan have to be repaid?
    2. There are several options for receiving your HECM proceeds. Of those, which option are
        you interested in and how does it work. What happens if you change your mind later and
        want to change your payment plan?
    3, When you have a HECM, can the lender require you to make monthly payments?
    4. When does the HECM have to be paid back”?
Questions about the financial implications of a HECM or other reverse mortgage
    1. What responsibilities as a homeowner you have to continue after you get a HECM? What
        may happen if you do not keep up these responsibilities?
    2. A HECM may require either a partial or full Life Expectancy Set-Aside (LESA) at the
        closing which is designed to cover hazard insurance, property taxes, and other property
        assessments. Where will the funds come from to establish the LESA and how will that
        impact overall HECM proceeds available? If you have a LESA and all the funds have
        been exhausted overtime, who is responsible for the continued payment of the property
        charges?
        What happens if you use up all the money that is available from the HECM? (Utilize
        examples tailored to client’s circumstances, e.g., “What if you no longer had any
        remaining HECM proceeds to access?” or “Can you share how you would pay the
        property charges, maintenance, and repairs necessary to make your house safe and
        livable?”’)
          If you were to relocate to another house, what are your responsibilities on the HECM
          loan? When your house is sold and the HECM is paid off, will the net proceeds give you
          the ability to pay for your move.
Questions to use for clients with a potential or known Non-Borrowing Spouse (NBS)
     1.   If your spouse is the Non-Borrowing Spouse on the HECM and deed, how will this affect
          their ability to stay in the house should the borrower leave for any reason?
    2.    Will the NBS be allowed to use LESA funds to continue to pay property charges when
          the borrower dies?
    3.    If the borrower dies or is permanently placed in a healthcare facility, are there
          circumstances where the NBS obtains the remaining loan funds, loan proceeds, or
          remaining principal limit? (Note that the HECM loan balance differs from net proceeds
          from the sale of the property).
    4.    What terms of the mortgage are surviving NBS responsible for maintaining upon the
          passing of the mortgagor?
Questions for Refinances
     1.   If you refinance your current HECM, will you still have to pay the FHA mortgage
          insurance? What is your understanding of how this insurance will be calculated?



                                                                                                      112
                                                                                     Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                             04/2024


    2.   What are some of the additional costs you will incur should you decide to refinance?
Questions for HECMs      for Purchase
    1.   When you purchase a home with a HECM, will the HECM be on your existing home or
         your newly purchased home?
    2.   How are closing costs determined for a HECM for purchase? What sources of funds
         (money) are allowed when you purchase a home with a HECM and pay closing costs?
         Why is it important to get a home inspection?
   »




   4.    What are some questions that you would want to ask a real estate professional about a
         property (assessments, HOA) purchased with a HECM?

Results of the Review
Counselors must make detailed notes of client responses to the questions by using HECM Loan
Calculator and Underwriting Tool (HLCUT)        10-question function or note the section of the
agency’s CMS electronic file or in their paper file. Such notes should include information about
any difficulties the client has in answering questions. This is particularly necessary when the
client’s answers are incomplete or incorrect, as this will help support any decision to withhold or
delay issuing the certificate.

The review questions are meant to assess the most basic HECM concepts. The counselor should
not issue a Certificate of HECM Counseling until the client correctly answers 5 out of 10
questions.

Clients Unable to Demonstrate Product Understanding
If the client cannot provide complete or correct answers for at least five of ten questions, there
may be concerns about his or her ability to make an adequately informed HECM decision. If that
is the determination, the counselor should not issue the counseling certificate after the first
counseling session but must propose additional ways to help the client gain the necessary
knowledge, such as:
    1.   Schedule an additional session to allow more time to review important topics and
         possibly at a different time of day, or
    2.   Help the client to arrange a face-to-face counseling session with the original counselor or
         another counselor, or
    3.   Ask the client if there is someone else, he or she could bring with them to or could join in
         a phone or live video counseling session and schedule another session to include this
         person, or
   4.    Ask the client if there are any accommodations that could be made to support them
         during the counseling session.

These options must meet the client’s specific needs.

The counselor may discontinue the session without issuing the Certificate of HECM Counseling
if it is apparent that the client is not able to understand the material.

During any additional counseling sessions, the counselor will ask the review questions again. If
the client again is not able to correctly answer 5 out of the 10 questions, the counselor will ask




                                                                                                  113
                                                                                      Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                              04/2024


the client if they would like additional time and invite them to come back at a later date after
they have had more time to study the materials.

Discuss Next Steps
    I.   Referrals: Counselors may provide clients with information about approved lenders. A
         list of approved HECM lenders can be obtained by searching HUD’s website at HUD
         Lender List
         Resources: Counselors must provide clients with additional information or resources that
         may help clients decide whether to pursue a reverse mortgage or other alternatives. A list
         of these resources is in Attachment B.
    3.   Counselors cannot make any specific recommendations or referrals to a particular lender.

III.C.3 Step 3: Completing the Client File

The counselor must complete the client file at the end of the session. The use of electronic files is
acceptable. Counseling agencies must maintain a separate, confidential file for every client. The
counselor must ensure that paper and electronic files are stored securely, and only accessible to
authorized individuals. The counselor must ensure that the file contains all of the following
contents:
    I.   File number: A file number for the unique counseling interaction;
    2.   Financial Analysis/Budget: Evidence of analysis of the client’s unique financial and
         credit circumstances as they relate to the HECM or other reverse mortgage;
         Required Data: All required fields listed in the Interface Control Document (ICD) of the
         Client Management System
         Activity Log: A record of the date, time, duration, and description of each interaction or
         activity performed with, on behalf of, and by, the client;
         Follow up: A record of all follow-up communication with the client must be documented.
         This documentation must also include an account of all attempts to contact clients to
         conduct follow-up sessions;
         Counseling Participants: Listing of people other than the borrower that attended the
         HECM counseling session and a description of their relationship to the borrower;
         Counseling Certificate: Signed and dated Certificate of HECM Counseling; if the
         certificate was not issued, the reason why it was withheld;
         Agency Disclosure Statement: A copy of the disclosure statement must be provided to
         each client in a face-to-face setting or a notation of the date that the disclosure statement
         was verbally or electronically provided during a live video or telephone counseling. The
         disclosure statement identifies the agency and explicitly describes the various types of
         services that it provides. It must clearly state that the client is not obligated to receive,
         purchase, or use any other services offered by the organization or its exclusive partners,
         in order to receive counseling services. For clients receiving a live video or telephone
         counseling, the agency must verbally or electronically provide a disclosure that meets
         these requirements.
         Power of Attorney or other documents relating to authority of a third party to act on
         behalf of the prospective borrower, if applicable;
    10. Total Annual Loan Cost (TALC): Assessment of the total annual costs of a reverse
        mortgage including interest payments and other fees that require payment;
    11. Amortization schedules for reverse mortgage loan options;


                                                                                                     114
                                                                                   Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                           04/2024


    12. Loan Comparison Estimate for reverse mortgage: Client-specific loan comparisons of
        HECM products, and, as appropriate, proprietary reverse mortgage products, showing
        examples of loan details including interest rates, principal limits, fees, closing costs and
        available funds.
    13. Notation/Documentation verifying that all required counseling content and information
        was provided;
    14. Notation of other brochures or handouts provided to the client on the general reverse
        mortgage lending process, procedures, or timelines; reverse mortgage lenders; and/or
        alternatives to a reverse mortgage;
    15. Documents including copies (electronic or paper) of records or correspondence received
        from the client or created on their behalf, including Miscellaneous Information obtained
        during the intake and subsequent housing counseling sessions not otherwise mentioned in
       this section;
    16. Termination documentation detailing when the housing counseling agency terminated
        services. The housing counselor must notate the client’s file with the date and
        cause/explanation of termination. Client files must not remain open indefinitely;
    17. Documentation of results of counseling session(s);
   18. Fees charged or whether a hardship waiver was requested and approved, if applicable; the
       amount paid through client fees and a copy of the receipt(s) provided to the client;
   19. HUD Grant Activity, if applicable, noting whether the activity was partially or fully
       funded by a HUD housing counseling grant or sub-grant; and
   20. Discussion of alternatives listing any service providers, product vendors, products,
       features, services, or properties about which information was discussed with the client.

II.C.4Step 4: Follow-up

The housing counseling work plan must detail the agency’s procedures for follow-up
communication with the client to confirm that the client is progressing toward his or her housing
goals, learn outcomes, and determine if the agency should modify or terminate counseling for the
client.
The counselor must conduct client follow-up; hiring a third-party agency to conduct follow-up
services is prohibited.

The counselor should make reasonable efforts to conduct a verbal follow-up within 60 days after
the counseling session (in person, live video or telephone). If the counselor makes several verbal
follow-up attempts without success, the counselor must write a letter or send an e-mail to the
client stating that the counselor has attempted to follow up and inform the client of the need for
follow-up communication. The letter or e-mail must request that the client contact the housing
counseling agency no later than 30 days from the date sent, to help the agency assess if
additional client services are necessary to assist the client in achieving their housing goals or if
the agency should terminate counseling services. Refer to Attachment A.2 for a sample Follow-
Up Letter. Issuing surveys to assess housing outcomes does not meet the requirement for client
follow-up.

Follow-up Phone Call
If the counselor is successful in reaching the client by phone, the counselor must review the
information discussed during the counseling session and the materials provided to the client. The


                                                                                                 115
                                                                                     Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                             04/2024


counselor must emphasize that the client may contact the counselor after this initial phone call
with questions or concerns.

Follow-up to Emergency Counseling
When the counselor performs emergency counseling and the client receives the information
packet during or after the counseling session, counselors should wait 24 to 48 hours to contact
the client. This gives the client time to review the materials and consider their options. Again, the
counselor must emphasize that the client may contact the counselor with additional questions or
concerns.

Close-out or Outcome letter
After enough time has passed for the client to close on a reverse mortgage loan, the counselor
must send the client a letter to remind the client of borrower obligations. Generally, this should
occur three to six months after the counseling session. The counselor must remind the client of
the costs and implications of purchasing an annuity with the proceeds from a reverse mortgage
and other uses for the loan proceeds that may not be in the client’s best interests.

The letter must encourage the client to call the counselor with any additional questions or
concerns and include a survey for the client to report the outcome of the session. An outcome
letter is not necessary if the counselor has already called the client for follow-up and recorded the
outcome (for example, the client has closed on the loan, the client has no additional questions or
the client will not proceed with a reverse mortgage).

HI.C.SStep 5: Preparing and Sending the Certificate of HECM             Counseling

Overview of Requirements on Counseling Certificate
All borrowers must have a Certificate of HECM Counseling to proceed with          a HECM loan
application.

Counselors issue the Certificate of HECM        Counseling (HUD-92902) after the borrower
successfully completes the counseling session. The certificate does not represent an opinion or
decision by the counseling agency about the suitability of a reverse mortgage for the client.
Rather, it is a certification that the client has:
    e   Received HUD’s required handouts;
    e   Received counseling;
    e   Discussed his or her needs and circumstances and the potential for a reverse mortgage to
        meet those needs; and
    e   Has a basic understanding about reverse mortgages.

The Certificate of HECM Counseling applies to HECM counseling only and is not intended to
provide any guarantees about counseling for other reverse mortgage products.

The certificate includes a list of specific items that the counselor must discuss in detail with the
client before issuing the certificate. This list includes:
     1. Options other than a HECM that may be available to the homeowner(s) including other
        housing, social service, health and financial options;



                                                                                                   116
                                                                                               Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                                       04/2024


     2.              Other home equity conversion options that are or may become available to the
                     homeowner(s) such as other types of reverse mortgages, sale-leaseback financing,
                     deferred payment loans, and property tax deferral;
                     The financial implications of entering into a Home Equity Conversion Mortgage;
   »



     4.              A disclosure that a Home Equity Conversion Mortgage may: 1) have tax consequences;
                     2) affect eligibility for assistance under Federal and State programs; and 3) affect the
                     estate and heirs of the homeowner(s);
     5.              A notice that the homeowner need not pay for the services of an estate planner in order to
                     get a HECM loan; and
     6.              A notice that the HECM is due and payable when no remaining borrower lives in the
                     mortgaged property, or when any other covenants of the mortgage have been violated.
                     (Borrowers are those parties who have signed the Note and Mortgage or Deed of Trust).

Preparation of the Certificate of HECM Counseling
Counselors generate the certificate only in FHA Connection and not from any other source. FHA
will only accept Certificates of HECM Counseling generated from FHA Connection when the
lender submits the loan for insuring.

The counselor must record on the certificate:
                     The name of the counselor;
   OC PANDMARWN ES




                     The   name of the counseling agency;
                     The   employer HCS (Housing Counseling System) ID of the counseling entity;
                     The   date and signature of both the counselor and all prospective borrowers;
                     The   date that that the client completed counseling;
                     The   expiration date for the certificate provided by the counselor;
                     The   type of counseling performed (face-to-face or telephone);
                     The duration of the counseling session(s); and
                     If applicable, the signature of the client’s legal representative.

The counselor must ensure that the Certificate of HECM Counseling is signed by the client
and that all the relevant information is completed.

The Certificate of HECM Counseling address must reflect the address of the client at the time of
counseling. The certificate does not need to match the address of the property that will serve as
the security for the FHA-insured HECM loan.

Required Signatories of Certificate of HECM Counseling
Only those individuals who must attend the HECM counseling session are required to sign the
Certificate of HECM Counseling.

When counseling is attended on behalf of the borrower by persons holding a durable power of
attorney or a court-appointed conservator or guardian, the individual attending the HECM
counseling session must sign the Certificate of HECM Counseling.




                                                                                                                117
                                                                                     Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                             04/2024


Where the borrower has a trustee, the trustee must sign the mortgage, as necessary to create a
valid first mortgage and second mortgage, if applicable, but the trustee is not required to attend
counseling unless the trustee is also the beneficiary of the loan or a HECM borrower.

Other individuals participating in the session are not required to sign the certificate. This
includes, for example, children or other individuals not on the title.

However, it is permissible to have others sign the certificate in order to document their presence
during the counseling session. Lenders may request this when the borrower’s competency is in
question and the borrower’s legal representative is present for the counseling session.

Providing the Certificate of HECM Counseling to the Client and Lender
The counselor may send the Certificate of HECM Counseling to the client and/or directly to
the lender by mail, fax, or PDF by email, pursuant to the client’s request after the counseling
has concluded. This approach does not prejudge the outcome of the counseling or risk
substituting a lender’s wishes for those of the client.

Counselors must follow these steps if faxing the certificate:
    1.   If, at any time after the counseling has concluded, a client requests that the counselor fax
         a certificate to a lender, the counselor must comply with a client’s request.
    2.   The request does not have to be in writing. If the client makes a verbal request, the
         counselor must note this in the client’s record. The counselor should note the date of
         faxing and the number to which it was faxed in the client’s record.
    3.   Ifaclient makes such a request before counseling has been completed, the counselor
         must acknowledge the request, and then, once the counseling is complete, ask the client if
         they still want the counselor to fax the certificate to a lender.
   4.    Only the client or their legally authorized representative may request that the counselor
         fax the certificate to the lender.

In the case of live video or telephone counseling, the counselor must follow these steps:
     1. The counselor must fax a copy of the certificate to the lender that has been signed by the
         counselor;
    2.   The counselor must then mail a copy of the certificate to the client;
         The client must sign the certificate and then either fax or mail a signed copy to the lender;
   »




   4.    Once the lender receives both copies, the lender can merge the two copies and consider
         them a complete HECM counseling certificate issued on behalf of the client.

Required Receipt of Certificate of HECM Counselor by Lender
The lender may not charge any fees or proceed with processing the HECM loan application until
it receives the certificate, signed by both the counselor and the client.

The counselor must inform the client of this requirement so that the client knows that the loan
may not proceed in any way until the certificate is appropriately signed and transmitted.

Period of Validity of Certificate of HECM       Counseling




                                                                                                   118
                                                                              Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                      04/2024


The Certificate of HECM Counseling is valid for 180 calendar days from the date counseling is
completed.




                                                                                            119
                                                                                    Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                            04/2024


IV.   Client Needs and Circumstances


Counselors must consider clients’ diverse needs and circumstances when conducting the
counseling session. Counselors need to be able to discuss the following topics, with reference to
the clients’ specific circumstances.

IV.A.Property Value’s Effect on Available Equity:
The value of the client’s property determines how much equity may be available through a
reverse mortgage. Clients living in homes with high property values may be able to obtain higher
proceeds through proprietary reverse mortgage products than through HECMs, since HECM
loans are subject to an FHA loan limit. Further, older houses may have lower appraised values,
and some houses may require certain repairs to qualify for a reverse mortgage. When counseling
clients on a HECM, counselor must provide information about proprietary reverse mortgage
products, if available in the current lending market, and provide a comparison of costs and
benefits.

Proprietary reverse mortgages are not insured by the federal government.

Counselors should ensure that clients understand the benefits of FHA mortgage insurance.

IV.B. Borrower’s Age
IV.B.1 Effect on Eligibility

HECMs are available to seniors age 62 or older and to married couples with one individual at
least age 62. Other reverse mortgage products may have different age requirements. See the
HUD Single Family Handbook 4000.1 for requirements for the HECM Program.


IV.B.2 Effect on Access to Equity

For HECMs, FHA includes life expectancy in the formula to determine reverse mortgage
proceeds. Older borrowers are usually eligible for higher initial limits on principal. If there 1s
more than one borrower or a non-borrowing spouse, FHA requires the lender to use the age of
the youngest borrower for the HECM loan calculations.

Other reverse mortgage products may use different calculations to determine proceeds based on
the age of the borrower or multiple borrowers.

IV.C. Income Requirements: Effect on Reverse Mortgage

The HECM Program does not have an income eligibility requirement. Under the requirements of
financial assessment, lenders will review a client’s resources to determine the capacity of the
client to meet their financial obligations with their documented income and assets. The lender
may ask clients for tax returns, pay stubs, evidence of Social Security income, bank statements,
retirement accounts, or other verification sources to document income. The lender will deduct
the total monthly expenses from the total monthly income to determine the client’s residual
income.


                                                                                                     120
                                                                                     Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                             04/2024



If a client’s residual income is not sufficient and they do not have acceptable compensating
factors, a client may still qualify for the HECM with a Life Expectancy Set-Aside for property
taxes, insurance, and other required property charges. Lenders are responsible for determining
whether a client qualifies for a loan under financial assessment.

Counselors should review the requirements of the financial assessment and highlight potential
areas that may impact the client, such as the need for a partial or fully funded life expectancy set
aside or possible denial of   a HECM.   To do this, the counselor must use the HUD tool in
Attachment A.4: HECM Calculation Software and Attachment A.5: Using Client Budget and
Resource Identity Tool (CBRIT).

The counselor must make it clear that qualification for a HECM is determined by the lender.

Other reverse mortgage products may have other income requirements that impact the reverse
mortgage.

IV.D.Credit Requirements: Effect on Reverse Mortgage
Lenders will review clients to determine willingness of clients to pay their financial obligations.
The lender will review the client’s credit report and prior tax and insurance payment history in
making this determination. If the client has significant derogatory credit, the lender may request
an explanation from the client. The client will be given the opportunity to provide documentation
of any extenuating circumstances that contribute to the derogatory credit. Clients with
derogatory credit, without acceptable extenuating circumstance, may qualify fora HECM with
either a fully or partially funded Life Expectancy Set-Aside for required property charges.

Other reverse mortgage products may be available and have different guidelines for client credit.

IV.E. Length of Time Remaining in the Home: Effect on Costs and Obligations
The costs of a reverse mortgage are front-loaded. Unlike a forward mortgage in which costs are
folded into the monthly mortgage payments and paid over time, the costs of a reverse mortgage
are paid (and can be financed) as part of the origination. As a result, the total origination cost of
the loan, relative to the loan amount, decreases over time. Therefore, the counselor and the client
must discuss how long the client expects to remain in the home. Clients who are planning to
move soon may find the costs of the reverse mortgage outweigh the costs of directly selling their
home. By contrast, clients who plan to stay in their homes for a longer period are more likely to
realize a long-term benefit from the HECM or other reverse mortgage loan.

Clients also must consider what the implications of a reverse mortgage are on their obligations
and debts. For example, will they be able to pay taxes and insurance and still maintain the home?
Will they be able to pay for in-home care if that becomes necessary?

IV.F. Payment Plan Options and Their Effect on Current and Future Financial Obligations
For HECMs, clients may choose from several payment plan options. Counselors are reminded
that the HECM program limits the initial drawdowns to no more than 60% of the principal limit
or the sum of mandatory obligations plus ten percent of the principal limit. For all options other



                                                                                                   121
                                                                                   Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                           04/2024


than the single lump sum payment option, the remaining loan balance cannot be withdrawn until
12 months after the loan closing date.

The following are payment plans available for HECMs. Proprietary reverse mortgages may have
different payment plan options.
     1. Line of Credit
    2. Tenure
    3. Term
    4. Combination of a line of credit plan with either tenure or a term plan
    5. Single Lump Sum Payment
See Section V. Features of a Reverse Mortgage for more information on the payment plans.

Paying Off the Existing Mortgage and All Other Liens
The HECM proceeds must be sufficient at least to pay off all existing liens on the home.    Some
clients consider using a HECM to eliminate existing mortgages and other debt.

Recurring and Future Expenses
The counselor must help the client consider the client’s recurring and future expenses, and how
the client’s current income meets existing and future needs. The client may use the proceeds
from a reverse mortgage for these expenses. Counselors should also consider inflation when
reviewing clients recurring and future expenses.

Recurring expenses include, but not limited to:
    1. Property taxes, assessments, Homeowners association and condominium fees
    2. Hazard insurance
    3.   Home maintenance and repair

Future   expenses may include but not limited to:
    1.   Interior and exterior accessibility modifications
    2.   In-home health care or assistance
    3.   Other health-related expenses

Availability of Public Benefits to the Client
Counselors must determine whether the client receives public benefits (e.g. Supplemental
Security Income, Medicare, and Medicaid). If not, counselors must inform clients about their
potential eligibility for such benefits. Counselors will utilize the web-based software designated
by HUD which allows users to check eligibility for frequently utilized public benefit programs.
If the client has an income at or below 200% of the Federal Poverty Level or is a person with a
disability, counselors must run the HUD designated web-based software to inform the client of
programs for which he or she might be eligible and provide the client with appropriate forms or
referrals.

A reverse mortgage may be a substantial supplement to public benefits for seniors; however,
counselors must make clients aware that a reverse mortgage may affect their eligibility for some
public benefits if they allow their loan proceeds to accumulate. Counselors should recommend
that the client(s) seek legal or financial advice with regards to the potential impact of various



                                                                                                 122
                                                                                  Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                          04/2024


public benefits. See Attachment B.9 for more information on public benefits, financial
alternatives and supplements.

IV.G.Non-Borrowing Spouses
HUD allows for the deferral of a due and payable status when the HECM borrower has an
eligible Non-Borrowing Spouse who meets HUD requirements provided in Handbook 4000.1,
II.B. Counselors must discuss the impact of and the obligations for Non-Borrowing Spouses to
remain in the property when the HECM becomes due and payable.

The counselor must address the situation where a borrower remarries after taking out      a HECM
and its impact on the new spouse. In these situations, counselors must advise clients that the
new spouse would be an “ineligible Non-Borrowing Spouse.”

The counselor must advise the client that the ineligible Non-Borrowing Spouse may be added
to anew HECM loan when they have reached the age of 62 via a HECM refinance. The
counselor must indicate that HECM refinancing where clients have remarried is not
guaranteed: it will depend on the eligibility of the clients, the value and remaining equity in
their property, and the lenders underwriting under the financial assessment requirement.

IV.H.Borrower’s Heirs and Estate
Some clients may be concerned about leaving an estate to their heirs. Reverse mortgage
borrowers who remain in the home for many years may use a large part of their home equity,
reducing the amount they can leave to their heirs. However, reverse mortgage borrowers do not
have to use all of the equity made available through the reverse mortgage. The different payment
options enable borrowers to preserve varying amounts of equity.

Counselors must advise clients that fluctuations in the value of their property over time may
increase or decrease their equity. Further, the age of the youngest borrower or Eligible Non-
Borrowing Spouse is a factor in calculating the allowable principal amount of a HECM loan




                                                                                                 123
                                                                                Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                        04/2024


V.     Features of a Reverse Mortgage

V.A. Overview of Reverse Mortgage Programs and Product Features
Counselors must discuss the features of the HECM or reverse mortgage that are relevant to their
client’s situations or interests.

Clients also must consider what the implications of a HECM are on their obligations and debts.
For example, will they be able to pay taxes and insurance and still maintain the home? Will they
be able to pay for in-home care if that becomes necessary?

Eligibility
      1.       Borrower and Non-Borrowing Spouse Eligibility
               Power of Attorney and Conservator/Guardian (if applicable)
       R WD




               Meeting requirements of Financial Assessment
     SAM




               Property Eligibility
               Required Repairs
               Properties Held in Trust (if applicable)
               Financial Assessment Criteria

Loan Features
               Loan Limit
               Principal Limit
               Impact of Loan Interest Rate Lock-In
               Payment Options
               Line of Credit
               Tenure
               Term
                Combination Payment Plans
                Single Lump Sum
              . Interest Rate
              . Annual Adjustable Interest Rates
              . Monthly Adjustable Interest Rates
              . Fixed Interest Rates
              . Interest Rate Cap for ARM
              . Margin/Index
              . Expected Rate
              . Note Rate
              . Leftover Equity
              . Mortgage Insurance
              . Retention of Title

Loan Costs
      1        Mortgage Insurance Premium (Initial and annual)
      2.       Servicing Fee and Set Aside
      3.       Repair
      4.       Financial Assessment requirements



                                                                                             124
                                                                                   Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                           04/2024


        Full Life Expectancy Set-Aside
  OND U Partially Expectancy Set-Aside
        Third Party Costs (Appraisal, Credit Report, and Processing Fees)
        Origination Fee
      . Financing Closing Costs
    10. Payment Plan Change Fees
    11. Total Annual Loan Cost (TALC)

After Closing
     1. Disbursement of Funds
        Right of Rescission
        YY




        Borrower Obligations and, if applicable, Non-Borrowing Spouse Obligations
   PANNE




        Taxes and Hazard Insurance
        Ongoing Repairs and/or maintenance
        Continued Occupancy
        Loan Payable Events/Repayment of Debt
        Prepayments
    9.       Life Expectancy Set-Aside (“LESA”) (Full and Partial)
    10. Impact on Public Benefits
    11. Income Tax Implications
    12. Ability to Change Payment Options
    13. Required Repairs
    14. Repayment of Debt

V.B. Eligibility for HECMs
V.B.1  Borrower Eligibility

All HECM         borrowers must be 62 or older.

A spouse who does not meet the minimum age requirement may be considered a Non-Borrowing
Spouse.

All borrowers who are interested in a HECM must be counseled by a HUD HECM counselor
working for a HUD participating agency before making formal application for a HECM.

Borrowers must maintain their principal residence in the property securing the HECM loan. The
property must be the principal resident for at least one borrower. Borrowers may have only one
principal residence. If the borrower is planning an absence from their principal residence that is
expected to exceed two months, the borrower is required to notify their lender in advance.
Borrowers who have an existing mortgage on their home must either pay it off before getting a
HECM or use the proceeds of the HECM at closing. If the closing proceeds from the HECM loan
are not sufficient to pay off existing liens on the property, the borrower may not incur additional
financial obligations, such as a credit card cash advance or an additional lien against the property
from a home equity loan, to pay off the existing liens.

FHA regulations require that borrowers have no outstanding federal financial obligations or liens
on their property to get a HECM loan.


                                                                                                 125
                                                                                    Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                            04/2024



To be eligible for a HECM for Purchase, clients must be able to make the required monetary
investment at closing. This investment is the difference between the principal limit of the HECM
loan and either the sales price of the property or its appraised value, whichever is less. Clients
may use cash on hand or funds from the sale of their existing property or from the sale of
personal assets such as retirement accounts and stocks to satisfy the monetary investment
requirement. Clients may not use “gap financing” or other interim financing such as credit card
cash advances, seller financing or any other financial obligation that cannot be satisfied at
closing. Additionally, sellers may not provide any concessions, except to reduce the sales price.

Counselors must advise the client that lenders will verify the client’s sources of funds and
conduct a credit check during the application process.

Eligibility requirements for other reverse mortgage products may vary from those for a HECM.

V.B.2.    Property Eligibility

For HECM loans, eligible property types include:
    1. single-family homes (one to four-unit properties),
     2.   manufactured homes (built after   June 1976),
     3.   condominiums,
     4.   properties in planned unit developments, and
     5.   townhouses.

Properties held in a living trust are also eligible to be used as security for a HECM loan.

In addition, properties must be one to four-unit properties held in fee simple, or on renewable
leasehold lasting at least 99 years, or not less than 50 years beyond the date of the 100th birthday
of the youngest borrower.

Newly constructed properties are eligible only if local authorities have issued a Certificate of
Occupancy or its equivalent.

Counselors must be aware of HUD program changes concerning the eligibility of different
property types, as these requirements may change over time. Clients must confirm the eligibility
of their property with their lender.

Ineligible properties for HECMs include the following:
     1. Cooperative units
         Boarding houses
    wD!




         Bed and breakfast establishments
         Condominium projects that are not approved by HUD
    AWB




          Manufactured homes built before June 15, 1976
          Manufactured homes lacking HUD certification labels and a foundation which does not
          meet HUD’s permanent foundation requirement for manufactured homes.

Additionally, the following types of properties are ineligible for purchase with   a HECM:


                                                                                                   126
                                                                                    Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                            04/2024


        Properties being sold by anyone other than the owner of record
   pe)
   N    Properties being re-sold 90 or fewer days from the previous sale
    3. Properties being re-sold between 91 and 180 days from the previous sale and the new
        sales price exceeds 100% of the previous sales price and there is no additional
        documentation to validate the property’s value
Note: There are certain exceptions to the time restriction on sales. Potential borrowers must work
with their lenders to determine whether these sales restrictions apply to their specific properties.

Under the HECM for Purchase program, borrowers must occupy the property within 60 days
from the date of closing.

See HUD Handbook 4000.1.11.B. for additional guidance on requirements.

V.B.3     Modifications and Required Repairs

Borrowers must consider what modifications may be necessary to ensure the home’s habitability
as they age. For example, it may be necessary to add ramps, stability bars in bathtubs, or wider
doorways for wheelchair access. Clients must consider whether the proceeds of the reverse
mortgage will cover the costs of these health-related modifications.

Certain repairs, which affect the home’s habitability and safety, may be required for a property to
be eligible for a HECM loan. The HECM may be closed before the required repairs are
completed if the estimated cost of the repairs does not exceed 15 percent of the maximum claim
amount.
Required repairs that are estimated to cost less than 15 percent of the maximum claim amount
can be completed after loan closing using a Repair Set-Aside.

Under a Repair Set-Aside for a HECM, funds equal to 150 percent of the cost of the repairs, plus
the administration fee, are set aside from the loan. The funds may not be drawn until the repairs
are complete. If the costs exceed the funds that have been set aside, the borrower must pay for
the repairs directly or with any funds available in a HECM line of credit. Repairs must be
completed within the time stated on the loan documents at closing (usually 6 months).
Otherwise, the lender must discontinue all payments on the loan until the repairs are complete.

V.B.4     Properties Held in Trust

If a client’s property is being held in a living trust for the benefit of the borrower or the future
interest of other individuals (such as the borrower’s heirs), the property may be eligible for a
HECM if it meets all other eligibility criteria. The HECM application process is the same as for
properties that are not held in trust. FHA does not require a trust to be revocable for the property
to be eligible for a HECM-Lenders may impose additional restrictions on the trust over and
above FHA guidelines for approving a reverse mortgage.

Financial Assessment
To qualify for a HECM, the client’s income, credit history and property charge payment history
must meet certain criteria. If those criteria are not met, the client may be required to establish a



                                                                                                   127
                                                                                 Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                         04/2024


fully or partially funded LESA from the proceeds of the loan to pay taxes and insurance for the
life expectancy of the youngest borrower.


V.C. Loan Features
V.C.1 Forward Mortgages and Reverse Mortgages

In a forward mortgage, the borrower makes monthly payments to the lender, gradually building
up their equity in the property. In a reverse mortgage, the lender makes payments to the borrower
in the form of a monthly payment or line of credit, if funds are available, that the borrower can
draw upon at their choosing. The borrower continues to hold title to the property, which is
security for the loan.

There are three types of reverse mortgages:
    1. Reverse mortgage insured by the Federal Housing Administration (FHA): The Home
       Equity Conversion Mortgage (HECM) is a reverse mortgage insured by the federal
       government through FHA. FHA insures participating lenders against losses on HECM
       loans, and designs and administers the guidelines governing lender and borrower
       eligibility and use of HECM loans. There are no restrictions for Borrowers on the use of
       loan proceeds.
    2. Proprietary reverse mortgage products: Private lenders offer this type of reverse
       mortgage, which 1s not insured by the federal government. Borrowers may use the loan
       proceeds for a variety of purposes.
    3. Single purpose reverse mortgage: State and local government agencies usually offer this
       type of loan product, in which the borrower may use the proceeds in only one specific
       way. For example, the borrower may use the proceeds for home repairs or payment of
       taxes.

V.C.2   Loan Limits

HECM loan limits are set by law. The maximum HECM loan amount is the lesser of the FHA
mortgage loan limit or the home’s appraised value.

The loan limit on a HECM for purchase is the lesser of the FHA mortgage loan limit, the
appraised value, or the sales price.

Proprietary reverse mortgages may have higher loan limits than HECMs, or no limits at all.
Clients could consider proprietary products if they have a home with a high property value.
Counselors must inform clients aware that proprietary products may have higher costs or
substantially lower loan-to-value ratios than HECMs.

V.C.3   Principal Limit

For HECMs, the principal limit is the amount of money that a borrower may access through a
HECM. The principal limit is determined by multiplying the maximum FHA insurance claim
amount (which is the lesser of the appraised value of the property or the FHA loan limit) by a
factor based on the age of the youngest borrower or non-borrowing spouse and the expected



                                                                                                 128
                                                                                     Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                             04/2024


interest rate, which may be no lower than 5.5 percent. Where a HECM borrower has identified a
Non-Borrowing Spouse, the lender must base the Principal Limit on the age of the youngest
borrower or Non-Borrowing Spouse.

The net principal limit is calculated at closing and increases each month by one-twelfth of the
sum of the note rate and the monthly mortgage insurance premium rate.

V.C.4   Payment Options

The lender disburses HECM loan proceeds to the borrower through the payment plan of the
borrower’s choice: term, tenure, line of credit,   a combination of line of credit with term or tenure
(“modified term” or “modified tenure,” respectively), or single lump sum payment.

For payment plans other than the single lump sum payment, a HECM borrower may request to
change their payment plan at any time during the life of the loan. The lender may charge a fee,
subject to HUD program requirements, for changing the payment plan. A borrower may change
the term of payments, receive an unscheduled payment, suspend payments, establish or terminate
a line of credit, or receive the entire net principal limit (the difference between the current
principal limit and the outstanding loan balance) in one payment. Counselor should advise client
to verify any requirements or fees to change their payment plan.

For HECMs, the lender establishes plans with monthly payments to the borrower (term or
tenure) by using the net principal limit, the length of the term in months (for the tenure option,
100 years minus the age of the current borrower), and the note rate. For either of these plans,
borrowers may choose to receive less than the maximum monthly payment allowed under the
plan, in which case the remaining funds are placed into a line of credit.

Counselors should suggest clients consult with a financial advisor if they are being urged by a
lender to purchase an annuity or other investment. Counselors who suspect improper lender
influence on use of HECM proceeds should report this to the Office of Housing Counseling and
Office of Inspector General.

The following payment plans are available for HECMs.

Line of Credit
The line of credit allows the borrower to draw varying amounts of money at unscheduled
intervals until the line of credit 1s exhausted. Clients may also choose to draw all available funds
at closing, subject to the program limits of no more than 60 percent of the principal limit which
include all mandatory obligations. Any remaining funds will be available 12 months after the
loan closing.

The line of credit is exhausted when the loan balance equals the net principal limit. As with any
HECM payment plan, a borrower with a line of credit who uses up the entire principal limit may
remain in the home as long as they continue to pay homeowners insurance real estate taxes and
makes any necessary home repairs. Counselors must caution clients against withdrawing all
funds at closing if there is not an immediate need to do so. Clients who draw all proceeds at



                                                                                                     129
                                                                                    Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                            04/2024


closing will accrue interest on the loan balance and will not benefit from the credit line growth
feature.

The remaining available funds in the line of credit will grow at the note rate as it adjusts over
time, providing the client access to a larger line of credit over time. Counselors must not tell
clients that HECM credit lines “earn interest,” because credit line growth is simply increased
access to borrowing power, comparable to an increase in a credit limit on a credit card.

Open-ended HECM payment plan options have principal limit growth at the note rate and not
just the line of credit.

Counselors should advise clients that proprietary reverse mortgages may have a lower credit line
growth rate, or no credit line growth at all, which will affect the amount of cash available to the
borrower over the life of the loan.

Term
Under the term option, borrowers choose a fixed period of time during which they receive equal
monthly payments. At the end of the term, the borrowers may remain in the home as long as they
fulfill their obligations under the terms of the mortgage. This includes, but is not limited to,
paying their property taxes and hazard insurance, paying property assessments, and maintaining
the home.

This plan provides security of income to clients who know how long they will remain in their
home. Because the available funds may be disbursed over a shorter period, clients may receive
larger monthly payments than they would under a tenure plan.

Tenure
Under the tenure option, the borrower receives equal monthly payments as long as the borrower
maintains primary residence in the home. Even if the loan balance exceeds the principal limit of
the loan, the borrower will continue to receive payments. The tenure payment is calculated by
subtracting the age of the youngest borrower from 100 years, although the borrower will
continue to receive payments if he or she lives past 100 years of age. This plan is particularly
useful for clients who intend to remain in their homes for a long period.

Combination Payment Plans
Borrowers may combine a line of credit option with term or tenure payment options. Modified
Tenure combines a line of credit with monthly payments as long as the borrower remains in the
home. Modified Term combines a line of credit with monthly payments for a fixed period
determined by the borrower.

This option is beneficial for clients who need a fixed amount of money each month and who
want to reserve funds for unforeseen expenses. Counselors should remind the clients that they
are still subject to the 60 percent of available principal limit including mandatory
obligations.




                                                                                                    130
                                                                                    Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                            04/2024


Single Disbursement Lump Sum Payment
This payment option will be limited to a single disbursement at loan closing which cannot
exceed the greater of 60 percent of the Principal Limit or mandatory obligations plus 10 percent
of the Principal Limit.

V.C.5    Note Rate

Counselors must ensure that clients understand the interest rate being charged by the lender for
the HECM or other reverse mortgages.

For either adjustable or fixed-rate loans, lower interest rates may be offset by higher origination
costs. Counselors should advise clients that higher origination costs (subject to the maximum
costs allowed by HUD, for HECMs) and the financing of closing costs may mean less cash
available to the borrower.

    1.   Adjustable Interest Rate: The interest rates for adjustable loans are comprised of an index
         rate plus a margin. Rates that adjust monthly tend to reflect economic conditions on a
         timelier basis. As economic conditions change, the adjustable rate will rise or fall to its
         maximum cap or minimum floor.
   2.    With an adjustable rate mortgage, the net principal limit will grow at the current rate,
         which will fluctuate monthly or annually, whichever the borrower chooses.
   3.    HECM adjustable-rate mortgages are based on either the Treasury Rates (adjusted to a
         constant maturity of one month or one year; also called the Constant Maturity Treasury
         [CMT] index) or Secured Overnight Financing Rate (SOFR) index. See HUD Handbook
       4000.1 for clarification of eligible index types for adjustable rate HECM loans.
   4. Margin: The margin is an amount that a lender adds to the index to determine the note
       rate of the adjustable rate mortgage. The note rate, which is a combination of the index
       and margin, affects how much a borrower pays on the loan balance as well as the growth
       of the principal limit. The margin 1s also used to determine the expected rate, which
       affects the calculation of the initial principal limit.
       The higher the rate, the lower the principal limit.
   NN




       Margins may vary from lender to lender and from product to product.
   7. Interest Rate Cap: For HECMs, the interest rate cap 1s the maximum amount set by HUD
       that the lender may add to the initial interest rate on an adjustable rate loan.
       Caps may vary based on the adjustable product selected.
   9. Annual adjustable rate HECM loans have a 2 percent annual cap and a 5 percent lifetime
       cap.
   10. Fixed Interest Rate: Some lenders offer HECMs with a fixed interest rate.
   11. With a fixed-rate HECM, the borrower must take a single lump sum payment, at loan
       closing. The principal limit and the loan balance will grow at the interest rate determined
       at closing, but the borrower will not be able to make additional draws in the future.
   12. Counselors should advise clients that drawing the entire loan balance at closing may
       expose the borrower to risks including the lack of future availability of loan proceeds
       from credit line growth. Additionally, once the full amount is drawn, the borrower will
       pay interest on that loan balance for the life of the loan. This may create a significant and
       unnecessary expense if the borrower does not need all the funds at closing.



                                                                                                  131
                                                                                     Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                             04/2024


    13. In most cases, the interest rate on a fixed rate will be higher, initially, than an adjustable
        rate, because a fixed rate brings greater risk to the lender. Since an interest rate on an
        adjustable-rate loan may increase over time, an adjustable-rate loan may actually provide
        more available borrowing power for some borrowers.
    14. Expected Average Mortgage Interest Rate: The expected average mortgage interest rate
        means the interest rate used to calculate the principal limit established at closing. The
        lender calculates this rate at origination and uses it to determine the principal limit and
        the servicing fee set-aside (af applicable).
    15. For a fixed-rate HECM loan, the expected average mortgage interest rate is the same as
        the fixed rate and is the same as the note rate. The higher the expected average mortgage
        interest rate, the lower the principal limit will be once HUD approves the floor.
    16. For an adjustable-rate loan, the expected average mortgage interest rate is the sum of the
        lender’s margin plus the weekly average yield for U.S. Treasury securities adjusted to a
        constant maturity of ten years. HUD establishes an interest rate index floor by mortgagee
        letter.
    17. Note Rate: The note rate is equal to the current interest rate (current index plus margin).
        The lender uses the note rate to calculate the loan balance, credit line growth, and the
        available loan funds at any given time.


V.C.6   Leftover Equity Reserve

When a borrower takes out a HECM, there is a portion of the equity in the home that is reserved
to reduce the lender’s and FHA’s risk. The amount reserved is determined by the ratio of the
loan’s principal limit to the amount of equity in the home.

V.C.7   Mortgage Insurance

HECMsSs are insured by the federal government. The borrower pays a mortgage insurance
premium at closing and on a monthly basis. FHA insures HECM loans to protect lenders against
loss if the loan balance exceeds the property value when the loan is due and payable. If the sales
proceeds are not sufficient to pay the amount owed, FHA will pay the lender the difference.
Because lenders are protected by FHA insurance from losses, they may be able to provide better
loan terms, including a higher principal limit and lower costs to borrowers.

FHA insurance also directly protects the borrower. If the lender fails to make payments due to
the borrower, FHA will make the payments to the borrower.

V.C.8   Retention of Title

Throughout the term of a reverse mortgage, the borrower retains ownership of the home. The
title to the subject property will remain with the borrower or the borrower’s estate until the home
is sold.


V.C.9   Repayment of Debt

A HECM loan becomes due and payable for any of the following reasons:



                                                                                                    132
                                                                                     Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                             04/2024


    1.   The last surviving borrower passes away and there is not a Non-Borrowing Spouse that
         meets the Qualifying Attributes and Requirements of HECM program;
    2.   The property is no longer the principal residence of the borrower. This is a dwelling that
         the borrower spends the majority of the calendar year.
    3.   Fora period of more than 12 consecutive months, the last surviving borrower and/or
         eligible Non-Borrowing Spouse fails to physically occupy the principal residence because
         of physical or mental illness;
   4.    The borrower and/or eligible Non-Borrowing Spouse fails to perform an obligation under
         the mortgage, such as paying taxes and hazard insurance and maintaining the property.

The lender will send the borrower’s estate, heirs, or other parties with legal title to the property
securing the HECM a notice with such options as:
    e satisfying the HECM loan balance;
    e selling the property for the lesser of the outstanding loan balance or 95% of the appraised
         value; or
    e providing the lender with a Deed in Lieu of Foreclosure.
See HUD Handbook 4000.1 for additional guidance on the servicing of due and payable
requirements for HECMs.

“Open-end” credit loans allow for the repayment of some or the entire principal, which the
borrower may re-borrow at some future date. ““Closed-end” credit loans do not allow the
borrower to re-borrow principal that is paid on the loan. Usually, fixed-rate HECMs are closed-
end credit loans.
Other reverse mortgages may have different conditions for when the loan becomes due and
payable.


V.C.10 Non-Recourse Feature

“Non-recourse”’ means that if a lender takes legal action against the borrower for default on the
loan, the borrower is not legally obligated to pay the lender more than the lender can get for the
sale of the property. For HECMs, this repayment standard also applies to the borrower’s heirs or
estate when the property is sold to repay the outstanding loan.

However, if the heirs or the estate wish to keep the property, heirs may purchase the property.
Heirs must notify the lender of their intention to purchase the property at the lesser of:
     1. The outstanding HECM balance or
    2. 95% of the appraised value of the property, based on a timely, lender-ordered appraisal.

For a HECM, the lender is limited to six months it may provide to the heirs or the estate to pay
off the loan. The lender can request HUD approval for up to two 90-day extensions if the heirs or
estate can demonstrate they are actively marketing the property. Extension requests must be
made before the initial six months or previously extended timeframe has expired. The lender
must promptly confirm the intention of the heirs or the estate to either, sell the property to a third
party or, to keep the home and pay the balance of the loan in full. Where no information has been
provided, the lender will have no other option but to initiate foreclosure.



                                                                                                   133
                                                                                    Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                            04/2024




V.C.11 Loan Costs

Counselors must be familiar with the costs of HECMs and reverse mortgages. They must be able
to explain to clients how:
     1. Reverse mortgages are most costly at the beginning of the loan term
    2. The annual average cost of a reverse mortgage generally decreases over time
    3. Generally, reverse mortgages are best for borrowers who intend to remain in their home
        over a long period of time, allowing the average cost of the loan to decrease over time.

Although the counselor can provide a general overview of reverse mortgage costs to a client,
only a lender can provide the client with the actual costs of a specific product. Only the client
can weigh the costs and benefits of a reverse mortgage for themself to determine whether the
loan would meet their needs and circumstances.

Itemized HECM and Reverse Mortgage Costs
Lenders often present reverse mortgage products to consumers by emphasizing the itemized
costs of the loan, which include:
    1.       Application fee and origination fee
             Up-front Mortgage Insurance Premiums (MIP) for HECM loans
        YY




             Monthly MIP (or HECM loans
   PANNE




             Third-party closing costs
             Third Party Property Tax Verification Fee
             Servicing Fee and servicing fee set-asides
             Life Expectancy Set-Asides
             Interest

However, these costs do not always allow consumers to tell if one product is more or less
expensive than another. In order to compare loan products, a consumer must gather more
information beyond the itemized costs to assess the benefit and value of the product, both now
and in the future.

Application Fee and Origination Fee
These fees compensate the lender for processing, underwriting, and preparing the loan
documents. For HECMs, lender origination fees are limited to the greater of $2,500 or two
percent of $200,000, plus one percent of any portion of the maximum claim amount that is
greater than $200,000. The maximum origination fee for HECMs is $6,000. These fees may be
changed through notice by HUD.

Mortgage Insurance Premiums
Borrowers must pay both an upfront and monthly premium for the insurance provided by FHA.

These premiums are calculated at closing. Mortgage insurance premiums are charged to the
borrower throughout the life of the loan and are not refundable.




                                                                                                    134
                                                                                     Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                             04/2024


HECM borrowers who refinance into another HECM are eligible for a reduction in their upfront
mortgage insurance premium. The premium paid on the new HECM is calculated by multiplying
the difference between the old maximum claim by 2 percent and the new maximum claim.
HECM      for purchase is not a refinance, and as such there is no initial reduction in premium even
if the borrower previously held            a HECM mortgage.

FHA charges an insurance premium as protection against crossover risk, which occurs when the
loan balance exceeds the property value. With proprietary products for which the crossover
exposure may be greater than with a HECM, lenders may protect themselves by setting the initial
principal limit lower than they would on a HECM (as shown in the chart below).

HECM loans generally offer higher ratios of principal limit to equity in the home and lower costs
as aresult of the mortgage insurance program. They also provide lenders and borrowers with the
security of full backing by the federal government.

Proprietary reverse mortgage products may be subject to other mortgage insurance premium
policies.

                                                                  Loan Balance




                                     Crossover Risk
                                         (FHA)
                                                              "_ Property Value



    Initial Principal Limit
             (HECM)




                 Initial Principal
                        Limit
                   (Proprietary)


                                                                      Time



Third-Party Closing Costs
These costs include the usual and customary expenses associated with obtaining a mortgage,
including the appraisal, credit report, title searches, and title insurance. The costs depend upon
the third parties who perform the activity for the lender, not on the type of mortgage. Clients
must obtain a list of estimated closing costs from their lender prior to closing. Counselors must
not quote any specific closing costs but may discuss usual or customary ranges. The counselor
must inform the client that none of the charges associated with these third-party origination
activities may be paid before the counseling is completed. A client must not write a check or pay
cash for the services until they complete a reverse mortgage application with the lender.

Third-Party Property Tax Verification Fee
A Third Party Property Tax Verification Fee is a fee charged to the lender by a third party to
verify the borrower’s property tax payment history and the annual amount of property taxes due




                                                                                                  135
                                                                                     Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                             04/2024


for a specific property. For HECMs, this fee may be paid by the borrower as long as it is a
reasonable and customary amount and does not exceed the actual amount paid by the lender.

Lenders may not charge a Tax Service Fee, which is a fee for services related to obtaining and
monitoring tax bills and tax payments after closing, for HECMs.

Servicing Fees and Servicing Fee Set-Aside
Servicing fees are monthly fees paid to the lender for administering the loan, such as making
monthly cash advances and processing payment plan changes. They are added to the cost of the
loan and are set aside from the available equity at closing.

For annually adjusting and fixed rate HECM loans, these fees may not exceed $30 a month. For
monthly adjusting HECMs, the fee cap is $35. Lenders may charge less than the maximum set by
FHA. These fees may be changed by notice by HUD.

For HECMs, the servicing fee set-aside is the present amount of money that will be enough to
pay all of the monthly servicing fees until the borrower reaches age 100. This calculation ensures
that sufficient loan proceeds are set aside so that the servicer may collect the monthly servicing
fee. This amount is subtracted from the principal limit to arrive at the net principal limit that is
available at closing. The amount reserved for these future payments is not part of the loan
balance, does not accrue interest, and is not a cost to the consumer until the fee is paid.

Payment Plan Change Fees
The borrower has the option of changing the HECM payment plan type at any time for a fee not
to exceed and amount established by HUD, (currently $20). Borrowers should ask lenders about
the procedures for changing the payment plan when applying for a reverse mortgage. No
proposed payment plan change can exceed the HECM draw limits as established by HUD.

Life Expectancy Set-Asides
All HECM borrowers are required to undergo a financial assessment (FA). This assessment is
used to determine if they will have sufficient resources to pay for ongoing property charges
including, but not limited to, property taxes, insurance, homeowner association fee, and
applicable municipal, county or state property assessments. The use of HECM proceeds will be
considered as a resource to cover these costs. The FA will determine if the loan requires a full or
partial Life Expectancy Set-asides (LESA). The lender will make the final determination of
whether a LESA is required as part of the loan underwriting.

Total Annual Loan Cost (TALC)
Similar to an Annual Percentage Rate on a forward mortgage, the Total Annual Loan Cost is the
interest rate that shows the true cost of a HECM by including all loan costs and taking into
account the future loan balance, including all loan advances. It is a projection based on how long
the borrower will have the loan, how the borrower draws the loan proceeds, and an assumed
property appreciation rate. The TALC is what the interest rate would be if all loan costs had to be
included in the interest rate. The TALC will decrease the longer the borrower has the HECM, as
the costs associated with the loan are averaged out over a longer period of time.




                                                                                                 136
                                                                                Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                        04/2024


TALC rates depend on:
   1. The payment option and the timing and size of the loan advances,
   2.     The loan term, and
   3.     Home appreciation or depreciation.

TALC Rates: Payment Options and Timing of Loan Advances
TALC rates are high at the beginning of the loan because up-front costs are a large part of the
total amount owed. Smaller loan advances in the early years generate higher TALC rates because
up-front costs are a large percent of the loan balance. However, when these up-front costs are
spread out over more years, they become a smaller percent of the loan balance. Larger loan
advances create lower TALC rates because they reduce the impact of the up-front costs.

TALC Rates Over Time: Comparing Payment Plans
The following charts display how payment options and payment timing affect the TALC rates for
a line of credit reverse mortgage and a tenure plan reverse mortgage.

The tenure loan had up-front costs of $6,500 for the borrower to receive $562 monthly.
However, after 2 years, the borrower has paid $9,751 to get $13,488. The TALC rates decline
over time as the borrower receives loan proceeds and the up-front costs become a smaller
percentage of the loan balance.
              Loan Closing              Loan A: Line of Credit             Loan B: Tenure
        Net Cash to Borrower                   $70,298                       $562/month
         Total Financed Costs                   $6,500                          $6,500
             Loan Balance                      $76,798                          $7,062


            After 2 Years               Loan A: Line of Credit             Loan B: Tenure
        Net Cash to Borrower                   $70,298                       $562/month
             Total Costs                       $21,464                          $9,751
            Loan Balance                       $91,762                         $23,239
             TALC Rate                          13.4%                           49.5%


            Time Lapsed                 Loan A: Line of Credit             Loan B: Tenure
                2 years                        13.4%                           49.5%
               12 years                        10.0%                           10.8%
              17 Years                          8.3%                            9.0%
              22 Years                          7.39%                           6.5%

TALC Rates and Home Appreciation
   1. The loan balance reaches the principal limit over time.
   2. With higher appreciation of the home’s value over time, the rising loan balance is less
      likely to exceed the principal limit or property value.
   3. As the home value appreciates over time, TALC rates become higher.




                                                                                                137
                                                                                     Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                             04/2024




The chart below shows how different appreciation rates impact TALC        rates.
         Time Lapsed          0% Appreciation           4% Appreciation             8% Appreciation
                             Line of    Tenure         Line of    Tenure           Line of    Tenure
                             Credit                    Credit                      Credit

          2 Years           13.4%        49.5%        13.4%         49.5%       13.4%      49.5%
         12 Years             5.9%        8.4%        10.0%          10.8%      10.0%       10.8%
         17 Years             4.1%        2.2%          8.3%          9.0%       9.7%       11.0%
Financing Closing Costs
Borrowers may finance the mortgage insurance premium, origination fees, and third-party costs,
using a draw at closing from the loan to cover these initial costs. Borrowers may also pay closing
costs with their own available funds.

V.D. After Closing
V.D.1 HECM Right of Rescission

After closing, borrowers have three business days to cancel the HECM loan. If a borrower
decides not to take the HECM, they must notify the lender immediately of this decision. A
borrower is entitled to a refund of all fees should they exercise the right of recission. There is no
right of rescission with a HECM for purchase in most cases, unless state law provides it.

V.D.2     Disbursement of HECM      Funds

Initial disbursements are limited to 60 percent of the available HECM proceeds including
mandatory obligations. The lender disburses term and tenure payments on the first business day
of each month. Lenders must disburse line-of-credit payments within five business days of
receiving a written request for funds from a borrower. Lenders are subject to late charges equal
to 10 percent of the disbursement amount (up to $500) if they do not meet the payment
timeframes. There is no minimum amount that the borrower must withdraw from a line of credit.

V.D.3,    HECM Borrower Obligations

The borrower must pay property taxes, hazard insurance and other property assessments. Under
the financial assessment (FA), the lender will determine if a borrower requires a full or partial
Life expectancy set-aside (LESA) with their HECM. The final decision on the use of LESA 1s
the lender’s, based on the FA underwriting. Should the LESA funds be exhausted, it’s the
borrowers and/or eligible non-borrower spouse’s responsibility to ensure the payment of taxes,
insurance, and other property assessment.

The borrower must maintain the condition of the property. If the borrower fails to maintain the
property, the lender may notify the borrower of the deficient condition, indicating the necessary
repairs. If the borrower does not begin repairs within 60 days, the lender may declare the loan
due and payable.




                                                                                                   138
                                                                                 Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                         04/2024


The borrower must maintain the property as their principal residence.

V.D.4   Life-Expectancy Set-Aside Funds

When the HECM loan is due and payable, regardless of the mortgagor’s payment plan, any funds
that remain in a Life Expectancy Set-Aside shall not be disbursed to the mortgagor, estate, or
non-borrowing spouse. Non-borrowing spouses eligible to remain in the home are not eligible to
receive any money from the reverse mortgage, including any money remaining in a set-aside
account established for the payment of property taxes and insurance. No LESA funds will be
disbursed during any applicable deferral period for an eligible non-borrowing spouse.

V.D.5   Impact on Public Benefits

A HECM does not affect a borrower’s basic Social Security and Medicare benefits because
eligibility for these programs is not based on income and assets. However, a HECM may affect
eligibility for benefits from needs-based government assistance programs (i.e. Supplemental
Security Income, Medicaid and Food Stamps). Generally, these programs do not treat loan
advances as income. However, if the borrower retains loan advances in a readily available form
(i.e. a bank account) past the end of the month in which the borrower received them, then the
proceeds count as a “liquid resource” and may disqualify the borrower from receiving need-
based government benefits.
For the current limits for allowable liquid resources in the Supplemental Security program, go to
www.ssa.gov. If the borrower resources exceed these limits, that benefit will be terminated.

V.D.6   Income Tax Implications

The Internal Revenue Service does not consider loan advances from a HECM to be taxable
income; the IRS views HECM loan advances as debt. Interest on a HECM 1s not tax-deductible
until it is actually paid through loan prepayment or payoff.




                                                                                                139
                                                                                  Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                          04/2024


VI. HECM       for Purchase


VI.A.HECM for Purchase Program Guidance
Counselors conducting sessions with clients who are interested in purchasing a residence with a
HECM should refer to the program guidance provided in Mortgagee Letter 2009-11.

VI.B. Required Topics for Counseling
HECM for Purchase requires counselors to not only cover the typical HECM counseling
requirements with clients, but several unique features for this product.
Counselors must discuss with prospective HECM for Purchase borrowers the following topics:
    1. Role of the real estate professional
        The decision to purchase a home
   WY




        The selection and purchase of a home
        The sale or disposition of a home
   AMR




        Importance of legally binding sales contracts
        Importance of home inspections in the buying process, with provision of “For your
         Protection Get   a Home Inspection (FORM HUD        92564-CN)” and “10 important
       questions” documents
   7. Ability to write an offer contingent on satisfactory home inspection and financing
   8. Including repair expenses in the purchase agreement
   9. Role of the appraisal in the buying process
   10. Expenses associated with properties needing significant repairs
   11. Future draws of HECM proceeds are unlikely in a HECM for purchase
   12. Limited right to cancel transaction at any time prior to closing, and
   13. Closing Disclosure Form

Counselors must also advise clients on the following topics:
    1. Real estate professionals must provide clients with the FHA Amendatory Clause and Real
       Estate Certification in HUD Handbook 4000.1 H.A.1, Origination/Processing. There is no
       three-day right of rescission for HECM mortgages being used for a purchase, unless
       required by state law;
       If the Appraisal Report states that the property value is “subject to”, or conditioned on,
       the repair of various deficiencies, these repairs must be completed before closing;
       If the borrower pays for the repairs, payment must come from the borrower’s personal
         assets; and
         Borrowers may not borrow funds to close — all funds to close must come from the
         borrower’s personal assets and must be available at closing.

Counselors must caution clients regarding the following:
    1. Clients are not required to use a HECM to purchase property;
    2. Foreclosed and short-sale properties may require substantial repairs to be habitable, and it
       may be necessary to perform these repairs prior to closing on the reverse mortgage. If so,
       and if the borrower is paying for the repairs, then payment must come from the
         borrower’s personal assets, and not HECM   funds;
         Clients must not be rushed into purchasing a property; and




                                                                                                140
                                                                                Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                        04/2024


   4.   Counselors must report suspected fraud to the Office of Housing Counseling, to the HUD
        Office of Inspector General, or both.


VI.C.Other Liens on Property
If the client currently has a HECM on their property, that lien must be satisfied prior to FHA’s
endorsement of the new HECM for purchase. A borrower may not have two HECM mortgages at
the same time.

VI.D. Investment Requirement: Effect on HECM for Purchase
Clients interested in a HECM to purchase a new property should receive counseling about the
monetary investment required at closing. At closing, HECM borrowers must provide a monetary
investment, which is the difference between the HECM principal limit and the sales price of the
property, plus any HECM loan-related fees that are not financed, minus the amount of the
earnest deposit, down payment, or both. Borrowers may provide a larger investment amount to
retain a portion of HECM proceeds for future payments or withdrawals.

Mortgagee Letter 2009-11 has information on what funding sources can and cannot be used to
satisfy the monetary investment requirement.




                                                                                             141
                                                                                    Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                            04/2024


VII.Financial Alternatives and Supplements

Counselors must assess the client’s financial situation to provide the most appropriate housing
options. Here are questions that counselors must ask clients to assess how well a HECM meets
the client’s needs:
     1. What are your financial needs and how would a HECM help you? This may include large
         medical expenses or home repairs.
    2. How long do you plan to stay in your home? A reverse mortgage may not make sense, for
         example, for someone planning to move two years in the future
    3. When do you need the loan? Clients may be eligible for more money under a reverse
         mortgage as they get older and the value of their home increases.
    4. Is downsizing a better option? Examining other housing options can help your clients
         weigh the costs and benefits of staying in their home versus moving to more affordable
         housing which may include rental options.
         What are your financial needs and how would a HECM help you?
   nn




    6. Are there any other potential borrowers including spouses, non-borrowing spouses or
         family members?

Further details and resources regarding these options are below.

VILA. Selling and Moving
For many clients, selling their homes and moving into a less expensive residence or one that
better suits their physical needs may be the most appropriate option. Clients must consider the
costs of the real estate transaction, which usually include real estate broker fees, moving
expenses, and may include other costs as well. The process of investigating other living
arrangements will help clients determine whether to purchase a different home or remain where
they are, and ultimately, evaluate the advantages of a HECM or another type of reverse
mortgage.

Counselors must discuss the following options:
     1. Alternative Ownership Arrangements
    2. Retirement communities
     3. Retirement communities may offer several services such as meals, housekeeping
         services, transportation, and activities. Residents may retain their independence while
         eliminating most of the burdensome responsibilities of homeownership.
         Home-sharing arrangements
   ne




         Clients may be able to find another senior to share a home, either through informal
         networking or, in some communities, through an agency that screens and matches
         potential home-sharers.
         Selling:
   1 NID




         Taxes, insurance, or other property charges may become too costly
            The home is too large, and the client wants to downsize.
       .    The upkeep of the home is too burdensome or costly
     10.    The house needs repairs or upgrades that the client cannot afford.
     11.    The client believes he or she will save money by selling and renting.
     12.    Renting


                                                                                                   142
                                                                                    Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                            04/2024


    13. Subsidized or affordable senior apartments—Subsidized housing is generally available
        to people 62 years or older and below a certain income level. Both state and federal
        programs offer this type of housing, which provides funding towards monthly rent.
        Typically, seniors would pay no more than 30% of their adjusted gross income. The
        subsidized portion would cover the rest, up to the established fair market rents. Seniors
        who qualify for subsidized housing are less subject to dramatic increases in rent over
        time if their income remains stable. The stabilization of housing costs is often attractive
        to seniors living in homes with low value or homes subject to large debt. Seniors must
        be aware that the proceeds from selling their home or any other large increase in income
        may affect their ability to qualify for subsidized housing.
    14. Non-subsidized rentals—There are many communities that offer non-subsidized
        housing for seniors 55 years or older. When living in non-subsidized rental housing,
          residents have more flexibility with the amount of assets they maintain, as their assets
        do not affect their eligibility to live in the community. However, rents may increase
        over time, possibly on an annual basis. Seniors must plan for potential increases when
        considering long-term non-subsidized rental housing.
    15. Other Financial Options
    16. Home Equity Loans: A home equity loan uses the equity in the borrower’s home as
          collateral. Because the home acts as collateral, one risks losing the home to foreclosure
          in the event of default. Home equity loans are sometimes useful to help pay for
          unexpected home repairs and medical bills and other purposes. A home equity loan
          creates a junior lien against the borrower’s home. A major difference between a HECM
          and a home equity loan is that unlike   a HECM, borrowers must make a scheduled term
        of payments to pay off the principal and interest as soon as the home equity loan is
        closed. Borrowers must have sufficient income and meet lender underwriting
        requirements to qualify for a home equity loan.
    17. Individual Retirement Accounts: Many clients may have Individual Retirement
          Accounts (IRAs) that may serve as sources for extra income. There are several IRAs
          including, but not limited to, traditional IRAs, Roth IRAs, SIMPLE IRAs, and SEP
        IRAs. Combined with potential tax savings at the time of contribution, IRAs may be
        valuable tax management tools for individuals. Depending on income at the time of
        retirement, an individual may be able to fit into a lower tax bracket with tax-deductible
        contributions during his or her working years, while still enjoying a lower tax bracket
        during retirement. Seniors who have invested in IRAs should contact their financial
        institutions to learn more about their ability to draw on these accounts.
    18. Refinance of Existing Forward Mortgage: If a client has an existing forward mortgage,
        they may be able to refinance the mortgage to obtain a loan with better terms, including
        a possible lower interest rate. In some cases, the client may be able to pay off the
        existing mortgage and obtain funds by borrowing against the additional equity in the
        property. Borrowers must have sufficient income and meet lender requirements to
        qualify for a refinancing mortgage.

VII.B. Services provided through the Aging Network
Federal funds support the provision of services in local communities through the Aging Network.
Three areas benefit the most broadly from federal funding:




                                                                                                     143
                                                                                       Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                               04/2024


    1.   Information and Referral (i&R)—These programs exist to help older adults and their
         caregivers find specific information on programs that are available to the elderly. Many
         I&R programs also publish a directory of resources or maintain a website with
         information about community resources for the elderly.
         Senior Centers—Many senior centers offer a variety of exercise programs, health
         screenings, socialization and recreation opportunities, counseling services, hot meals, and
         other services and activities.
         Nutrition Services—A significant portion of funds under the Older Americans Act is
         targeted to provide hot noontime meals in senior centers, churches, and other convenient
         locations. Home-delivered meals may also be available.

VII.C. State and Local Programs
A wide variety of additional services and programs may be offered by local public agencies or
nonprofit groups at the state and local level, such as:
    1. Home repair and adaptation services—Subsidized funds for minor home repairs, to build
         wheelchair ramps, and to install safety features for older adults;
   2.    In-home care, homemaker, and chore services—Public assistance available for those who
         need help with tasks like housekeeping, grocery shopping, or personal care;
    3.   Adult day care—Group care programs may serve as an alternative to expensive one-on-
         one home care for adults who need constant supervision;
   4.    Transportation—Assistance via public programs or volunteer groups;
   5.    Volunteer coordination programs—Assistance with yardwork, house painting, roof
         repairs, grocery shopping, transportation, social contact, and other needs;
   6.    Corporate Programs—Corporate eldercare programs may provide information and
         referrals for their employees, as well as more tangible support such as using a corporate
         van to deliver meals;
   7.    Local hospitals—Wellness events or health fairs that provide free blood pressure checks
         and materials on nutrition and fitness;
    8.   Churches—Support of "friendly visiting” of older people who are homebound by another
         member of the church; and
   9.    Civic groups—Charitable events to serve older adults.

VILD. Public Benefits
Many low- to moderate-income homeowners are not aware that they are eligible to receive
benefits from major public programs, such as:
        Supplemental Security Income—Supplemental Security Income (SSI) provides monthly
        cash payments to qualifying low-income persons 65 and older.
        Medicaid—Medicaid is a health insurance program for people with low incomes, paid for
        by a combination of federal and state dollars. Medicaid eligibility guidelines vary from
        state to state.
        Medicare Prescription Drug Program—Medicare Prescription Drug Program (Medicare
        Part D) is an optional add-on to the regular Medicare health insurance program. In most
        cases, seniors can save on their drug costs (compared to full retail) by signing up for this
        program.
        Local Tax Deferral or Exemption Programs—Many communities offer local tax deferral
        programs for seniors who cannot make the payments. These programs are normally



                                                                                                    144
                                                                                   Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                           04/2024


       designed to allow senior citizens to defer payment of part or all of the property taxes on
       their homes.
   e   The Aging Network—The Aging Network is the system of public and private nonprofit
       agencies and organizations responsible for implementing the Older Americans Act
       (OAA). Enacted in 1965, the OAA sets forth objectives for improving and maintaining
       quality of life for older Americans.
   e   State Units on Aging—State Units on Aging (SUAs) are the designated state agencies
       serving the elderly. They coordinate related state activities and administer federal funds
       at the state level. See States Units on Aging (acl.gov) for more information.
   e   Area Agencies on Aging—Area Agencies on Aging (AAAs) coordinate the delivery of a
       variety of services to meet the needs of the older population, including information and
       referral, outreach, transportation, in-home care, legal and protective services, counseling,
       socialization, recreation, and education.

HECM counselors and agencies are encouraged to utilize the Client Budget and Resources
Identity Tool (CBRIT) for all clients as a resource to identify programs and agencies that can
assist seniors. Counselors should encourage clients to utilize these state and local resources to
meet their needs.




                                                                                                    145
                                                                                     Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                             04/2024


VIII.     Reverse Mortgage Counseling Tools

VIII.A.           Software
Counselors must generate and discuss loan printouts, amortization schedules, and total annual
loan cost (TALC) using HUD’s calculation software (Attachment A.4: HECM Online
Comparison Tool). Only counselors on the HECM Counselor roster may use this software.

HECM calculation software can provide the following:
   1. Future remaining credit line projections based on credit line draws specified by the client
          (if the client selects a credit line)
    2.    A comparison of estimated loan details at closing
    3.    Projected loan comparisons at various points in the future including projected figures for
          total cash received, cash remaining, and total cost expressed in terms of total dollars and
          a total annual average rate
    4.    Amortization projections for selected products with year-by-year details (the loans
          negatively amortize: as the loan balance increases, equity decreases)
    5.    Required investment for HECM purchase loans


VIIL.B.           Product Printouts and Discussion
Counselors should discuss loan printouts, product features, and amortization schedules given by
lenders to clients. However, counselors must be sensitive when helping their clients analyze and
compare the financial implications of the loan choices they are considering. Counselors must
help clients understand which features are most appropriate, given the client’s unique financial
circumstances.

Counselors must explain to clients that the printouts are generalized because actual costs and
pricing of the loan fluctuates and is dependent on the loan product. Due to the prohibition on
steering, they should provide a balanced view by providing customized loan printouts, if
available, to clients on:
HECM loans and proprietary products that are available from HECM lenders,
Specific proprietary or HECM products that have been offered to that client by       a HECM lender.




                                                                                                    146
                                                                                   Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                           04/2024


IX. Refinancing    a HECM

IX.A.Cost Considerations in Refinancing a HECM
Some clients may want to refinance an existing HECM loan to take advantage of lower interest
rates, increased home value, or increased lending limits. The costs associated with this
transaction must also be taken into consideration when making a final decision regarding a
refinance.

When refinancing an existing HECM, the mortgage insurance premium is reduced to cover only
2 percent of the difference between the original maximum claim amount and the new maximum
claim amount.

IX.B. Lender-provided Documents

In the event of a HECM refinance, HECM borrowers should be aware that lenders must provide
them with the following information:
     1. HECM Anti-Churning Disclosure- HUD form 92901
     2. The total cost of the HECM refinance
     3. The increase in the principal limit as measured by the estimated initial principal limit on
        the mortgage to be insured less the current principal limit on the HECM that is being
        refinanced

The lender must provide a best estimate of funds available to the borrower minus any closing
costs and other fees. This ensures that the borrower is provided with information to assist in
understanding the amount of new funding that will be available after refinancing the existing
HECM.

IX.C. Waiver of Housing Counseling for HECM Refinance
For HECM refinance, HUD will waive the counseling requirement if all three of the following
conditions are met:
    1. The HECM borrower has received the required HUD Anti-Churning Disclosure form.
    2. The increase in the borrower’s principal limit (as estimated by the lender and provided to
        the borrower in the Anti-Churning Disclosure form) exceeds the total cost of the
        refinancing by an amount equal to five times the cost of the transaction.
    3. The time between the closing on the original HECM that is to be refinanced and the
        application for refinancing does not exceed 5 years.

Information provided on refinancing    a HECM is provided in Mortgagee Letter 2009-11.




                                                                                                 147
                                                                                            Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                                    04/2024


X.      Property Charge Default Counseling for HECM

X.A. Property Charge Default
Under the terms of the HECM, the borrower must pay property taxes, hazard insurance, and
other property assessments themselves or through a full or partial LESA. The use of LESA 1s the
lender’s decision alone, based on the FA underwriting.

Property charges include:
       1.    Real estate taxes (from taxing authorities like schools, cities, counties, states, etc.);
       2.    Property insurance (homeowners/hazard or flood insurance);
       3.    Other property charges or special assessments, such as condominium and planned unit
             development fees or homeowner’s association dues;
       4.    Ground rents; and
       5.    Other assessments levied by municipalities or under state law.


X.B.        Eligibility to provide Default Counseling

X.B.1        Agency Participation in HECM Default Counseling

Counselors do not have to be on the HECM roster to provide HECM default counseling. The
HECM roster placement is required statutorily for HECM origination.

To offer HECM default counseling, housing counseling agencies must perform the following:
    1. Review their HUD work plans and reports to ensure they reflect their current process and
        future intentions to expand their operations
   2. If needed, modify their work plans to identify:
             a. The number of counselors providing HECM default services
            b. Where the agency currently provides this service
             c. Other geographic areas if they wish to expand their scope in the future
             d. Obtain HUD approval on the revised work plan.


X.C. HECM Default Counseling Session Protocol
The following details HECM-specific actions, to be performed in addition to the housing
counselor’s one-on-one default counseling practices.

Counselors providing HECM default counseling must be aware that the loss mitigation options
available for HECMs and reverse mortgages may be different than those for forward mortgages.
Fewer options may be available to reverse mortgage borrowers, and often, lenders are not
required to provide certain options to all borrowers.

In the event of disasters or other events impacting HECM origination and servicing, HUD may
provide additional guidance for assisting borrowers.




                                                                                                         148
                                                                                   Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                           04/2024


X.C.1   Client Intake

While gathering basic information about the potential client, agency staff should find out:
    I. Status of all property taxes, amount past due, and estimated annual property tax amount
    2. Status of homeowner insurance, including estimated annual premium
    3. Estimated home value—If client does not know, counselor can use home valuation
       websites to get an estimate of the current home value.
    4. Existing debt on home, HECM, and other debt or liens
    5. Names, relationships, and phone numbers of other persons who reside with the borrower
   6.   The FHA case number of the HECM,       if known

X.C.2   Counseling Session

The counselor should determine if the client is a HECM borrower, non-borrowing spouse, or an
agent with a Power of Attorney (POA).
   I.    Is the client a HECM borrower’?
   2.    Does the client currently reside at the mortgaged property? To cure the default, the
         borrower must meet all HECM obligations, including maintaining the mortgaged
         property as their principal residence. Certain exceptions apply, depending on the date an
         FHA case number was assigned to the HECM, so the counselor should discuss with the
         borrower for reasons for and duration of the change of residence.
         Does the borrower meet the definition of an “At Risk” borrower? Specific HUD home
         retention options may be available when:
         The youngest living borrower is at least 80 years of age; and
   a




         The borrower has critical circumstances such as a supported terminal illness,
         substantiated long-term physical disability, or a “unique” occupancy need (e.g., terminal
         illness of family member receiving care at the residence)
         Is the client a non-borrowing spouse? HUD home retention options are not available to
         non-borrowing spouses. The counselor should discuss available resources for
         transitioning out of the home.
         Is the client an agent with a Power of Attorney (POA), wanting to act on behalf of a
         HECM borrower?
         The POA must be durable (attorney specifically designed to survive client’s incapacity)
         and include financial matters.
         If the agent contacts the counselor on the client’s behalf, counselor should contact the
         servicer to determine if the POA is currently on file with the servicer.
    10. If yes, the counselor can proceed with the session.
    11 . If no, the counselor, agent, and servicer should work out best way to ensure the agent is
        able to act on behalf of the client for the HECM.

The counselor will explain the HECM foreclosure process and the consequences of not resolving
the borrower’s delinquent property charges.

X.C.3   Financial Analysis

As part of the Financial Analysis required for each client, the counselor should determine
whether, based on the borrower’s financial information, there appears to be enough money to



                                                                                                149
                                                                                          Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                                  04/2024


repay the servicer any advances and set aside money for future taxes and insurance payments and
other property expenses.
    I.   Review with client:
              a.  Borrower’s income, expenses, unsecured and other debt including student loan
                  debt, home repairs needed, medical expenses, and other property expenses (e.g.
                  HOA dues, condo fees, assessments — NOTE: super lien states where property
                  fees can take first position, any other large expenses)
                  Additional household members—do the additional household members contribute
                  to the household income? Does the borrower financially support anyone?
                  Reduced employment or unemployment
                  Borrower’s assets—savings and checking accounts, bonds, annuities, retirement
                  accounts, life insurance (cash value), certificates of deposit, other real property,
                  stocks and any other financial assets
                  A proposed household budget, identifying any budget deficits or other financial
                  challenges the borrower is or may be facing in the future
         Utilize CBRIT to perform an analysis of federal, state, and local programs that could be
         alternatives or supplements to a reverse mortgage and check borrowers’ eligibility
         If the CBRIT analysis indicates the borrower may qualify for benefits, the counselor
         should:
             a. Assist the borrower in filling out all the appropriate benefit program application
                       forms and sending the forms to the appropriate social service agencies; or
              b.       Refer and connect the borrower to a local Area Agency on Aging (AAA), if
                       unable to assist with filling out the benefit program application forms.
         Advise borrower of other sources of income or assistance:
                       State or local funding for reverse mortgage property charge shortfalls and defaults
           v@monaoge




                       House mate match programs
                       Local property tax assistance
                       Options for homeowner’s insurance
                       Debt management plan
                       Other family members or friends who can provide financial assistance
                       Bankruptcy, as option to deal with unsecured debt, with information about local
                       legal aid services
                       Other resources such as the AARP, the Partnership for Prescription Assistance,
            a




                       local food ministries, and other services (see Eldercare Locator (acl.gov))

X.C.4    Communicate with the Servicer

If the borrower can afford to remain in the home
The counselor should contact the servicer to discuss available home retention options, such as:
    I. Refinancing the defaulted HECM into a new HECM;
       A Repayment Plan to satisfy outstanding corporate advances made for property charge
         default;
         The servicer requesting from HUD an extension of its foreclosure timeframes due to the
         borrower meeting “At Risk” requirements; or
         Any other options the servicer provides.




                                                                                                       150
                                                                                  Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                          04/2024


The counselor will assist the borrower with home retention option documentation required by the
servicer.

If the servicer offers a repayment plan, the counselor should find out and communicate to the
borrower:
     1. The minimum/maximum time for payoff;
   2.   How the funds will be remitted;
   3.   What paperwork is required;
   4.   How paperwork should be submitted to the servicer.

If the borrower cannot or will not cure the default
The counselor will work with borrower and servicer to identify appropriate strategies for the
borrower to address the default, including selling the home.

Should the borrower need more extensive support, such as a hands-on case manager to assist in
safe transitioning to other housing, the counselor should assist borrower in contacting the local
AAA for assistance.

X.C.5   After Counseling

The counselor should provide the borrower with:
    1. awritten Action Plan, outlining the steps to achieve their goals, with a summary of the
       counseling session and advice given
    2. a budget analysis with recommendations on how to free up income to pay for property
       charges;
    3. if a CBRIT analysis for public benefit eligibility is performed, a printout with information
       on benefits for which the borrower may qualify
    4. Contact information for the local AAA, and other state and local agencies found on the
       Eldercare Locator and Eldercare Locator phone number (800-677-1116).

If contact with the servicer was established with borrower’s permission, counselor will advise
servicer of the counseling session outcome and provide a copy of the borrower’s action plan.

X.C.6   Follow-Up

The counselor should schedule a follow-up appointment with borrower within sixty days to
determine if the borrower is working on the recommended tasks from the counseling session.

As needed by the client, the counselor should:
    1. Assist client in filing out all appropriate benefit program application forms and in
       submitting them to the appropriate social service agencies;
   2. Assist client in scheduling appointments with local agencies for assistance and
       transferring, with the client’s permission, relevant information
   3. Contact the borrower 30 days after counseling session, if no interim contact, to answer
       questions, provide additional services.




                                                                                                 151
                                                                            Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                    04/2024


XI. HECM     Protocol Attachments


Attachment   A.1: Sample Appointment Confirmation Letter on Agency Letterhead
Attachment   A.2 Sample Follow-up Letter
Attachment   A.3 Reverse Mortgage Resources
Attachment   A.4: HECM Online Comparison Tool
Attachment   A.5: Using Client Budget and Resource Identity Tool (CBRIT)




                                                                                        152
                                                                                    Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                            04/2024


Attachment A: Resources for Counselors
Attachment A.1: Sample Appointment Confirmation Letter on Agency Letterhead



<Date>


<Homeowner’s     Name>   <Homeowner’s     Address>
<Homeowner’s City, State, ZIP>

Dear Homeowner,
Thank you for requesting Home Equity Conversion Mortgage (HECM) counseling through
<NAME OF AGENCY>. Our role is to provide you with the independent information you need
to make your own best decisions about the various reverse mortgage loans and other alternatives
that may be available to you. So that you are aware, this agency does not endorse or recommend
any reverse mortgage loan or lender. The counseling process explains the key features of reverse
mortgages in general by covering the costs, benefits, and financial implications of these loans. It
also provides information on alternatives to reverse mortgages that may be more beneficial to
you.

Your counseling session is scheduled for <DAY>, <DATE> at <TIME>. To prepare for this
counseling session, please review the enclosed materials <Please specify the HUD required
documents here and the optional documents that you choose to send to your client> and other
relevant information that may be related to your situation. Please have these materials on hand
for the counseling session. During your counseling session, you will discuss your current
financial situation, 1.e., income, assets and debts, with the counselor in order to review the
alternatives to a reverse mortgage based on your unique situation. You will also want to have
paper and pencils handy to take notes. The counseling session will last approximately one hour
or longer if necessary.

When the counseling is completed successfully, you will receive a Certificate of HECM
Counseling. When you sign this certificate, you will be verifying that you have been counseled
by me. You will need a signed copy of the certificate for your lender if you decide to apply fora
federally insured HECM within the next six months. I look forward to talking to you on
<DATE> at <TIME>.

Sincerely,

<Counselor Name>
Housing Counselor, <NAME       OF AGENCY>

Enclosures
HUD’s Preparing for Your Counseling Session
Loan Comparison print-out
TALC calculation print-out
Loan Amortization Schedule



                                                                                                  153
                                               Handbook 7610.1
                                                       04/2024


HUD-designated booklets on reverse mortgages




                                                           154
                                                                                   Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                           04/2024


Attachment A.2: Sample Follow-up Letter



<Date>




<Homeowner’s      Name>    <Homeowner’s Address>

<Homeowner’s City, State, ZIP>



Dear Homeowner,



        Thank you for participating in the Home Equity Conversion Mortgage (HECM)
counseling session I conducted with you on <DATE>. Please take the time that you need to
review thoroughly the information that I have shared with you before making any decisions
about your financial future. If you need more information, or if you have any more questions,
please call me at any time.



        Enclosed are two copies of the Certificate of HECM Counseling. This certifies that you
have completed and understood the basics of HECM counseling. Please keep one copy for your
personal records. If you apply for a HECM loan within the next six months, please sign and give
the second copy of the Certificate of HECM Counseling to your HECM lender. The lender will
need this signed copy to verify that you have been counseled within six months of loan
application. If you apply for a different reverse mortgage product other than a HECM, ask your
chosen lender whether you need to provide this Certificate for that product as well.

        <Amount of time that will pass until counselor calls the client> from now, I will be
calling you to ask if you have any more questions or if you have made any decisions about
HECMs, reverse mortgages, or other alternatives available to you.

        If you need any further assistance, please do not hesitate to call me at <PHONE #> at any
time.




Sincerely,

<Counselor Name>

Housing Counselor, <NAME OF AGENCY>             Enclosures




                                                                                                    155
                                                                                 Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                         04/2024


Attachment A.3: Reverse Mortgage Resources

General Reverse Mortgage Resources

 For a list of general resources as well as information about HUD’s reverse mortgage program
visit HECM | HUD.gov / U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD)

Consumer Financial Protection Bureau Reverse mortgage loans | Consumer Financial Protection
Bureau (consumerfinance.gov)

AARP   Reverse Mortgages   - Mortgage Rates, Mortgage Debt & Management       (aarp.org)

National Council on Aging: for health, independence issues, volunteer opportunities for seniors
and benefits available to seniors: The National Council on Aging (ncoa.org)

National Reverse Mortgage Lenders Association website Home - Reverse Mortgage



Resources on Lenders

HUD’s HECM Lender List: HUD Lender List | HUD.gov / U.S. Department of Housing and
Urban Development (HUD)

Complaints about HECM lenders or counselors should be reported to HUD’s Office of Housing
Counseling at housing.counseling
                               @hud. gov.




                                                                                               156
                                                                                    Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                            04/2024


Attachment A.4: HECM       Online Comparison Tool

The web-based HECM Loan Calculator and Underwriting Tool (HLCUT) is HUD’s designated
calculation software. HLCUT calculates principal limits for variations on a HECM, based on
different interest rates with different indices and margins. HLCUT generates individual loan
amortization schedules and side-by-side comparisons of:
     1. projected total principal limits,
        total costs,
   WN




        remaining credit line funds,
        leftover equity, and
   We




        total annual average percentage rate costs at various future points in time related to the
        client’s remaining life expectancy.
It will not generate calculations for any proprietary reverse mortgage products.

Additional features of this online tool include the ability to produce:
    1. Information packages that can be printed or emailed to clients;
    2. Loan comparison pie charts that can visually compare two types of loans to demonstrate
        the differences between them to the client;
    3. Comparisons between one loan type during two periods of the client’s life; and
    4. Customized printouts for the client on selling their home and how it would affect them
        based on their property’s current value.

This information can be saved within the tool and retrieved for each individual client and for any
future questions and conversations between the counselor and the client regarding the features of
specific reverse mortgages.

HLCUT is available only to counselors who are on HUD’s HECM Counselor roster.




                                                                                                     157
                                                                                  Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                          04/2024


Attachment A.5: Using Client Budget and Resource Identity Tool (CBRIT)

Client Budget and Resource Identity Tool (CBRIT)

Counselors are required to complete a budget using the Client Budget and Resource Identity Tool
(CBRIT) with every client using financial information obtained from the client.



The objective of completing a budget using CBRIT is to illustrate to the client their current
financial situation and to determine how a HECM or other reverse mortgage might assist them in
meeting their needs and goals.



Using CBRIT, counselors will ask questions generated by the tool that helps the client report
income, debt and expenses. Counselors are not expected to request verification of income, debts
and expenses from clients in order to complete CBRIT.



CBRIT helps counselors assess a client’s immediate budget concerns and identify other risks that
could affect their ability to use a reverse mortgage to meet longer-term personal goals. CBRIT
will facilitate conversations with counseling clients about life factors such as declining health,
limitations in the home environment, or recent life transitions such as widowhood that can make
it hard for them to stay at home. CBRIT provides a summary of these factors, which can help
counselors identify the features of a reverse mortgage that may be appropriate to meet client
goals, assess the impact of their financial needs on remaining equity over time, and consider
alternative options to a reverse mortgage.

The decision to obtain a reverse mortgage is the client’s decision regardless of the budget
results.

In addition, CBRIT also helps counselors direct HECM clients to non-HECM resources
including federal, state, and local programs that could be important alternatives or supplements
to a reverse mortgage. CBRIT can be used to check client eligibility and provides instructions on
accessing those resources. Counselors should note to the client that final program eligibility
determination can only be made by the agencies administering the programs.




                                                                                                158
                                                                                Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                        04/2024


Attachment B: Required Handouts for Clients
The materials in Attachment B are for the prospective HECM borrowers and their advisors who
are counseling clients. Attachment B.1 (Preparing for Your Counseling Session) is mandatory
and must be provided to a client prior to the HECM counseling session. Attachments B.2 — B.11
are encouraged and can be sent before, during, or after counseling. These attachments must be
made available upon the client’s request.

Handouts for clients begin on the following page. These include:
       Attachment B.1 Preparing for Your Counseling Session
       Attachment B.2: Important Information about Home Equity Conversion Mortgage
       (HECM) and Other Reverse Mortgage Counselors
       Attachment B.3 Reverse Mortgage Eligibility Requirements
       Attachment B.4 Steps in the HECM Lending Process
       Attachment B.5 Reverse Mortgage Considerations for Consumers
       Attachment B.6 Questions to Ask Your Lender about HECMs        and Other Reverse
       Mortgages
       Attachment B.7 HECM Borrower Obligations
       Attachment B.8: Reverse Mortgage Borrower Obligations: A Checklist for Borrowers
       Attachment B.9: Using a Reverse Mortgage to Buy an Annuity
       Attachment B.10: Reverse Mortgage Counseling Frequently Asked Questions
       Attachment B.11: How You Can Access Your Home’s Equity with a Reverse Mortgage:
       Payment Options




                                                                                                159
                                                                                  Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                          04/2024


Attachment B.1 Preparing for Your Counseling Session




                                          Preparing for Your Counseling Session


The decision to get a reverse mortgage is an important one. The Department of Housing and
Urban Development (HUD) and the Federal Housing Administration (FHA) want to ensure you
are able to make an informed decision and that you are able to choose a course of action that will
meet your needs. For this reason, housing counseling for HUD’s Home Equity Conversion
Mortgage (HECM) is required. This counseling must be provided by a HUD certified housing
counselor on HUD’s HECM Roster.

The purpose of this overview is to provide introductory information on counseling and the
HECM program, to help you prepare for your counseling session. After your counseling session,
you will have a better understanding of the features of a HECM; the impact a HECM will have
on your particular circumstances; and whether services or programs other than a HECM or other
reverse mortgage might better meet your needs.

What You Can Expect from Your HECM Counselor
Understanding what to expect from HECM counselors is an important first step in setting your
expectations for your counseling session. Remember, only you can decide if a reverse mortgage
is right for your situation. The counselor provides information to assist you in making that
decision.

    1.   The counselor is responsible for helping you understand HECMs, its appropriateness to
         meet your particular needs, and alternatives to a HECM or other reverse mortgage
         product.
   2.    HECM counselors will discuss your financial and other needs for remaining in your
         home, the features of a HECM and how it works, your responsibilities with a HECM, the
         impact of a HECM on you and your heirs, and the availability of other assistance you
         may need.
   3.    The job of the counselor is not to “steer” or direct you towards a specific solution, a
         specific product, or a specific lender. In addition, HECM counselors are not financial
         advisors and may not be able to provide you with specific financial advice. Consider
         talking with a financial or tax professional if you need additional information.

HECM counselors are required to follow specific practices, which are designed to ensure you
receive quality counseling services and are protected against fraud and abuse. HUD requires that
HECM counselors do the following:
    1. Send you required materials (i.e., this packet) prior to your counseling session,
    2. Follow established protocols when conducting the counseling session, and
    3. Follow up with you after the session has concluded.


                                                                                               160
                                                                                  Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                          04/2024



What You Can Expect from the HECM Counseling Process
Step 1. Schedule an appointment. The counseling process begins when you schedule your
appointment for a counseling session. You must schedule an appointment directly with the
counseling agency. Your lender cannot initiate or participate in the counseling session. This
session is conducted in person, by live video, or over the telephone; however, HUD    advises that,
if possible, you meet with your counselor face-to-face to gain greater benefit from your session.

Step 2. The counselor will contact you and send information. Once you have set up an
appointment, the agency sends you a packet of information so that you can prepare for your
session. It is very important that you read through this packet before meeting with your
counselor.

Also, before you begin, you should also know that some agencies charge a fee for counseling; if
you cannot afford to pay this fee, you should discuss your inability to pay with the agency at the
outset of your session to understand your options.

Step 3. The counselor will collect from you: Your name, contact and other key information,
including your interest in obtaining a reverse mortgage, for the counseling session. The more
complete information you provide the counselor, the more effective the counseling session can
be for you. Counselors tailor their sessions to your specific needs.

Step 4. Counseling session: The counselor will discuss with you your needs and circumstances;
provide information about HECMs, reverse mortgages, and other alternative types and sources of
assistance that might be available to you. During the session, you will work with the counselor to
develop an assessment of your current financial situation using online tools. This will assist you
in determining the best course of action. You should be prepared to discuss your income, debts,
and expenses. The counselor will also help you learn more about the funds and services in your
area for which you may qualify.

Step 5. Certificate of HECM Counseling: Once you complete your session and you and your
counselor are comfortable that you understand the essentials of a HECM, the counselor will issue
a certificate which verifies for a lender that you have successfully completed counseling. The
lender cannot accept an application fee from you until you have provided a signed Certificate of
HECM Counseling.

Step 6. Follow up: Your counselors will follow up with you to learn if you need further
assistance and to understand the outcome of your counseling session. You may also call your
counselor to seek further assistance after your session.

Counseling agencies are required to make reasonable accommodations that may be necessary for
individuals with disabilities. If you need a reasonable accommodation related to your HECM
counseling, contact the counseling agency with which you are scheduling or have scheduled an
appointment.




                                                                                                 161
                                                                                 Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                         04/2024


How a Reverse Mortgage Works
Before you begin your counseling session, it is helpful if you understand a few basics about a
reverse mortgage. The following apply to HUD’s HECM product. Other reverse mortgage
products may have different features.

Generally, reverse mortgages enable homeowners age 62 or older to convert their home’s equity
into available cash — a lender advances you money (the loan) based upon the equity in your
home. The amount of money you are eligible to receive generally depends upon the amount of
equity in your home and your age at the time you get the loan. With a reverse mortgage, you
remain the owner of your home. You must continue to pay property taxes and homeowner’s
insurance. You are also responsible for maintaining your home in good condition.

You will not have to repay your loan balance for as long as you live in your home. You can
choose to pay off the loan through the sale of the property or prepayment of the loan at any time
without penalty. Your estate may retain ownership of the property by paying off the loan balance
as determined by the lender.

Types of Reverse Mortgages
There are three types of reverse mortgages shown in the chart below.
 Single purpose reverse mortgage                  Typically offered by state and local
                                                   government agencies to be used in only one
                                                   specific way. for example, home repairs
 Proprietary reverse mortgage                      Can be used for any purpose and may be
                                                   suitable for borrowers who may be able to
                                                   get more funds through a private product or
                                                  whose reverse mortgage loan or property
                                                  may not fall within HUD guidelines
 Home Equity Conversion Mortgage (HECM)             Can be used for any purpose and is insured by
                                                    the Federal Housing Administration.

Payment Plan Options
There are several types of HECM loan plans available, including monthly and annually adjusting
interest rate loans as well as fixed interest rate loans. Borrowers can decide to take a line of
credit with flexible draw down options, a term loan with fixed monthly payments for a specified
number of years, a tenure plan with guaranteed payments for life, or a combination of these
options, or a single lump sum payment.

Choosing a Reverse Mortgage to Meet your Needs
HECM payment plans are flexible. The best payment plan for you will depend on your current
and future financial needs and circumstances. For example:

       If you have a small balance on your existing mortgage and would like to pay it off with
       the reverse mortgage, a line of credit plan would allow you to draw all the funds at loan
       closing and pay off the current mortgage.




                                                                                                 162
                                                                                 Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                         04/2024


        If you know you will have some large health care expenses in the near future and want to
        have the funds available when needed, a line of credit may also meet your needs.

        If you need a set amount of money every month to supplement your income to help meet
        monthly expenses, then a tenure or term payment plan might be a suitable option for you.
Your HECM counselor will discuss your goals for a HECM or other reverse mortgage product
with you and will explain the different options available to help meet your needs.

Costs to Obtain a HECM
Costs associated with HECMs are the same as those for “forward” mortgages used to purchase a
home. These costs include lender fees to originate the mortgage, servicing fees for ongoing
administration of the loan and interest on the money you use from the loan. There are also
closing costs, which include all the usual and customary expenses associated with obtaining a
mortgage, for example, the appraisal, title searches, and insurance. HECMs also include a fee for
FHA mortgage insurance.

Impact on Tax/Social Service Benefits
Reverse mortgage loan advances are not taxable and do not affect Social Security or Medicare
benefits. However, you must be careful that any loan proceeds you retain do not exceed the
monthly liquid resource limits for Supplemental Security Income (SSI) and Medicaid. You may
want to consult a financial professional for additional information.


Alternatives to a HECM      or Other Reverse Mortgage

Your HECM counselor will also help you consider options available to meet your needs other
than a reverse mortgage. These options include:
    1. selling your home and moving to a more suitable residence,
   2.   renting as well as other financial options, and
   3.   support services and public benefits that may be available to you in your community.

As with any big financial decision, HUD encourages you to consider all options before you
decide on a reverse mortgage. Listed below are resources you can access to learn more about
reverse mortgages and elder care.

Consumer Financial Protection Bureau provides information for consumers on reverse
mortgages. Reverse mortgage loans | Consumer Financial Protection Bureau
(consumerfinance.gov)

AARP’s web site at www.aarp.org/money/revmort provides more information on reverse
mortgages and calculators that will provide general estimates of the amount of money you might
receive from a reverse mortgage. You may also contact AARP at | (800) 424-3410.

The National Reverse Mortgage Lenders Association provides consumer information at Your
Guide to Reverse Mortgages and can be reached by calling (866) 264-4466.




                                                                                               163
                                                                                 Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                         04/2024


Attachment B.2: Important Information about Home Equity Conversion Mortgage
       (HECM) and Other Reverse Mortgage Counselors

The role of Home Equity Conversion Mortgage (HECM) Roster counselors in HUD’s reverse
mortgage counseling program is to discuss information with you that will help you make your
own decisions about getting a reverse mortgage and other available alternatives. The counselor
can help you to decide whether or not a reverse mortgage may be appropriate for you, and which
options may be most appropriate given your financial circumstances.

HECM    counselors do not promote, represent, or recommend any specific lender or loan. They
do, however, provide general information on factors you may want to consider in selecting a
lender or a loan.
HECM counselors can tell you:
    1. the types of costs that are required for reverse mortgages (both HECMs and proprietary
        products),
   2.   which types of reverse mortgage costs may vary from lender to lender, and
   3.   the maximum amount that HUD permits HECM lenders to charge for certain loan costs.

Counselors do NOT provide any information on the prices charged by any individual lender or
loan officer. The prices that a lender or loan officer charges one borrower at one time may be
different from what they would charge another borrower or at another time. The costs also vary
among other available reverse mortgage products.

Lenders and loan officers are the best source of information regarding the prices they charge and
the loan products they offer, while counselors can help you understand any reverse mortgage
loan that is offered to you.




                                                                                                164
                                                                                    Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                            04/2024


Attachment B.3 Reverse Mortgage Eligibility Requirements

Typically, to be eligible for a reverse mortgage, you must meet the following requirements:

Minimum Age
You must meet the minimum age requirement for the reverse mortgage product. For HECM
loans, the minimum age is 62.
        Note: If the borrower has spouse who is not at least 62 years of age, that spouse may be
        considered a Non-Borrowing Spouse under the HECM. If the borrowing spouse should
        die or otherwise become ineligible, the HECM may become due and payable and the
        Non-Borrowing Spouse may have to leave the home if they do not continue to meet the
        terms of the mortgage. Other reverse mortgage products may have different policies
        regarding spouses who do not meet the minimum age requirement.

Residency
You must maintain primary residence in the property for a HECM loan. This is often a
requirement for proprietary loans, but some loan products may not have this requirement.

No Debt Against Your Home from an Existing Mortgage
If you have debt against your home from an existing mortgage, you must either pay it off before
getting a reverse mortgage or use an immediate cash advance from the reverse mortgage to pay it
off. If you do not pay off the debt beforehand, or do not qualify for an adequate cash advance to
do so, you will not be able to get a reverse mortgage.

Investment Requirement for HECM to Purchase a Home
At closing, you must provide a monetary investment. This monetary investment is the difference
between the amount of money you will receive from the HECM and the sales price for your
current property, plus any loan-related fees that are not financed. Your lender will verify that the
funds you use to close on the purchase are the result of money from the sale of your home, cash
on hand, or from the sale of personal assets. You may not borrow money (such as through a
credit card cash advance) or take out a temporary loan to close on a HECM.
Note: FHA regulations require that you have no outstanding financial obligations connected to
the property involved in the HECM transaction.

Counseling
HECM borrowers must receive HECM counseling from a counselor on the HECM Roster,
employed by a HUD-approved housing counseling agency. Some states and proprietary products
require counseling for reverse mortgages.

FHA Property Requirements
Your property must meet certain FHA requirements.
       Note: For HECM loans, eligible property types include single-family homes, 2-4 unit
       properties, manufactured homes (built after June 1976), condominiums and townhouses.
       You, as the homeowner, should confirm the eligibility of your property type with your
       lender.




                                                                                                  165
                                                                                   Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                           04/2024


Attachment B.3 Home Equity Conversion Mortgage (HECM) Features

A Home Equity Conversion Mortgage (HECM) is a loan that allows homeowners who are age
62 or older to convert their home’s equity into available cash. A HECM is a reverse mortgage,
which works much like a traditional mortgage, only in reverse. Reverse mortgages are “Tising-
debt, falling-equity” loans, because as debt increases, home equity falls. Rather than making a
payment to the lender each month, the lender can send you a loan advance each month if you
choose. Unlike a conventional home equity loan, a reverse mortgage does not require any
repayment of principal, interest or servicing fees as long as you live in your home. You may use
the cash you obtain from a reverse mortgage for any purpose.

Homeownership
Through a HECM, you remain the owner of your home. As with any home, you must continue to
pay property taxes and homeowner’s insurance. Alternatively, you can arrange for the lender to
pay your taxes and insurance and deduct this amount from your reverse mortgage loan proceeds.
You will also be responsible for maintaining your home and making necessary repairs.

Debt Payoff
A HECM must be a first mortgage. If you have an existing mortgage, it must be paid off prior to
closing or paid off at closing with funds you receive from the HECM. Any additional lien against
your property must be subordinated to the HECM.

Principal Limit
The amount of money you may be eligible to borrow depends on your age, home value, and the
interest rate. Typically, the older you are, the more cash you will be able to receive. Also, the
greater the home value or the lower the interest rate, the more cash you will be able to receive.
This amount may be impacted by whether you have a non-borrowing spouse.

Loan Costs
HECMs typically involve costs such as:
     1. an origination fee,
     2. closing and other third-party costs,
     3. servicing fees, and
     4. mortgage insurance premiums.
You may finance these costs as part of your loan by having them added to the loan balance. Your
lender must provide you with a Total Annual Loan Cost (TALC) disclosure for any loans that
you are considering prior to your loan closing. Your lender may be able to waive certain loan
costs.

Interest Rates
Interest is charged on all money that you receive and on all loan costs that have been financed,
1.e., added to the loan balance. You may select an interest rate that is fixed or that adjusts
monthly or annually. However, not all lenders offer all options, but lenders are required to
provide you numbers based on different interest rate scenarios. Your lender must provide you
with the index, the margin, and the periodic and lifetime caps for adjustable interest rates.




                                                                                                    166
                                                                                   Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                           04/2024


Payment Plans
You may receive the cash from a HECM in a variety of ways. You can receive the funds as a line
of credit or through fixed monthly payments for as long as you meet the terms and conditions of
the mortgage. You may choose to receive the funds at times and in amounts of your choosing
through a line of credit or a combination of the different options, subject to HUD limits. Payment
plan options include:
     1. The Fixed-Rate Payment Plan: Single Lump Sum
    2. Adjustable-Rate Payment Plans
                Option 1: Tenure Payment Plan
                Option 2: Term Payment Plan
          eo Roop




                Option 3: Line of Credit
                Option 4: Modified Tenure Plan
                Option 5: Modified Term Plan

HECM loan advances are not taxable and are not tax-deductible. They generally do not affect
Social Security or Medicare benefits. However, you must be careful that any loan proceeds you
retain do not exceed the monthly liquid resource limits for Supplemental Security Income (SSI)
and Medicaid. Consult a financial professional for impacts of a HECM.

Generally, you have the option of changing your payment plan type at any time for a fee (not to
exceed HUD limits). You should ask your lender about the procedures for changing your
payment plan in the future.

Cancellation
After closing a HECM, you, as the borrower, have three days to cancel the mortgage if you
choose. This is also known as the “rescission period,” an important measure implemented to
protect you, as the consumer. If you cancel during the rescission period, you are entitled to all
your fees, minus the cost of the appraisal.

If you are purchasing a new property with    a HECM, you will not have the three-day cancellation
period. Your closing will be final.

When the HECM Becomes Due and Payable
HECMs become due and payable when the last surviving borrower dies, sells the home, or no
longer occupies the property as their primary residence. You may partially or fully repay the loan
balance at any time. There are no prepayment penalties for a HECM. Non-borrowing spouses
who continue to meet the terms and conditions of the HECM may be eligible to stay in the home.

Some products allow “open-end” credit: you may pay back some or the entire loan and then re-
borrow the money at another time (a line of credit). Other products have “closed-end” credit,
meaning that you may not re-borrow principal that is paid on the loan. Ask your lender which
type of credit your loan provides.




                                                                                                    167
                                                                                    Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                            04/2024


HECM Loan Payoff
When the loan becomes due and payable, you or your estate must pay back all of the cash
advances, any fees or costs financed as part of the loan, and all interest that has been charged to
date. The loan becomes due and payable when:
     1. The last surviving borrower passes away,
     2. The property is no longer the primary residence of the borrower,
     3. The last surviving borrower fails to physically occupy the principal residence for more
        than 12 consecutive months because of physical or mental illness;
     4. The borrower sells or otherwise transfers ownership of the property, or
     5. The borrower fails to perform an obligation under the mortgage.

Non-borrowing spouses who continue to meet the terms and conditions of the HECM may be
eligible to stay in the home.

When the loan is due and payable, you may choose to satisfy the HECM in full, sell the property
for at least 95 percent of the current appraised value, provide the lender a deed in lieu of
foreclosure, or otherwise correct the matter that resulted in the HECM becoming due and
payable. If the borrowers pass away, the heirs or estate will have the option to keep the home by
satisfying the HECM for the lesser of the full debt or 95 percent of the current appraised value.
They can also sell the property or provide the lender with a deed in lieu of foreclosure.

Borrower Obligations Under the Mortgage

After closing, you must continue to ensure that property taxes, hazard insurance and other
property assessments are paid, either by yourself or through a full or partial life expectancy set-
aside (LESA).

You must maintain the condition of the property and maintain the property as your principal
residence. See your mortgage documents for any additional obligations.




                                                                                                  168
                                                                                       Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                               04/2024


Attachment B.4 Steps in the HECM Lending Process

APPLICATION
You must receive counseling before the lender may process your application for a HECM loan.

When you apply, you will be asked to select a payment plan: a line of credit, monthly advances
(term or tenure), a combination of a line of credit and monthly advances, or single lump sum.
You may be asked to choose between a fixed interest rate and a monthly or annually adjustable
interest rate. You also may be asked if you want your property taxes and homeowner’s insurance
paid directly by advances from your loan.

You will need to provide information required by the lender, which may include:
       photo ID,
       verification of your Social Security number,
   wWN




       a copy of the deed to your home,
       information on any existing debt (liens) on your home, and
   WAP




       your Certificate of HECM Counseling.

You could be asked to pay a loan application fee and could be required to pay other fees,
including the cost of a home appraisal and the cost of a credit check. The lender also determines
your eligibility to be a HECM or a reverse mortgage borrower, according to the appropriate
program guidelines.

PROCESSING
Your lender orders an appraisal, title search and insurance, lien payoffs, and any other services
needed to complete the loan. An appraiser comes to your home to assess its value and physical
condition. If the appraiser finds structural defects or conditions that may affect your health and
safety that require repair to be eligible for the loan, you must hire a contractor to make the
repairs. If the repairs are relatively minor, it is possible that they will be delayed until after you
get the loan. You may be eligible for a set-aside from your HECM loan for repairs.

Your lender submits all required information to the lender’s underwriting department. They will
determine if everything necessary to close the loan is completed correctly.

CLOSING
When your loan is approved by the underwriter, a date for closing the loan is set and the final
loan documents are prepared. A closing is a meeting at which you sign all the loan documents. It
is generally handled by the title company or the lender. Some states require that an attorney be
present at closing.

After closing, you have three business days in which you may cancel the loan, except if you are
purchasing a home with a HECM. When these three business days are over, you can begin
receiving money from the loan and you can use money from the loan as you choose, including
paying off any existing debt on your home as required. Two new liens are placed on your home
to secure the reverse mortgage (these two liens are explained in the “Frequently Asked




                                                                                                         169
                                                                                     Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                             04/2024


Questions” handout). Your loan is then sent to the “servicing” department or to another company
that specializes in servicing reverse mortgages.

AFTER CLOSING
Unless you have arranged to have your taxes and homeowner’s insurance paid directly from your
loan proceeds, you are still responsible for making these payments. The lender may require a
partial or full Life Expectancy Set-Aside (LESA) for these payments.

If you do not make the required taxes and insurance payments or if your LESA runs out, the
lender can use loan proceeds to make the payments for you. If no loan proceeds remain, you
should be aware that the entire loan could be due and payable for nonpayment of taxes and
insurance.

Additionally, the real estate taxing authority, i.e. city or county, can sell your home for
nonpayment of taxes.

If you have selected a monthly payment plan, the lender will send your payments on the first
business day of the month.

If you have selected a line of credit, the lender will wait for a request from you before sending
any loan advances. You should receive instructions from the lender on how to make requests for
funds from your line of credit.

Unless you have selected a single lump sum payment, you may request to change the payment
plan at any time during the life of the loan. The lender may charge a fee, not to exceed HUD’s
limit for HECM borrowers, for changing your payment plan. You may change the term of
payments, receive an unscheduled payment, suspend payments, or establish or terminate a line of
credit.




                                                                                                 170
                                                                                  Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                          04/2024


Attachment B.5 Reverse Mortgage Considerations for Consumers

The following list includes several aspects of the reverse mortgage lending process that you, as a
consumer, must be particularly cautious of.

Lender Involvement
Beware of a lender’s advice steering you towards or away from a particular reverse mortgage
product before you are familiar with reverse mortgage products generally. Lenders cannot be
present during counseling sessions nor do they need to be a part of your decision to take out a
reverse mortgage.

You should also be cautious of a lender’s recommendations on how you use your loan proceeds,
particularly if they are recommending a costly annuity or other investment.

Lender or Product Steering by the Counselor
Beware of lender or product steering by your counselor. During the counseling session, make
sure that the counselor has informed you of various options and alternatives that may be
available to you. A counselor should not recommend a particular course of action and should
help you look at all available options (for example, selling your home or seeking other sources of
financial help). A counselor should not tell you what specific loan products may be appropriate
but should inform you about all reverse mortgage features generally.

Income and Benefits
Keep track of your sources of income, especially if you are receiving any income-based
government benefits such as Supplemental Security Income (SSI) or Medicaid. If you allow your
reverse mortgage payments to accumulate into liquid assets, it could affect your benefits.

Borrower Obligations
You should be aware of your and your spouse’s, if applicable, obligations under a reverse
mortgage after you have taken out your loan. You should know what will happen once you begin
receiving loan payments each month and what you are responsible for. Consider creating
monthly and annual checklists, which should include your obligations such as monthly payments
and normal upkeep requirements.

Role of the Reverse Mortgage Broker
The reverse mortgage broker is not a lender. The broker is an independent agent who accepts the
loan application on behalf of the lender and deals with the consumer. For HECMs, brokers must
be FHA-approved. The broker does not fund the loan nor provide money to the borrower. The
broker is not responsible for establishing or remitting loan payments. Therefore, do not sign over
funds to the broker to set up the line of credit for you.

Servicing Lender
The servicing lender is responsible for the day-to-day management of your loan, including
sending statements and providing customer service. This may be different than your originating
lender, who processed your application for the HECM. Most originating lenders transfer your




                                                                                                  171
                                                                                Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                        04/2024


loan to another company for servicing. Keep the servicing lender’s information and your reverse
mortgage documents readily available, should you have questions about your loan.




                                                                                             172
                                                                                  Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                          04/2024


Attachment B.6 Questions to Ask Your Lender about HECMs and Other Reverse
        Mortgages

Here are questions and guidelines to assist you in your discussion of HECMs and other reverse
mortgage products with lenders. Your counselor should educate you on all reverse mortgage
features, including how the interest rate (fixed vs. adjustable) and payment plan you choose
should be based on your unique financial needs and circumstances. You will also be educated on
the meaning and implications of each of the various products, costs, and issues mentioned below.

For each product:
    1. What is the appraisal fee?
    2. What are the closing costs?
    3. What is the origination fee? (The origination fee must cover all origination activities.
        HECM product defines the origination fee as the greater of $2,500 or two percent of the
        maximum claim amount of the mortgage, up to a maximum claim amount of $200,000,
        plus one percent of any portion of the maximum claim amount that is greater than
        $200,000. The total loan origination fee may not exceed $6,000. The lender may accept a
        lower origination fee when appropriate.)
        What is the servicing fee? (HUD sets maximum servicing fees for HECMs. It is $35 per
        month for a monthly adjustable HECM and $30 per month for an annually adjustable or
        fixed rate HECM)
        What is the mortgage insurance premium? (For HECMs, the initial mortgage insurance
        premium is 2% of the maximum claim amount, with an annual mortgage insurance
        premium of 0.5% of the loan balance)
        What is the current interest rate’? What is the expected interest rate?
   ON




        Is the interest rate adjusted monthly or annually? Do you offer any products that have a
        fixed interest rate?
        How much money do I need to close on a HECM or reverse mortgage to purchase a
        property?
        What payments options do you offer? By law, a lender must offer all payment options,
        term, tenure, line of credit or any combination for HECMs.
   10. If there is a credit line payment option, what is the rate of credit line growth?
   11. Is there a fee to change payment plans?
   12. What will be my monthly obligations with this reverse mortgage?
   13. What will be my yearly obligations with this reverse mortgage?
   14. Am I eligible for a reverse mortgage? Is my spouse eligible?
   15. Is my home eligible for a reverse mortgage?
   16. Can I set aside tax and insurance payments so that you can make payments on my behalf?




                                                                                               173
                                                                                      Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                              04/2024


Attachment B.7 HECM Borrower Obligations

This handout covers your obligations under a HECM or other reverse mortgage. Check with your
lender on how your spouse, if applicable, is expected to meet these obligations, and whether
proprietary reverse mortgage product policies differ.

Paying Property Taxes
    1. Borrowers are required to make timely payments on their property taxes. Failure to do so
       could result in the loss of your home because this is considered a default of your
       mortgage agreement.
    2. You must pay property taxes yourself or you can ask your lender to pay your property
       taxes with funds from the reverse mortgage.
    3. In the case of a term, tenure or modified payment plan, the lender will estimate the annual
       costs, add the amount to the loan balance, and make monthly payments.
    4. In the case of a line of credit plan, you can ask your lender to pay your taxes using draws
       on the line of credit when taxes are due.
    5.   If you choose a line of credit plan, and the line of credit is exhausted, the lender will no
         longer be able to make payments on your behalf. You will then be responsible to pay the
         taxes and insurance directly.
    6.   Note: that if you do not leave enough money to pay your taxes and insurance once your
         line of credit is exhausted, you may not be able to meet your loan obligations and you
         could lose your home.
    7.   The lender may charge a small fee for paying the taxes and insurance on your behalf.
         You should inquire about the specific costs with the lender. Paying a nominal fee for this
         service may help you keep your home in the long run.
    8.   Contact your lender or a HUD certified housing counselor if you are, become, or
         anticipate becoming unable to make property charge payments.

Paying Homeowner’s Insurance
Homeowner’s insurance protects you and the lender from loss in the event that your home is
damaged or destroyed by a fire or storm. HECM borrowers are required to make timely
payments of premiums towards their homeowner’s insurance. For HECMs, flood insurance is
also required if the property is located in a flood zone. Failure to do so could result in the loss of
the home.
     1. Itis your responsibility as the borrower to maintain active homeowner’s insurance.
        Homeowner’s insurance is different than mortgage insurance.
    2. You can pay the insurance directly or ask the lender to pay using your loan funds.
    3. The policy must remain active even if you are absent from the home for a period of time.
    4. If you find out that your house is in a flood zone, you will be required to maintain flood
        insurance. For example, some areas have been rezoned as flood zones requiring flood
        insurance for the first time. Some insurance companies have also changed the geographic
        areas where their insurance is available. You should check on the status and costs of your
        homeowner’s insurance and flood insurance policies. You may also find out that your
        house is in a flood zone during annual recertification or a property condition check by
        your lender.




                                                                                                        174
                                                                                  Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                          04/2024


Lenders may utilize force-place insurance if they learn the property no longer has the required
hazard insurance. The lender’s insurance may be more expensive than the borrower’s own
policy.

Regular Review of Loan Documents
The HECM adjustable interest rate will adjust every month or year depending on the period
selected by the borrower. This is also the case with many other reverse mortgage products. In the
case of a HECM, the lender will notify you of a change at least 25 days before the new rate is
charged to the loan. It is your responsibility to review this notice.

The servicing lender (which may be HUD on an assigned loan) is required to send a statement
that summarizes your mortgage activity. Statements for HECMs are issued at least annually and
may be issued more frequently by some lenders. You should review this statement when you
receive it.

Maintaining the Property
Your property must be maintained in at least the condition that it was in when the reverse
mortgage was issued. Before the lender issues a HECM, they must make sure that the HECM
property meets minimum property requirements and standards for being safe, sound, and secure.

Lenders may perform “drive-by” inspections. If problems are identified, you will be required to
remedy them. One suggestion for you is to create a checklist of normal maintenance procedures
and go through this list 4 times each year to make sure that you are keeping your home in good
shape. Your counselor may be able to help you come up with a list of maintenance procedures
appropriate for your property.

Prepayment
Prepayment policies may vary depending on the reverse mortgage product. You should discuss
prepayment policies with your lender. You may be able to prepay the loan, in whole or in part,
without penalty.
    e Fora HECM, you may prepay all or part of the outstanding balance at any time without
        penalty. Repayment in full will terminate the loan agreement.
    e You may choose to make a partial prepayment to preserve more of the equity in the
        property, or to increase monthly payments, if a payment plan with monthly payments was
        selected.
    e Most products allow “open-end” credit: you may pay back some of the loan balance and
        then re-borrow the money at another time.
    e Other products have “closed-end” credit, meaning that you may not re-borrow principal
        that is prepaid on the loan.
    e Generally, you may change your payment plan at any time. The fee charged in
        association with this change will be applied to the loan balance.

When the Loan Becomes Due and Payable
HECMs are typically not due and payable until the last surviving borrower or eligible non-
borrowing spouse dies, or the home is sold or is no longer the primary residence of the borrower
or non-borrowing spouse. Other proprietary reverse mortgages may have different repayment


                                                                                                  175
                                                                                 Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                         04/2024


conditions. The borrower and non-borrowing spouse, if applicable, are responsible for telling the
lender when a due and payable event occurs.

Generally, you or your heirs or estate must pay off the final amount determined by the servicing
lender, as consistent with HUD rules, when the HECM     becomes due and payable.    A HECM,    and
most proprietary reverse mortgage products, can be repaid in a variety of ways. The loan can be
paid in one payment from the proceeds of the sale of the home. Alternatively, your heirs might
take out another mortgage on the home and pay off the loan with those funds or they may have
other funds available to pay off the loan. The lender may also accept a deed in lieu of
foreclosure.

The lender does not own the home and does not “get” the home when the borrower or non-
borrowing spouse passes away. This is a common consumer misconception. The borrower owns
the home and title throughout the life of the reverse mortgage, just the same as with a forward
mortgage.

HECM loans are not assumable by family members or other parties.

HECMs are non-recourse loans. This means that the lender cannot require any other security
other than the property, even if the mortgaged property does not cover the full value of the
HECM balance.




                                                                                               176
                                                                                  Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                          04/2024


Attachment B.8: Reverse Mortgage Borrower Obligations: A Checklist for Borrowers

There are many things that you need to do and consider after you have closed on your reverse
mortgage. For example, failure to make timely payments of taxes and insurance may make your
reverse mortgage due and payable immediately. Here is a checklist to help you keep your reverse
mortgage current.
oO Pay your property charges (such as property taxes, hazard insurance premiums, special
assessments, and homeowner association fees) on time
Oo Pay flood insurance (this is applicable only if the home is located in a flood zone)
oO Maintain the property in good condition and make any necessary repairs
O Review interest rate change notices
oO Review annual mortgage statement
oO Maintain your principal residence status
oO Change your payment plan (if necessary)
O Prepay the loan (if applicable)
oO Check for property tax exemptions or reductions for seniors, disabled individuals, or low-
income households (if applicable)




                                                                                                177
                                                                                  Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                          04/2024


Attachment B.9: Using a Reverse Mortgage to Buy an Annuity

An annuity is a contract sold by an insurance company designed to provide payments, usually to
a retired person, at specified intervals.

If you are considering using your HECM or other reverse mortgage to purchase an annuity, here
are some facts and features you need to know about:
     e your loan options
     e annuity benefits
     e annuity costs
     e public benefits
     e annuity choices
HECM counselors may be able to provide you with the basics of annuities. Consider consulting a
financial professional for more information, including the availability of deferred annuities and
death benefits; note that some financial professionals may also be in the business of selling
annuities.

Your Loan Options
You may have options on how to have a reverse mortgage loan paid to you. These options may
include:
     1. an immediate cash advance,
    2. acredit line account that lets you take cash advances at times and in amounts that you
         select,
    3.   afixed monthly cash advance for a specific number of years or for as long as you live in
         your home, and
    4.   acombination of immediate cash, credit line, or monthly advance.

Clearly, buying an annuity in order to get monthly cash advances is not always necessary. You
may get this type of payment plan directly from a reverse mortgage.

Annuity Benefits
An annuity can give you monthly cash advances for life, regardless of where you live. By
contrast, reverse mortgages can only last for as long as you live in your home. If you sell or
move, your reverse mortgage becomes due and payable. When considering an annuity, you
should think about how long you expect to remain in your home.
     e Fixed annuities: If you want annuity advances that are the same amount every month, be
         sure to get a “fixed” annuity. Fixed monthly annuity advances continue for life, no matter
         where you live. These advances may be smaller than the fixed monthly loan advances
         you can get from a reverse mortgage for as long as you live in your home.
     e Variable annuities: Cash advances from a “variable” annuity may depend on the stock
         market or other investments that are more risky or volatile. Although they may provide a
         fixed monthly advance for a while, “variable” annuities can result in a smaller monthly
         advance after their guarantee periods end.

A lender can show you how much you can get each month from a reverse mortgage. You may
want to compare this monthly loan advance to the annuity advance you could get.


                                                                                                178
                                                                                   Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                           04/2024


You may also want to consider the fact that if you were to move into a nursing home and qualify
for Medicaid, most of the annuity advances and proceeds from any sale of your home would be
used to pay for nursing home costs.

Annuity Costs
Using a reverse mortgage to buy an annuity is generally more expensive than getting monthly
reverse mortgage advances. If you buy an annuity with loan proceeds, you will have a larger
immediate loan balance. That means greater interest charges, especially in the early years of the
loan. But if you live beyond your life expectancy, a reverse mortgage/annuity combination can
become less costly than a HECM alone.

If lenders know that you intend to buy an annuity with a reverse mortgage, they are required to
give you a Total Annual Loan Cost (TALC) disclosure that includes the annuity. Follow-up with
your lender to ensure that you receive a TALC disclosure that includes the annuity.

Anyone who sells you an annuity will be paid a sales commission from the money you use to
buy the annuity. If you want to know how much they will be paid, ask them what their sales
commission would be. Also, ask if the annuity includes a “surrender” fee that you would have to
pay if you later decide to discontinue the annuity.

Public benefits
Annuity income does not affect your Social Security or Medicare benefits under current law.
However, if you are eligible for Supplemental Security Income (SSI), you need to understand
that annuity income may jeopardize your benefits from this and possibly other programs such as
Medicaid.

Annuity advances are counted as income for SSI. Therefore, they can reduce SSI benefits dollar-
for-dollar, and might make you ineligible for other programs. By contrast, HECM loan advances
generally are not counted as income for SSI.

If you now receive or expect to become eligible for SSI or similar programs (for example,
Medicaid), be sure you understand exactly how annuity income and HECM advances would
affect your eligibility and benefits.

Annuity Choices
An annuity is only as safe and sound as the company that provides it. You may want to ask the
annuity company for its ratings from the firms that provide them. Companies such as A.M. Best,
Fitch, Moody’s, and Standard & Poor’s provide ratings.

Many annuity plans offer an optional cash refund (or “death benefit’) to your heirs upon your
death. This reduces the overall cost to your estate, but it also reduces the amount of your
guaranteed monthly annuity advance. Be sure to consider these options carefully.

Some annuities provide monthly advances for a fixed period of time. If you are considering this
type of “period certain” annuity, you may want to compare it with the monthly loan advance you




                                                                                                179
                                                                              Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                      04/2024


could get for the same amount of time from a reverse mortgage “term” plan. You may also want
to compare how much you would end up owing in each case.

Conclusion
Only you can decide what best fits your needs. It makes sense to be careful when considering a
major financial decision about choices that may be new to you. You should take as much time as
you need to:
    e learn what you need to know,
    e get answers to your questions,
    e compare your choices carefully, and
    e discuss your choices with people you trust who have no financial interest in your
       decision.

The following resources can provide you with additional information:
       Securities and Exchange Commission. Investor.gov
       Financial Industry Regulatory Authority (FINRA)
       AARP: www.aarp.org Telephone: (888) 687-2277
       National Association of Insurance Commissioners: www.naic.org




                                                                                            180
                                                                                  Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                          04/2024


Attachment B.10: Reverse Mortgage Counseling Frequently Asked Questions

Why are HECMs and other reverse mortgages “‘rising debt, falling equity” loans?
Reverse mortgages are called rising-debt, falling-equity loans, because as debt increases, home
equity falls. Lenders, or investors who buy the loans, recoup this debt - the accumulated principal
and interest payments - when the home is sold.

Why do [ need an appraisal?
An appraisal is needed to determine the market value of your home and to ascertain any required
repairs. The property must meet minimum property standards in order to provide adequate
security for the loan. If repairs are necessary, they must be made as a condition loan approval.
The appraisal must be ordered by the lender and completed by a HUD-approved appraiser.

The appraised value of the home is used to determine the maximum claim amount, which is
equal to the lesser of the appraised value of the home or the maximum FHA loan limit in your
community. The appraised value and maximum claim amount will help determine how much
you qualify to draw.

How can the amount of the loan differ from the lender’s estimate?
The amount of your loan at closing is based on the appraised value of your home and the interest
rate.

At the time you apply for the loan, you and your lender will probably not know what the
appraised value of your home is going to be. Because of this, the estimate that the lender gives
you will most likely change once the appraisal is completed.

In addition, whether the borrower locks in the interest rate or lets it “float” or change with the
market will impact the loan amount. The interest rates change from week to week; however, the
lender can lock the interest rate at the time you sign the loan application for 120 days. This
would keep the rate from changing between the time of the application and the time of closing. If
the borrower chooses to let the interest rate “float” or change with the market and rates decrease
between the time of the application and closing, the principal limit will be recalculated and may
result in a change to the loan amount.

What if I change my mind and no longer want the loan after I go to closing? Can I back out
of the loan?
By law, you have 3 business days to change your mind and cancel the loan. Saturday counts as a
business day and Sunday does not. This is called a 3 day right of rescission. Be sure to ask the
lender for instructions on this process, as the process for canceling a loan may differ from one
lender to another. You should get the names of the appropriate people, phone numbers, fax
numbers, addresses or written instructions on whatever process the company has in place. You
may still be responsible for some of the loan costs if you decide to back out, such as the cost of
the appraisal.

Note: If you are closing on a HECM to purchase a home, you will not have three days to change
your mind. The loan transaction is finalized at closing.



                                                                                                   181
                                                                                  Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                          04/2024



What annual expenses will I have in connection with this loan?
The annual expenses that you are responsible for are all property taxes, flood and hazard
insurance premiums, and special assessments, such as your homeowner’s association or
condominium fees. In some cases, a portion of these charges is escrowed by the lender, but
ensuring their payment is still your responsibility. It is important that you budget for these
expenses throughout the year, for the life of the loan, so that when payment is due you will have
enough money available. For example, if your property value appreciates, your annual property
taxes may increase, so review your tax statements or discuss with a tax professional.

Once the loan closes, how soon can I access my line of credit?
The lender can disburse funds to you after the 3-day right of rescission ends. The disbursement
date will appear on your Closing Disclosure.

After the first disbursement, how often can I expect to draw my money?
After the first disbursement, payments from the lender will be made within 5 days of receiving a
written request for payment from you. Term and tenure payments will be made on the first
business day of each month beginning with the first month after closing.

If the lender requires me to make repairs to the property, how soon after loan closing do I
have to complete repairs?
The lender determines the length of time you will have to complete repairs after loan closing.
The exact date by which you need to have all repairs completed will be on the Repair Rider
attached to the Loan Agreement. You will be given a copy of these documents at loan closing.

What happens if the repairs are not complete on the date specified on the Repair Rider?
If the required repairs are not completed by the date specified on the Repair Rider to the Loan
Agreement, the lender must discontinue payments on the loan. The loan will be frozen at a line of
credit status, available only to fund repairs and mandatory items such as property charges and
Mortgage Insurance Premium (MIP). Upon satisfactory completion of the repairs, the loan may
be converted back to the borrower’s selected method of payment.

Are any repair inspections required?
Yes. The lender is responsible for ensuring that the completed repairs are inspected by a
qualified inspector one or more times before the funds to pay for the repairs are disbursed. The
lender must also complete a form HUD-92051, Compliance Inspection Report, before funds can
be disbursed. The lender may charge an administrative fee and compliance inspection fees.

How will the lender disburse any funds in excess of the cost of the repairs?
Once the lender has paid the vendor for the repairs, the lender will transfer any remaining
balance to a line of credit and inform you of the amount available. At that time, if you choose,
you can send the lender a written request for an amount not to exceed the amount available and
the lender will send a disbursement 5 days after receiving your written request for the funds.
Otherwise, the remaining balance will remain in the line of credit.




                                                                                                  182
                                                                                   Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                           04/2024


Attachment B.11: How You Can Access Your Home’s Equity with a Reverse Mortgage:
       Payment Options

This handout provides descriptions of various payment plans for Home.
Payment Option Overview
You can receive reverse mortgage loan proceeds through various payment plans, which may vary
depending on which reverse mortgage product you choose.
HECM loans permit the following payment plans:
|| term
|] tenure
(| line of credit
|| combinations: modified term/modified tenure with a line of credit
Single Lump Sum.

With a HECM loan, you can also change the payment plan at any time during the life of the loan
(until you have exhausted your available funds).

Not all of these options may be available for proprietary (non-HECM) products. In addition, a
borrower may be required to pay a fee if he or she decides to change payment plans for a
proprietary product.

You should ask your counselor if you have additional questions. If you want to know more about
specific reverse mortgage product details, which payment plan options are available for specific
products, or how much equity may be available to you through a reverse mortgage, you should
contact a lender.

HECM - Term
A borrower may choose a term option where he or she would receive equal monthly payments
for a fixed period of time of the borrower’s choosing, e.g. 5 years or 10 years. The borrower will
no longer receive payments at the end of the term but may remain in the home as long as he or
she chooses.

Tenure
Under the tenure option, the borrower can receive equal monthly payments as long he or she
remains in the home. The amount of each monthly payment is determined by subtracting the age
of the borrower (or the age of the youngest borrower on the loan) from 100 and dividing the
amount of money made available by the reverse mortgage over that time period. Even if the loan
balance exceeds the value of the home, or if he or she lives past age 100, the borrower will
continue to receive payments as long as he or she stays in the home and meets the obligations of
the loan.

Line of Credit
You can choose to have the entire loan placed into a line of credit. With this line of credit, you
can access the money at any time until no funds remain.
For HECM loans, the unused portion of the line of credit grows at the “credit line growth rate,”
or “note rate.” A proprietary product may have a different credit line growth rate than that of a



                                                                                                 183
                                                                               Handbook 7610.1
                                                                                       04/2024


HECM, which will affect the amount of cash available to you. You should ask your lender about
the line of credit features if you are considering a proprietary product.

Combinations
Borrowers may also choose a combination of an up-front draw, line of credit, term and tenure
payment options. Modified Tenure combines a line of credit with monthly payments as long as
the borrower remains in the home. Modified Term combines a line of credit with monthly
payments for a fixed period of time determined by the borrower.

Single Lump Sum Payment
Borrowers may choose this payment option, which will be limited to a single payment at loan
closing no greater than 60% of the principal limit or mandatory obligations (such as loan
origination fees) plus 10% of the principal limit.




                                                                                               184
