               |
               | *.     U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
                               Community Planning and Development

eee


Special Attention of:                              Notice:    CPD-22-12
All CPD Directors                                  Issued:    October 26, 2022
HUD Field Offices
                                                   Expires:    This notice is effective until
HUD Regional Offices                                           amended, superseded, or rescinded.
All ESG Formula Recipients
                                                   Cross Reference:       24 CFR Part 578, 42
All Continuums of Care                                                    U.S.C. 11371, et seq.
Tribes and Tribally-Designated Housing
Entities
Subject:   Notice for Housing Inventory Count (HIC) and Point-in-Time (PIT) Count Data
           Collection for Continuum of Care (CoC) Program and the Emergency Solutions
           Grants (ESG) Program




HIC/PIT Count Data Collection Notice           Page 2                           October 2023
          TABLE OF CONTENTS

1. Purpose of this Notice ..........cccccccccccccccccccssseececesseeeeccseeeeeecessseeececessseececesseeeeecesnsaeeceseesssaeeeeeeaas 4
2. Important Changes to HIC and PIT Requirements Beginning in 2020 ..........
                                                                       ec eceeeeeeeee 5
   2.1 HIC Changes 2.0.0.0. cccccccccccccsccccccesseeeececcsseeececcssseeeescesseeeeceeessseeeecenseeeescesssaeeeeeeessaaeeeeesssaeess 5
   2.2 PIT Changes .......0.cccccccccccccccsseceeccessseeeececeseeececcsseeeescessseeecceessseeeecensseeeescesseeeeeeesssaaeeeeensaaeess 5
3. Housing Inventory Count Guidance 20.0.2... cccccccccceeseceeeceessseeccesessseeeeccsseeeeecesaeeeeseesssaeeeeeeaas 5
   3.1 Types of Homeless Projects to Include in the HIC .........                           cc ccccccccccesseceeeeessseeeeeeenssaeees 6
      B.L.1 VA Programs 2.0.0... ccccccccceeccececcseesseeeeceeeeeccesssseeeeceeceeesseaeeeeeececesstssseeeeeeeeeeeeestaaas 7
      3.1.2 RHY Programs 0... cccccccccccccceccesessseeeeceeececeessseeeecceeeeessseeeeeeeeeesessssseeeeeeeeeeeeetiaaas 8
   3.2 Using HMIS Data for the HIC o.oo                         ccc cccccccccecccsseceeccessseeeeeeeessaeeeecensseeeeseesssaeeeesensaaeess 9
   3.3 Completing the Bed Inventory «2.0.0.0... cccccccccccscecceccesseeeeccessseeecceecssaeeeecensseeeeseestseeeeeeenssaeess 9
      3.3.1 Organization and Project Information ........ occ                        cece cccceesscecceccssseeeecesseeeeeeesssaaeeeeeesaas 9
      3.3.2 Bed and Unit Inventory Information ....0.0000 ccc icccccccccccessseccecenseeeeeeessseeeceeessseeeeeenas 14
      3.3.3 Point-in-Time Counts for Each Project ........ ccc ccccccccccccsssecceccnseeeeeeessseeeeeeessaeeeseens 18
      3.3.4 Supplemental Inventory Instruction...                              ccc cccccccccecessseececensseeeeeeessseeecseessaeeeseens 19
4. Point-in-Time Count Requirements ............00cccccccccccccsssscecceceseeeeecesseeeeecestseeeeseetssaeeeeeestaneeees 23
   4.1 People Who Must Be Counted in the PIT Count ..........oo                              ccc ccccccccecessseeeeeeesssaeeeeeessaes 24
      A.1.1 Sheltered Count 2.0.0... cccccccsccesseccssceeeeeeeeseeceseeeceeeeesseecesaescnseeecsseeeeseeeseeeeseeeeeaaees 24
      A.1.2 Unsheltered Count 0.0.0.0. ccccccccccccescecceneeenseeceeeeceeeeesaeeeeseecesseeecseeeceseeeseeenseeeseaeeeeaaees 25
   4.2 People Who Must NOT Be Included in the PIT Coumntt..........                            ooo iccecccccceecssseeeeeentaees 25
   4.3 The Timing of the PIT Coumnt.......               o.oo cccccccccecssaeccecesseeeescnsseeeceeessseeeeeeesseeeeeentaees 27
   A.A Population Data 0.0.0. cccceccccccccsscecceccssseeeecesseeeeeceeesseeececessseeeescssseeeeseesssaeeceeessseeesecsiaees 28
   4.5 Additional Homeless Population Data.........0..0cccccccccccccsccccecssseeeeccnssseeeceeessseeeceeessseeeeeentaees 31
   4.6 Using HMIS Data for the PIT oo... ccccccecccccecsseeececesseeeescnsseeeesesssseeeceeessseeeeeeniaees 31
   4.7 PIT Count Date Exception ........000ccccccccccccccsccccecssseeeeececssaeececessseeeesensseeeesessssaeeceeessseeeeeesiaees 32
   4.7 PIT Count Methodology Questions...............ccccccccccscccceccessseeccecessseeeeeceessseeeeecestseeeeeeeenaas 32
Appendix A — Summary of Projects to Include in the HIC and PIT Count .............                                           eee         34
Appendix B — Key Terms 00.0.0... ccccccccccccccccccceseeeecceseeeececesseeeccccssseeeescnsaeeeesesssaaeeseeesaeeeeeentneeees 40)
Appendix C — Population Reporting Requirements for the PIT Count ............0
                                                                       cc eccceeeerteeeees 42
Appendix D — Additional Homeless Populations Reporting Requirements for the PIT Count.... 51




HIC/PIT Count Data Collection Notice                                 Page 3                                             October 2023
1. Purpose of this Notice
This Notice supersedes CPD-21-12 (Notice for Housing Inventory Count (HIC) and Point-in-
Time (PIT) Count Data Collection for Continuum of Care (CoC) Program and the Emergency
Solutions Grants (ESG) Program) published in 2021. Similar to the prior Notice, this Notice
informs Continuums of Care (CoCs), or eligible entities intending to form a CoC (including
Tribes and Tribally-Designated Housing Entities), of the information that must be collected to
successfully complete the Housing Inventory Count (HIC) and Point-in-Time (PIT) count for
2023 and future counts this Notice applies to. This Notice is being published under the authority
of 24 CFR 578.7(c)(2)(ii1) and creates additional requirements for the PIT counts. The Notice
also provides further guidance on how to complete the HIC. The HIC and PIT data play a critical
role in the CoC Program Competition and HUD will continue to emphasize through its scoring
the significance of the data reported as well as the process for the data collection. However,
HUD deems most important the quality and accuracy of the count as opposed to merely the size
of the count. As CoCs begin to organize and plan these activities, CoC staff should review this
Notice and use it as a reference to ensure that CoCs are capturing all of the information HUD
requires.
In December 2020, Congress passed the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021, amending the
McKinney-Vento Act, allowing Tribes and Tribally-Designated Housing Entities (TDHEs) to
apply for CoC program funding and to form their own CoCs. Projects can now be sited on
Tribes’ formula areas, including trust lands and reservations. The standards in this Notice apply
to all CoCs, including those operated by Tribes and TDHEs. CoCs that conduct PIT count and
HIC activities in Tribal communities, including on trust lands and reservations, must gain the
consent from the appropriate Indian Tribe before doing so and should coordinate the PIT count
with the Indian Tribe or its TDHE.
Under section 578.7 of the CoC Program interim rule, CoCs must plan and conduct, at least
biennially, a PIT count of persons experiencing homelessness within the geographic area.
Section 578.3 of the CoC Program interim rule states that PIT counts are “carried out on one
night in the last 10 calendar days of January or at such other time as required by HUD.” HUD
has historically incentivized annual HIC and PIT counts by awarding maximum points in the
annual CoC Program Competition to CoCs that do annual counts and anticipates continuing this
practice for the indefinite future. The HIC and PIT count data will continue to provide critical
updates on national and local progress towards preventing and ending homelessness.
To accommodate the goals and constraints of the HIC and PIT counts, this notice uses simplified
definitions of certain complicated or nuanced terms, such as “rapid re-housing” and “chronically
homeless.” These definitions are meant only for use in conducting the HIC and PIT counts. For
the definitions that apply to HUD’s program requirements, refer to HUD’s program regulations.
CoCs will submit their HIC and PIT count data via HUD’s Homelessness Data Exchange (HDX)
in the spring following the count as part of the CoC Program Competition for the year of the
count. Additional guidance on the submission process will be released at a future date.
If your organization, including Tribes or Tribally-Designated Housing Entities, have questions
about planning for or implementing the HIC or PIT count please submit them to
HICPITCount@hud.gov. If you have technical questions about technical assistance tools to
assist communities with their HIC or PIT counts or how to submit your data in HDX, please



HIC/PIT Count Data Collection Notice             Page 4                             October 2023
submit them via the Ask a Question page on the HUD Exchange. To submit a question, select
HDX (AHAR, HIC, LSA, PDX, PIT, Stella, Sys PM) under Reporting Systems.


2. IMPORTANT CHANGES TO HIC AND PIT REQUIREMENTS BEGINNING IN 2023

2.1 HIC Changes
A. None

2.2 PIT Changes
A.   HUD expanded the data collection and reporting requirements for the age categories for the
     persons in households with at least one adult and one child and persons without children to
     the following:
         1)   Under age 18
        2)    18-24
        3)    25-34
        4)    35-44
        5)    45-54
        6)    55-64
        7)    65 and older



3. HOUSING INVENTORY COUNT GUIDANCE

This section provides guidance for collecting data required for the HIC. The HIC is a point-in-
time inventory of projects within your CoC that provide beds and units dedicated to serving
persons who are homeless. It is intended to provide HUD and CoCs with information about the
shelter and housing capacity of homeless crisis response systems. It should reflect the number of
beds and units available for occupancy on the night designated for the count that are dedicated to
serve persons who are homeless (and, for permanent housing projects, persons who were
homeless at entry), per the    HUD homeless definition.
CoCs are required to submit their HIC data through the HUD HDX website. Additionally, CoCs
must provide HIC data to the Consolidated Plan jurisdiction(s) located within the CoC, when
requested. This includes providing HIC data at the geocode level for each jurisdiction required to
report PIT count data in the Consolidated Plan. A CoC could cover one or more Consolidated
Plan jurisdictions. In turn, HUD expects states and entitlement communities responsible for
completing Consolidated Plans to participate in the HIC by contributing project-level
information to CoC and HMIS leads to facilitate the completion of the HIC.




HIC/PIT Count Data Collection Notice              Page 5                            October 2023
3.1 Types of Homeless Projects to Include in the HIC
 Beds and units included on the HIC are considered part of the CoC homeless assistance system.
Beds and units in the HIC must be dedicated to serving persons experiencing homelessness, or
for permanent housing projects, dedicated for persons who were homeless at entry. For the
 purposes of the HIC, a project with dedicated beds/units is one where:
    A.    The primary intent of the project is to serve persons experiencing homelessness;
    B.    The project verifies homeless status as part of its eligibility determination; and
    C.    The actual project clients are predominantly homeless (or, for permanent housing, were
          homeless at entry).
Beds in institutional settings not specifically dedicated for persons who are homeless such as
detox facilities, emergency rooms, jails, and acute crisis or treatment centers should not be
included in the HIC. HUD considers extreme weather shelters as dedicated homeless inventory
and they should be included in the HIC.
While there might be occasional instances where a project with dedicated beds serves a
non-homeless person, beds in these types of projects could still be counted as dedicated beds. For
example, a provider of a project that is intended to serve persons who are both homeless and
intoxicated might be unable to determine homeless status at entry due to a person’s severe
intoxication. After admission, the provider determines some participants are not homeless and
helps them return to their housing. In this instance, the project bed could still be counted as a
dedicated bed for persons experiencing homelessness.
For the HIC, CoCs will collect information about the beds and units in the CoC’s homeless
system, categorized by the Project Types described below. CoCs are required to include in the
HIC all projects in the CoC that are categorized as one of these Project Types and that provide
dedicated beds for persons who are homeless, not just those contributing client-level data in the
local HMIS or receiving HUD funding. This includes projects funded by the other federal
agencies (e.g., VA, HHS), faith-based organizations, and other public and private funding
sources.
The Project Types included in the HIC, as identified in the most recently published HMIS Data
Standards are:
         A.      Emergency Shelter (ES)
                 Transitional Housing (TH)
         a8




                  Safe Haven (SH)
                 Permanent Housing (PH)
         9




                  1)   Permanent Supportive Housing (PSH)
                 2)    Rapid Re-housing (RRH)
                 3)    Other PH (OPH) — combines two project types from the HMIS Data
                       Standards:
                        e   PH -— Housing with Services (no disability required for entry); and
                        e   PH -— Housing Only




HIC/PIT Count Data Collection Notice                 Page 6                              October 2023
       For the purpose of the HIC, permanent housing inventory is divided into three groups:
       permanent supportive housing (PSH), rapid re-housing (RRH), and other permanent
       housing (OPH).
        1)   To be considered PSH, the project must provide long-term housing to individuals
             with disabilities and families who are experiencing homelessness in which one
             member of the household has a disability, and supportive services that are designed to
             meet the needs of the program participants must be available to the household.
       2)    To be considered a RRH bed and unit, the project must provide short-term or
             medium-term assistance (up to 24 months for ESG and CoC Program funded projects,
             or longer if permitted by waiver), the lease for units must be between the landlord and
             the program participant, the program participant must be able to select the unit they
             lease, and the provider cannot impose a restriction on how long the person may lease
             the unit, though the provider can impose a maximum length of time that grant funds
             will be used to assist the program participant in the unit.
       3)    To be considered OPH, the provider must provide long-term housing that is not
             otherwise considered permanent supportive housing or rapid re-housing. HUD’s
             HMIS Data Standards defines two project types that represent the other permanent
             housing inventory — PH: Housing with Services and PH: Housing Only. PH: Housing
             with Services projects provide long-term housing and supportive services for persons
             experienicing homelessness, but do not limit eligibility to persons with a disability.
             PH: Housing Only projects provide long-term housing for persons experiencing
             homelessness, but do not make supportive services available as part of the project. It
             is critical to note that the CoC should look at the entire service package of these
             permanent housing projects, as opposed to what is funded by certain funding streams.
             CoCs should remember that these OPH beds should only be reported if they are
             dedicated to persons experiencing homelessness, as outlined in the first paragraph of
             this section.
In the FY2017 CoC Program Competition, HUD began funding joint component TH and RRH
projects. CoCs should report these grants on the HIC by entering two separate projects — one for
TH and one for RRH. Inventory reported under each project should comport with the
inventory instruction for its respective project type as described throughout this Notice. For
the TH project, this would mean including the available TH beds in the HIC, even if the TH beds
are not occupied on the night of the PIT count, just as a CoC would for any other TH project. For
RRH components, the CoC should report the number of beds in use on the night of the count,
just as a CoC would for any RRH project. If the TH project does not have a fixed inventory and
has no beds on the night of the count, the CoC should exclude the TH project from the HIC. For
both projects of a joint component grant, select the HUD: CoC — Joint Component TH/RRH
funding source option, regardless of the project type.
For a detailed list of which projects to include in the HIC, please see Appendix A.

   3.1.1 VA Programs
    The Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) recently designated components within its Grant
    and Per Diem (GPD) program and updated the component types for its GPD program. CoCs




HIC/PIT Count Data Collection Notice               Page 7                             October 2023
   should continue to report GPD programs in the HIC. The following chart outlines what
   project types are associated with each GPD program component.

     Component in GPD                           Project Type in the HIC
     Bridge Housing                             Transitional Housing
     Low Demand                                 Safe Haven
     Service Intensive Transitional Housing   | Transitional Housing
     Hospital to Housing                        Transitional Housing
     Clinical Treatment                         Transitional Housing
     Transition in Place                        Permanent Housing - OPH

   3.1.2 RHY Programs
   It is important that CoCs coordinate with and include projects that provide shelter and
   housing to children and youth experiencing homelessness in the HIC. Coordination will lead
   to amore accurate understanding of the inventory available to serve children and youth
   experiencing homelessness in the CoC and will, hopefully, lead to improved service delivery.
   Specifically, CoCs should be sure to coordinate with local projects funded through the U.S.
   Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) Runaway and Homeless Youth (RHY)
   Program when planning and conducting their HIC. RHY projects provide youth experiencing
   homelessness with short-term shelter, longer-term transitional living programs and maternity
   group homes, and also support youth through street outreach efforts. By engaging RHY
   programs in the HIC, CoCs will be able to collect more complete data on the emergency
   shelter and transitional housing programs that provide dedicated beds and units for youth
   experiencing homelessness. However, CoCs should not include projects or beds/units in
   projects in the HIC that are dedicated for children who are in foster care, who are wards of
   the state, or who are otherwise under government custody or supervision. A list of current
   RHY grantees by city and state, created by technical assistance providers, is available on the
   HUD Exchange. HUD also encourages CoCs to work with their Local Education Agencies
   (LEA) to participate in the count and assist CoCs to identify children and youth experiencing
   homelessness in their geographic areas.


   3.1.3   HUD PIH Programs
   HUD’s Office of Public and Indian Housing (PIH) is the Office that administers several key
   affordable housing programs in HUD, including Housing Choice Vouchers (HCV) and
   Public Housing. While most of these vouchers and programs would not be included in the
   Housing Inventory Count (HIC), when there are a certain number of vouchers set aside or a
   specific program that has beds dedicated to people currently or formerly experiencing
   homelessness per section 3.1 of this document then that should be recorded in the HIC.
   Examples include:
       A. A Set aside or preference (including limited preference) where a certain number of
           vouchers or specific percent of turnover vouchers have been provided to people
           experiencing homelessness. This could be through the normal voucher allocation or
           through special purpose vouchers.



HIC/PIT Count Data Collection Notice             Page 8                            October 2023
       B. Emergency Housing Vouchers (EHV) because participants are required to qualify as
          homeless. See Section 8 of Notice PIH 2021-15 (HA) for specific eligibility
          requirements. CoCs should include all EHV beds in the inventory unless there is a set
          portion of beds that are dedicated to a population that is at risk of homelessness.
              Note: While HUD strongly encourages CoCs to include EHV beds in HMIS,
              HUD 1s not requiring EHVs to be in HMIS. This is due to the strained capacity of
              CoCs at the time EHVs were being leased up as they focused on reducing the
              threat and impact of COVID-19.
       C. Family Unification Program (FUP) and Fostering Youth Independence (FYT)
          vouchers where there is a portion of the inventory that is dedicated to serve people
          experiencing homelessness. Often the youth FUP vouchers serve people
          experiencing homelessness whereas the family FUP vouchers tend not to be.
       D. HUD-VA Supportive Housing (HUD-VASH) vouchers.

   These programs should all be recorded in the HIC as “Other Permanent Housing” (OPH),
   except for HUD-VASH which should be reported as PSH.

3.2 Using HMIS Data for the HIC
HUD strongly encourages CoCs to use their HMIS data as a starting point to generate the HIC.
CoCs must collect and enter project descriptor data for all CoC projects in the CoC’s HMIS,
regardless of whether the CoC project participates in HMIS (1.e., makes a reasonable effort to
record all universal data elements on all clients served in HMIS). Instructions for collecting and
entering project descriptor data in the local HMIS can be found in the most recently published
HMIS Data Standards. CoCs that rely on an HMIS that is strictly programmed according to the
HMIS Data Standards must manually input whether beds are associated with a presidentially-
declared disaster.
Throughout this document, there are references to the HMIS project descriptor data element
numbers found in the most recently published HMIS Data Standards. These references are
intended to assist CoCs that use their HMIS to complete their HIC to identify what HMIS data
elements they can use as a starting point for their HIC. CoCs must still verify that the data
generated from their HMIS for their HIC correspond with the requirements in this Notice. Prior
to submitting HIC data in HDX, CoCs should coordinate with project staff to review, verify, and
update, if necessary, the information collected about their project for the HIC.

3.3 Completing the Bed Inventory
The following sections identify the data necessary to complete the HIC, along with a brief
description of each. If relevant, the data element number from the most recently published HMIS
Data Standards is included in brackets, e.g., Project Information [2.02]. While not all of these
data elements apply to every project, they are all needed in order to generate an accurate HIC.

   3.3.1 Organization and Project Information
   In general, projects included in any HMIS-based reporting for HIC purposes should be
   limited to those projects that are identified in Data Element 2.02 Field 5 as “Continuum
   Projects” (.e., considered part of the CoC homeless assistance system), as described in
   Section 3.1 of this Notice.



HIC/PIT Count Data Collection Notice              Page 9                             October 2023
   Organization ID and Name [Data Element 2.01 Fields 1 and 2]: The name and unique
   identifier of the organization providing shelter or housing to persons experiencing
   homelessness.
   Project ID and Project Name [Data Element 2.02 Fields 1 and 2]: A unique project name
   and ID for each distinct CoC project.
   Status [Data Element 2.02, Fields 3 and 4]: Whether the project remains active or should
   be marked as closed for the current HIC. Only projects that have beds available for
   occupancy or under development on the night of the count should be included on the HIC
   (see Inventory Type, below).
   Project Type [Data Element 2.02, Field 6]: The relevant type of project (e.g., emergency
   shelter).
   Target Population [Data Element 2.02, Field 8]: The population served by project, if
   applicable. A population is considered a "target population" if the project is designed to serve
   that population and at least three-fourths (75 percent) of the clients served by the project fit
   the target group descriptor. A single project is prohibited from having more than one Target
   Population. Information about project targeting for veterans, youth, and persons experiencing
   chronic homelessness should be collected at the bed level, per Bed and Unit Inventory data
   elements below. Note that there might be some projects that serve a target population of
   survivors of domestic violence but do not qualify as a “victim service provider.” For the
   purposes of the HIC, “Survivors of Domestic Violence” includes projects that serve people
   currently experiencing homelessness because they are fleeing domestic violence, dating
   violence, sexual assault, or stalking.

     Abbreviation                    Description
     DV                              People who are Survivors of Domestic Violence
     HIV                             Persons living with HIV/AIDS
     NA                              Not Applicable


   HUD McKinney-Vento Funded [Data Element 2.06]: Whether the project receives any
   HUD McKinney-Vento funding. HUD McKinney-Vento programs that provide funding for
   lodging projects include the following [corresponding HMIS data element 2.06 response
   options relevant to lodging projects are listed under each]:

     Program                                            Funding Sources [Data Element 2.06]
     Emergency Solutions Grants Program (ESG)         | HUD: ESG — Emergency Shelter

                                                        HUD: ESG — Rapid Re-Housing
                                                        HUD: ESG-CV
     Continuum of Care Program (CoC)                    HUD: CoC — Safe Haven
                                                        HUD: CoC — Transitional Housing
                                                        HUD: CoC — Permanent Supportive Housing



HIC/PIT Count Data Collection Notice               Page 10                           October 2023
     Program                                          Funding Sources [Data Element 2.06]
                                                      HUD: CoC — Rapid Re-Housing
                                                      HUD: CoC — Single Room Occupancy

                                                      HUD: CoC — Joint Component TH/RRH
                                                      HUD:   CoC — Youth Homeless Demonstration
                                                      Program (YHDP) renewals
     Youth Homeless Demonstration Program             HUD: YHDP
     (YHDP)


   CoCs with HUD-funded Youth Homelessness Demonstration Program (YHDP) grants
   should report them based on the project type identified for each project in e-snaps. For
   example, if a YHDP recipient was funded for a host home program identified with a
   Transitional Housing (TH) project type then it will be included in the HIC as a TH project
   and the youth in that project will be included in the sheltered PIT count. CoCs must select the
   HUD: YHDP — Youth Homelessness Demonstration Program (YHDP) funding source
   options in response to the HUD McKinney-Vento Funded question for each YHDP project.
   As with other grants, CoCs only report residential projects in the HIC and exclude service
   only projects like HUD-funded Supportive Services Only (SSO) projects. After a YHDP
   grant renews under the CoC Program, the project will no longer be reported under the HUD:
   YHDP funding source but must be reported under the appropriate HUD: CoC — Youth
   Homeless Demonstration Program (YHDP) renewals funding source.
   Note: CoCs should only select S+C, SRO, or SHP as the McKinney-Vento funding source if
   they still have funding and use requirements associated with that funding. Projects that were
   originally funded under those programs but are currently being renewed under the CoC
   Program should only identify CoC as the funding source.
   Additional Federal Funding Sources [Data Element 2.06]: HUD requires CoCs to report
   on additional federal funding sources in the HIC in the “Additional Federal Funding
   Sources” field. If there are multiple additional federal funding sources, CoCs will select all
   that apply for each project. If there are no additional federal funding sources, the CoC should
   not select any option. These funding sources are:




HIC/PIT Count Data Collection Notice             Page 11                            October 2023
     Funding Sources [Data Element 2.06]
     HUD: HUD/VA Supportive Housing (HUD/VASH)

     VA: Supportive Services for Veteran Families Program (SSVF)
     VA: Grant and Per Diem Program (GPD) — Bridge Housing
     VA: Grant and Per Diem Program (GPD) — Low Demand
     VA: Grant and Per Diem Program (GPD) — Hospital to Housing
     VA: Grant and Per Diem Program (GPD) — Clinical Treatment
     VA: Grant and Per Diem Program (GPD) — Service Intensive Transitional Housing
     VA: Grant and Per Diem Program (GPD) — Transition in Place


     VA: CRS Contract Residential Services (HCHV CRS: EH)
     VA Community Contract Safe Haven Program (HCH V/SH)
     HHS: RHY Basic Center Program (BCP)
     HHS: RHY Transitional Living Program (TLP)
     HHS: RHY Maternity Group Homes for Pregnant and Parenting Youth (MGH)
     HHS: RHY Demonstration Project

     HUD: Housing Opportunities for Persons With AIDS (HOPWA) shelter and housing
     programs. This includes the following HMIS data element 2.06 response options:
         e   HUD: HOPWA — Hotel/Motel Vouchers
         e   HUD: HOPWA -— Permanent Housing Placement (facility based or TBRA)
         e   HUD: HOPWA - Short-Term Supportive Facility
         e   HUD: HOPWA - Transitional Housing (facility-based or TBRA)
         e   HUD: HOPWA-CV

     HUD Public and Indian Housing (PIH) programs (non-VASH), including public housing
     and housing choice voucher inventory that is dedicated to persons experiencing
     homelessness
     HUD: PIH (Emergency Housing Voucher)
     HUD: HOME
     HUD: HOME (ARP)
     Other

   CoCs should identify each federal funding source that currently supports the project, even if
   a source only partially funds the beds and units.




HIC/PIT Count Data Collection Notice            Page 12                            October 2023
   Note: CoCs should not report VA-funded Mental Health Residential Rehabilitation
   Treatment Program — Domiciliary Care for Homeless Veterans (VADOM) and Compensated
   Work Therapy, Transitional Residence (CWT/TR) grants inventory in the HIC. The VA and
   HUD determined that VADOM and CWT/TR inventory are more appropriately identified as
   institutions and should not be included in the HIC or PIT count.
   Housing Type [Data Element 2.02, Field D]: CoCs indicate the “Housing Type” in the
   organization and project information section. All of the inventory for the project must fall
   within the selected Housing Type. If a project has multiple Housing Types, it must be split
   into separate projects. The Housing Type options are:
     Housing          Description
     Type
     1. Stte-based/ | All clients are housed in a single project facility.
     single site
     2. Site-based/ | Clients are housed in project facilities that are scattered across multiple
     clustered-       locations, but more than one client is housed in each project facility. The
     multiple sites | facility locations are owned, operated, or sponsored by the project.
     3. Tenant-       Clients have leases or occupancy agreements and are housed in residences
     based/           that are not owned or managed by the project.
     scattered site

   Victim Services Provider [Data Element 2.01, Field 3]: Identify whether the project is a
   victim services provider and is prohibited from HMIS participation by VAWA and/or the
   McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act. HUD 1s clarifying that, while DV providers are
   exempt from entering address information, they are expected to enter a ZIP code (see
   Appendix B for a definition of victim service provider).
   Geocode, Address, and ZIP Code [Data Element 2.03, Fields 2-7]: Geocode, Address, and
   ZIP Code fields should reflect the location of the project’s principal site or, for multiple site
   projects, the location in which the majority of the project’s clients are housed. A list of
   geocodes can be found at: https:/Awww.hud.gov/sites/dfiles/CPD/documents/F         Y -2022-
   GeoCodes-Report.pdf.
   CoCs are required to enter an address for all projects that are site-based (options | and 2,
   from the housing type chart above). If a site-based project has multiple sites, the CoC should
   enter the address for the site where most beds and units are located.
   Tenant-based scattered site projects are only required to complete the geocode and ZIP Code
   fields based on where the majority of the clients are housed and may use the administrative
   address if they wish to complete the remainder of the address fields. Victim Service
   Providers are only required to complete the geocode and ZIP Code fields.
   HMIS Participating [Data Element 2.02, Field 7]: CoCs must report the HMIS
   participation status of the entire project. Either the project completely participates in HMIS
   or it does not. If part of a project’s inventory participates in HMIS and another part does not,
   it should be split into two projects, one representing the inventory participating in HMIS and
   one representing the inventory not participating in HMIS.




HIC/PIT Count Data Collection Notice              Page 13                              October 2023
   For the purpose of reporting in the HIC, a bed 1s considered “an HMIS participating bed” if
   the project makes a reasonable effort to record all universal data elements on all clients
   served in that bed and discloses that information through agreed upon means to the HMIS
   Lead Agency at least once annually.
   HUD will compare the beds associated with projects that indicate they are HMIS
   participating to all beds in the HMIS minus beds associated with victim service providers.
   Note that HUD expects CoCs to work with all projects, including those that target survivors
   of domestic violence but are not victim service providers, to collect data in HMIS.
   Comparable Database Participating: Victim service providers are prohibited by VAWA
   from entering data into HMIS. CoCs must report whether victim service providers in their
   geography are participating in a comparable database. All CoC and ESG Program funded
   projects operated by a victim service provider are required to collect data in a comparable
   database. For more information about comparable databases please refer to the HMIS
   Comparable Database Manual, a resource prepared by technical assistance providers.
   For projects operated by victim service providers, the CoCs must report the comparable
   database participation status of the entire project. Either the project completely participates in
   a comparable database or it does not. If part of a project’s inventory participates in a
   comparable database and another part does not, it should be split into two projects, one
   representing the inventory participating in a comparable database and one representing the
   inventory not participating in a comparable database.
   For the purpose of reporting in the HIC, a bed is considered “a comparable database
   participating bed” if the bed is available for occupancy on the night the count is conducted.
   Throughout the year the project must make a reasonable effort to record all universal data
   elements on all clients served in that bed and updates that information in the comparable
   database at least once annually.
   3.3.2 Bed and Unit Inventory Information
   Inventory Type: Using Inventory Start Date and Inventory End Date [Data Element
   2.07, Fields 1 and 2], identify whether the bed inventory is current or under development.
       1)   Current inventory (C): Beds and units that were available for occupancy on the
            night of the CoC’s PIT count.
      2)    Under development (U): Beds and units that were fully funded but not yet available
            for occupancy on the night of the CoC’s PIT count. For inventory identified as under
            development, CoCs must also identify whether the bed/unit inventory is expected to
            be available for occupancy 12 months from the night of the CoC’s count. For
            example, in the 2023 HIC, if a CoC has a count date of January 31, 2023, CoCs must
            identify whether the bed/unit inventory is expected to be available for occupancy by
            January 31, 2024. Note that only inventory that has not yet been in operation should
            be listed as “under development.” Inventory that had previously been in operation but
            was not available or in operation on the night of the count should not be included in
            the HIC.
   Note: If using HMIS data to generate the HIC, inventory that is under development could be
   entered into HMIS with an Inventory Start Date [Data Element 2.07, Field 1] in the future
   that reflects the anticipated availability date; accordingly, inventory that is not yet fully


HIC/PIT Count Data Collection Notice              Page 14                             October 2023
   funded should not be included in the HIC and either should not be entered into HMIS or
   entered in such a way as to enable differentiation (e.g. via customized fields).
   Disaster-Related Beds: Beds that were funded specifically because of a presidentially-
   declared disaster. This information is not required to be captured in a CoC’s HMIS.
   Bed Type [Data Element 2.07, Field 5] (Emergency Shelter Only): The Bed Type
   describes the type of beds offered by emergency shelter projects according to the following
   mutually exclusive options:
       1)   Facility-based: Beds (including cots or mats) located in a residential homeless
            assistance facility dedicated for use by persons who are homeless.
      2)    Voucher: Beds located in a hotel or motel and made available by the homeless
            assistance project through vouchers or other forms of payment.
      3)    Other: Beds located in a church or other facility not dedicated for use by persons
            who are homeless.
   The Bed Type must be consistent with the Housing Type (i.e., a Facility-based emergency
   shelter project cannot have a Housing Type of “tenant based/scattered site’).
   Household Type [Data Element 2.07, Field 4]: Enter the counts of bed inventory, unit
   inventory, and HMIS bed inventory (detailed below) based on availability for each of the
   following household types:
       1)   Households without children: Beds and units typically serving households with
            adults only. This includes households composed of unaccompanied adults (including
            unaccompanied youth age 18-24) and multiple adults (including households with
            multiple youth ages 18 to 24). (Housing covered by the Fair Housing Act cannot deny
            admission to families with children.)
      2)    Households with at least one adult and one child: Beds and units typically serving
            households with (at least) one adult (including youth ages 18 to 24) and one child.
      3)    Households with only children: Beds and units typically serving households
            composed exclusively of persons under age 18, including one-child households,
            multi-child households or other household configurations composed only of children.
            For projects that have inventory designated for use by households with only children,
            care should be taken to ensure that this inventory is included in the HIC only in the
            category of households with only children, and not in the category for households
            with at least one adult and one child.
      4)    Bed Inventory [Data Element 2.07, Field 14]: The total number of beds available
            for occupancy on the night of the inventory count for each of the above-listed
            household types. For all of the relevant project types other than rapid re-housing (see
            Section 3.3.4), CoCs must include all of the dedicated homeless beds and units
            available for persons experiencing homelessness on the date of the inventory count,
            whether beds are current or under development (separate records will be created for
            each inventory type), regardless of whether the project participates in HMIS or not
            (separate records will be created for each inventory type), regardless of whether the
            project receives HUD funding, and regardless of whether the bed was occupied. CoCs
            need to remember that HIC beds can only be reported once, even if funding for the


HIC/PIT Count Data Collection Notice              Page 15                            October 2023
            housing and services are from multiple sources that may be associated with different
            project types. For example, when SSVF funds are provided to pay for a crib or move-
            in costs for a household who is served in HUD-VASH, the inventory should only be
            reported in the HIC under the PSH inventory.
   For inventory that was active on the night of the PIT count, CoCs should report the actual
   number of beds available for occupancy on that night in their HIC, even if it differs from the
   number projected in grant applications or calculated through some other approach to
   determining typical capacity.
   This applies to projects both with and without a fixed number of beds. If a project has a fixed
   number of units/vouchers, but not a fixed number of beds, CoCs should estimate the number
   of beds available on the night of the PIT count by multiplying the number of units by the
   average household size observed on the PIT night.
   For projects that serve multiple household types, but where a precise number of beds are not
   designated exclusively for a particular type of household, the total number of beds may be
   distributed among the household types served by the project using one of the methodologies
   described below. These same approaches can be used for determining the household type-
   distribution among dedicated beds for youth, veterans, and people who are chronically
   homeless.
       1)   Divide the beds based on how the bed(s) were used on the night of the count. If the
            facility is not at full capacity on the night of the count, then extrapolate the
            distribution based on the prorated distribution of those who are served on the night of
            the count.
      2)    Divide the beds based on average utilization. For example, a project has 100 beds that
            could be used by either households with only children or households with at least one
            adult and one child. If one-half of the beds are used by persons in households with
            only children on an average night and the other half are used by persons in
            households with at least one adult and one child, then include 50 beds for households
            with only children, and 50 beds for households with at least one adult and one child in
            the HIC.
      3)    Projects with a fixed number of units but no fixed number of beds can use a multiplier
            factor to estimate the number of beds (e.g., a program with 30 units and an average
            household size of 3 equals 90 beds for households with at least one adult and one
            child).
   Unit Inventory [Data Element 2.07, Field 15]: The total number of units available for
   occupancy on the night of the inventory count for each of the above-listed household type.
   Projects that do not have a fixed number of units (e.g., a congregate shelter program) may
   record the bed inventory, the number of residential facilities operated by the program, or the
   number of rooms used for overnight accommodation. For RRH projects, see instructions
   under Section 3.3.4.
   Dedicated Bed Inventory [Data Element 2.07, Fields 7-13]: All beds that have been
   funded by HUD or another federal partner that are dedicated to one or more of the following
   subpopulations must be recorded in the appropriate category. A bed may be counted more
   than once across categories of dedicated beds (e.g., a project may have beds dedicated for


HIC/PIT Count Data Collection Notice              Page 16                            October 2023
   persons who are both chronically homeless and a veteran). The number of beds for each
   subpopulation is a subset of the total bed inventory for a given project and must be equal to
   or less than the total bed inventory. A dedicated bed is a bed that must be filled by a person
   in the subpopulation category (or a member of their household) unless there are no persons
   from the subpopulation who qualify for the project located within the geographic area (see
   Appendix B for key terms).
   CoCs must report their inventory that is dedicated to veterans, youth, and people
   experiencing chronic homelessness by household type, instead of providing a single number
   of dedicated beds. For instance, if a project has 10 beds dedicated to serving youth, instead of
   merely reporting 10 beds dedicated to youth, the CoC must report based on how many of the
   10 beds are occupied by youth households with at least one adult and one child or are
   occupied by youth in households without children. None of the beds serving youth under 18
   can be veteran beds. For these reasons, CoCs will not report veteran and youth beds under
   this category. For projects where the typical use of beds by different youth household types
   varies, but where a precise number of beds are not typically being used by a particular type of
   household, the CoC must refer to the section above on Household Type to determine how to
   distribute their beds by household type.
   When reporting on dedicated beds for veterans, youth, and people experiencing chronic
   homelessness, CoCs should report all of the beds associated with the unit that is being
   provided to someone because they meet the criteria for which is it is dedicated. For example,
   if a project dedicates its beds and units to veteran families, the CoC should count all of the
   beds in each unit, even those occupied by family members who are not veterans, as part of
   their veteran bed inventory.
   CoCs must report all dedicated beds for veterans, youth, and people experiencing chronic
   homelessness, even if a person who does not match that subpopulation happens to be in that
   inventory on the night of the count. HUD recognizes that there may be times when a
   dedicated bed may become available but there may not be someone to fill the bed who
   matches that subpopulation. CoCs may continue to use that inventory for another person
   based on their own prioritization policies unless prohibited by law, contract or grant
   agreement.
            Permanent Supportive Housing Chronic Homeless Bed Inventory: The number
            of PSH beds that are dedicated to house chronically homeless persons and their
            household members (if applicable) for each of the household types: households
            without children, households with at least one adult and one child, and households
            with only children. A dedicated bed is a bed that must be filled by a person
            experiencing chronic homelessness (or a member of their household), which is a
            higher standard than simply prioritizing persons experiencing chronic homelessness
            for available beds, e.g., per CPD Notice 16-11, Prioritizing Persons Experiencing
            Chronic Homelessness and Other Vulnerable Homeless Persons in Permanent
            Supportive Housing. This category should be used for any beds that are dedicated
            to people experiencing chronic homelessness without regard for their veteran status
            or age.
            Veteran Bed Inventory: The number of beds that are dedicated to house veterans
            experiencing homelessness and their household members (if applicable) for



HIC/PIT Count Data Collection Notice             Page 17                             October 2023
             households with at least one adult and one child and households without children.
             This category should be used for any beds that are dedicated to veterans without
             regard for their chronic homeless status or age.
             Youth Bed Inventory: The number of beds that are dedicated to house youth
             experiencing homelessness, including parenting youth and unaccompanied youth
             and their household members (if applicable) for households with at least one adult
             and one child and households without children (all inventory reported for
             households with only children are assumed to be youth beds). This category should
             be used for any beds that are dedicated to youth without regard for their chronic
             homeless or veteran status.
   Emergency Shelter Bed and Unit Availability [Data Element 2.07, Field 6]: Detailed
   household-level bed and unit-inventory counts by household type must be provided as
   described above for all year-round emergency shelter beds and units. For emergency shelter
   beds that are provided on a seasonal (during a defined period of high demand) or on an ad
   hoc or temporary basis as demand indicates, CoCs must enter a total count of such beds.
       1)   Seasonal Beds: Seasonal beds are not available year-round, but instead are available
            on a planned basis, with set start and end dates, during an anticipated period of higher
            demand. For the HIC, identify only the total number of seasonal beds available for
            occupancy on the night of the inventory count and indicate the start and end date for
            the season.
      2)    Overflow Beds: Overflow beds are available on an ad hoc or temporary basis during
            the year in response to demand that exceeds planned (year-round or seasonal) bed
            capacity. For the HIC, identify the total number of overflow beds that were available
            for occupancy on the night of the inventory count. If there is no fixed number of
            overflow beds, CoCs may instead report the number of overflow beds that were
            occupied on the night of the inventory count.

   3.3.3 Point-in-Time Counts for Each Project
   Each project recorded in the HIC must provide a PIT count. This number should be the
   unduplicated number of persons served on the night of the count in the beds reported for the
   project. This includes all persons who entered the project on or before the date of the HIC
   and PIT count, and who are either still in the project or exited after the date of the count.
   Although permanent housing projects are not included in the CoC-wide PIT count of
   peresons experiencing homelessness who are sheltered and unsheltered, all permanent
   housing projects must provide a PIT count for the HIC. Rapid re-housing (RRH) projects
   should only count persons who are residing in permanent housing and being assisted by the
   RRH project on the night of the count. Tenant-based permanent supportive housing (PSH)
   projects may take this same approach, unless the PSH project (e.g., a TBRA project) has a
   more set number of vouchers available. If the PSH project has a set number of beds/units
   available, then the PSH project may choose to report that inventory number.




HIC/PIT Count Data Collection Notice              Page 18                             October 2023
                     Sheltered Person Counts on the HIC and PIT Must Be Equal
    It is important for CoCs to closely coordinate their HIC and PIT counts and report only those
    persons who are considered homeless and staying in an emergency shelter, transitional
    housing, or Safe Haven project identified on the HIC. The total number of persons reported
    in all emergency shelter, transitional housing, and Safe Haven projects on the HIC must
    match the total number of sheltered persons reported in the PIT Population tab in the HDX.




   As discussed earlier, the HIC and PIT count are integrally related. The sum total number of
   persons reported in emergency shelter, Safe Havens, and transitional housing projects in the
   PIT fields of the HIC must match the sum total of sheltered persons reported in the PIT
   count. As such, CoCs should conduct their annual housing inventory count on the same night
   as the CoC’s designated PIT count night or as close as possible to the designated PIT count
   night. Any discrepancies between the sum total number of sheltered persons counted on the
   HIC and the number of sheltered persons counted on the PIT count will result in a validation
   error requiring the CoC to make corrections.
   HUD strongly encourages the use of HMIS data to generate these counts for projects with
   100 percent of beds participating in HMIS. CoCs must verify with project staff that HMIS
   data are complete and correct for the night of the HIC and PIT count, and that Project Entry
   and Project Exit Dates have been entered for all persons who entered or exited on or before
   the date of the count.

   3.3.4 Supplemental Inventory Instruction
   Some common areas of confusion with regard to how to report some inventory are listed
   below:
   Rapid re-housing and tenant-based permanent supportive housing projects: On any
   given night, an RRH or tenant-based PSH project will have current participants who are still
   homeless (e.g., staying in an emergency shelter) and seeking permanent housing, and
   participants who have located and are residing in permanent housing.
   For the purpose of reporting in the HIC, CoCs should count RRH beds and units based on the
   actual number of current project participants who are:
       1)   Actively enrolled in the project on the night of the inventory count, including persons
            who are only receiving supportive services in the RRH project; and
      2)    Are in permanent housing on the night of the inventory count. [HMIS data element
            3.20 Housing Move-In Date should be used to identify RRH participants who are in
            permanent housing on the night of the inventory count].
   This generally means that the RRH beds and units in use will equal the number of people
   served on the night of the count. RRH projects that do not have any participants in
   permanent housing on the night of the inventory count (e.g., all participants are still in
   emergency shelter) should report zero (0) beds and zero (0) participants.
   VA Supportive Services for Veteran Families (SSVF) projects: SSVF projects may offer
   both homelessness prevention and rapid re-housing assistance. Effective October 1, 2014,
   SSVF projects should be recording homelessness prevention and rapid re-housing


HIC/PIT Count Data Collection Notice               Page 19                                October 2023
   participants in separate projects in HMIS. CoCs should not include the homelessness
   prevention component of SSVF in the HIC, nor should they count in the project-level person
   count any persons receiving SSVF homelessness prevention services on the night the
   inventory is conducted.
   VA SSVF Emergency Housing Assistance (EHA) inventory: CoCs should count SSVF
   EHA beds on the HIC. Although they are funded through SSVF RRH, CoCs cannot combine
   ES and RRH bed inventories in a single HIC project record, so they will need to add a new
   ES project to their HIC to account for SSVF EHA based on the guidance below.
      e   Project Type: Emergency Shelter (ES)
      e   Emergency Shelter Bed and Unit Availability: Overflow Beds. EHA beds should
          be listed as overflow beds because they are not guaranteed to exist in set numbers
          year-round or on a seasonal basis. That is, the number of beds on the HIC for these
          projects will always be fully utilized and will likely always equal the number of
          people served (unless there are people sharing beds).
      e   Year-Round Bed Inventory: 0 year-round beds
      e   Funding Source: VA: Supportive Services for Veteran Families Program (SSVF)
      e   HMIS Participation & HMIS Project ID: This will depend on how the SSVF
          project accounts for EHA resources in HMIS.
              o   Ifthe SSVF project logs EHA as “services” in the RRH component of the
                  project in HMIS, then the EHA ES HIC inventory should be listed as non-
                  HMIS-participating, and the HMIS Project ID should be the same as the
                  SSVF RRH project's HMIS Project ID with "-EHA" on the end.
                     "   For example: If the SSVF RRH project's HMIS Project ID is 4, then
                         we recommend that you list "4-EHA" as the SSVF EHA project's
                         HMIS Project ID in the HIC.
              o   Ifthe SSVF project reports EHA as its own ES project in HMIS (which is
                  allowed but not required), then the EHA ES HIC project should be listed as
                  HMIS-participating. The HMIS Project ID in the HIC should then match the
                  Project ID in HMIS.
      e   Project Inventory PIT Count: Should reflect the total number of people served by
          EHA on the night of the count. Further resources on pulling the number of people
          served from HMIS are provided on HUD Exchange including HIC and PIT Count
          Data Submission Guidance which was developed by a technical assistance provider.
   VA Grant and Per Diem (GPD) projects: VA designated components within its GPD
   program. CoCs should continue to report GPD programs in the HIC. See Section 3.1.1 for a
   detailed chart outlining what project types are associated with each GPD program component.
   HUD-VA Supportive Housing (VASH) Vouchers: CoCs must count the total number of
   VASH vouchers available for use on the night of the HIC and PIT count, regardless of
   whether the voucher is presently being used. This requirement applies to any HUD-VASH
   vouchers, including Tribal HUD-VASH grant funding that has been allocated to support
   rental assistance for homeless Native American Veterans. Vouchers are designated for use in


HIC/PIT Count Data Collection Notice           Page 20                            October 2023
   a particular geographic location. CoCs should contact their local public housing authority or
   VA medical center that administers the VASH vouchers to determine the total number of
   vouchers available in the CoC. When a single project operates in multiple CoCs, each CoC
   should have project descriptor data pertaining to that project in their HMIS; beds should be
   apportioned according to the CoC in which the housing units assisted by the vouchers are
   physically located.
   In 2020, VA developed a process to release HUD-VASH data from its HOMES database to
   CoCs through the local VA Medical Centers (VAMCs). The exported data are limited to
   data on veterans receiving assistance and does not provide additional household member
   details (because the HOMES database does not collect household member data). CoCs are
   not required to use the data from this export, and if CoCs have an existing process for
   including HUD-VASH data in their HMIS and HIC, they can continue to use this process.
   CoCs can also work with their PHA to gather household information. They can use this data
   from the PHA to derive household characteristic data in lieu of the VA export data or to
   supplement the data. If a CoC is using the data exported from VA, they can use one of the
   following approaches to count households:
   1.   IfCoCs are confident that the household breakdowns in the HMIS-participating HUD-
        VASH project are comparable to those in the other HUD-VASH projects, they could
        apply a multiplier based on household size and composition from the other HMIS PSH
        data to extrapolate for the HUD-VASH     household data. Please note, however, that there
        may be a number of factors that could make this extrapolation method less accurate and
        therefore less desirable. For example, if the HMIS-participating project houses a small
        percentage of all households served by HUD-VASH projects, or if it tends to serve a
        different household type than the others, then it would not make sense to use its
        household data as an extrapolation source for the non-HMIS-participating projects.
   2.   If CoCs are either not confident that the households in HUD-VASH are like households
        in other HMIS-participating PSH projects or, based on level of effort to perform the
        extrapolation, they would prefer not to use that option, they could simply report that each
        veteran represents a unique household and count them in Households without Children.
        This means that for some communities HUD/VASH beds will be counted as serving
        families with children and in some communities they won’t.
   RHY Basic Center Program (BCP) projects: BCP projects may offer both emergency
   shelter and homelessness prevention. Projects providing both should be set up as two separate
   projects (1.e., BCP Emergency Shelter and BCP Prevention) and should be recording
   homelessness prevention and rapid re-housing participants in separate projects in HMIS.
   CoCs should not include in the HIC persons receiving BCP homelessness prevention services
   on the night the inventory is conducted or counted as part of the PIT count. See Section 3.1.2
   for more information about RHY Programs.
   Projects serving runaway and homeless youth, including RH Y-funded projects:
   Generally, RHY projects should be included in the HIC. While eligibility for these programs
   sometimes differs from HUD eligibility requirements, HUD has decided to include these
   projects in the HIC. However, CoCs must exclude beds that are dedicated for persons who
   are wards of the state, including children who are in foster care or who are otherwise under
   government custody or supervision. If beds are not specifically dedicated to wards of the



HIC/PIT Count Data Collection Notice              Page 21                             October 2023
   state, then the CoC must pro-rate beds based on who is occupying the bed on the night of the
   count, excluding those beds occupied by persons who are wards of the state, or pro-rate beds
   based on average utilization of persons who are and are not wards of the state. CoCs, using
   HMIS as a starting point to generate the HIC, could use R2 RHY-BCP Status to identify
   which BCP beds to include in the HIC. See Section 3.1.2 for more information about RHY
   Programs.
   Projects Assisted under the Indian Housing Block Grant (IHBG) or Indian Community
   Development Block Grant (ICDBG) Programs: Any projects owned or operated by an
   Indian Tribe or TDHE assisted under the IHBG or ICDBG programs that are also limited to
   serving persons experiencing homelessness should be included in the HIC. CoCs should
   identify these projects in the “Other” funding source category in the HIC.
   Projects That Operate In More Than One CoC: CoC codes are published annually by
   HUD in the CoC Program NOFA and are associated with specific geographic areas. In some
   cases, a project might operate in more than one CoC (e.g., some ESG projects and projects
   funded by non-HUD sources). The most recently published HMIS Data Standards require
   that HMIS allow for multiple codes to be selected per project when projects are funded to
   operate in multiple CoCs via Continuum of Care Information [2.03]. In such cases, the
   Client Location [3.16] data element must be used to associate each client with the correct
   CoC where they are being assisted. Ordinarily, projects that are physically located in multiple
   CoCs must be recorded as a distinct project within each CoC’s HMIS. Each CoC should have
   project descriptor data pertaining to that project recorded in the HMIS serving the CoC; and
   beds should be apportioned between the CoCs based on their physical locations as of the date
   of the HIC.
   Beds with an Inventory Type of “Under development” must be divided between CoCs based
   on location of projected use, if that information is available. If information about the location
   of projected use is not available, all of the beds may be allocated to the CoC in which the
   project principal service site or administrative office is located.
   CoCs must note that projects funded by the CoC Program are awarded for specific
   geographic areas and the projects are limited to the areas identified and approved in their
   Project Application, except for tenant-based rental assistance where a survivor of domestic
   violence might move out of the area and continue to receive their rental assistance. ESG
   recipients might fund activities outside their boundaries (potentially in more than one CoC’s
   geography) if the activities benefit the ESG recipients’ population. If a client is housed in a
   different CoC, the housing inventory and households should be reported by the CoC that is
   paying for the project. CoC program recipients cannot pay for site-based facilities outside
   their CoC geography. Site-based facilities should only be reported in the CoC where the
   facility is located.




HIC/PIT Count Data Collection Notice             Page 22                              October 2023
4.   POINT-IN- TIME COUNT REQUIREMENTS

Under Section 578.7 of the CoC Program interim rule, CoCs must plan and conduct, at least
biennially, a Point-in-Time Count of persons experiencing homelessnesswithin the geographic
area. Section 578.3 of the CoC Program interim rule defines Point-in-Time Count as a “count of
sheltered and unsheltered homeless persons carried out on one night in the last 10 calendar days
of January or at such other time as required by HUD.” CoCs are required to conduct a PIT
count at least biennially during the last 10 days of January. CoCs that are considering
performing their required PIT count outside of the last 10 days of January must request a PIT
count date exception from HUD. No HUD permission or exception is required for CoCs to
conduct supplemental PIT counts.
CoCs must ensure that their count estimate accurately reflects what they believe to be the entire
sheltered and unsheltered population for the CoC’s entire geographic area. For example, if a CoC
only counts unsheltered people in selected areas, they need to consider whether there are likely
unsheltered persons experiencing homelessness in other areas of the CoC and, if so, how to
account for them. This is particularly important when entire counties, communities, or larger
geographic areas are not covered. CoCs should use sampling and extrapolation methods to
account for areas that were not included in the unsheltered count, if there is any possibility an
unsheltered person could be found there. The Point-in-Time Count Methodology Guide and the
Point-in-Time (PIT) Count Standards and Methodologies Training are resources that were
developed by technical assistance providers. These resources are found on HUD Exchange and
provide helpful tips on how to properly account for areas not included in a count.
In some CoCs, there might be geographic areas that CoCs are not required to incorporate into the
count. These might include deserts, dense forests, and other remote locations that are
uninhabitable by people. Additionally, there are some areas where the CoC may have counted for
several years and found no persons experiencing homelessness. In making the decision to
exclude some geography, it is important that CoCs discuss these regions with people
knowledgeable about the areas, and then document the decision-making process that is used to
decide if a specific area will not be included in the PIT count. Areas that are excluded from a
CoCs unsheltered count should be identified in the CoC’s PIT count plan that is approved by the
CoC governing board. CoCs should be prepared to provide this information to HUD through
HUD’s CoC Program Competition.
CoCs are required to submit their PIT count data through the HUD HDX website. Additionally,
CoCs must provide PIT count data to the entity responsible for the Consolidated Plan
jurisdiction(s) located within the CoC, when requested. This includes providing PIT count data at
the geocode level for each jurisdiction required to report PIT count data in the Consolidated Plan.

There could be one or more Consolidated Plan jurisdictions a CoC covers. In turn, HUD expects
states and entitlement communities responsible for completing Consolidated Plans to participate
in the PIT count.
The PIT count should be completed using unduplicated counts or statistically reliable estimates
of persons experiencing homelessness in both sheltered and unsheltered locations on a single
night. HUD requires that PIT counts be conducted in compliance with HUD counting
standards and related methodology outlined in this Notice. For additional PIT count



HIC/PIT Count Data Collection Notice             Page 23                             October 2023
resources please review HUD Exchange and the Point-in-Time Count Methodology Guide which
was developed by a technical assistance provider.
Compliance with HUD standards could result in a more accurate and, potentially, higher or lower
PIT count than in the past. CoCs will have the ability to explain changes in PIT counts that are
due to methodology improvements in the CoC Program competition application and HUD will
take such changes into account in the application review and scoring process. Questions about
whether your CoC’s counting methodologies meet HUD’s requirements as outlined in the
guidance should be submitted to HICPITCount@hud. gov.
It is important to note that the PIT count only identifies a subset of individuals and families that
meet HUD’s definition of homeless. As such, the PIT count does not capture everybody who is
eligible for homeless assistance through HUD or other homeless assistance funding sources.
The following sections detail PIT count data collection requirements for CoCs.

4.1 People Who Must Be Counted in the PIT Count

   4.1.1 Sheltered Count
   CoCs must count all individuals or families who meet the criteria in paragraph (1)(11) of the
   homeless definition in 24 CFR 578.3. This includes individuals and families “living in a
   supervised publicly or privately operated shelter designated to provide temporary living
   arrangements (including congregate shelters, transitional housing, and hotels and motels
   paid for by charitable organizations or by federal, state, or local government programs for
   low-income individuals)” on the night designated for the count. This includes individuals
   residing in Safe Haven projects.
   CoCs should report on people based on where they are sleeping on the night of the count, as
   opposed to the program they are enrolled in. RRH is permanent housing and, therefore,
   individuals and families who are enrolled in RRH and residing in permanent housing on the
   night of the PIT count are not included in the sheltered count. However, homeless households
   currently residing on the street, in an emergency shelter, transitional housing, or Safe Haven,
   but who are also enrolled in an RRH project and awaiting housing placement, should be
   counted based on where they resided on the night of the count. For example, a person
   residing in an emergency shelter and being assisted by an RRH project to obtain housing
   must be counted in the sheltered PIT count for the emergency shelter.
   Persons enrolled in the TH project of a HUD-funded joint TH/RRH grant should be counted
   as sheltered homeless, if they are being served and do not yet have a rapid re-housing move-
   in date recorded.
   In CoCs where veterans are receiving temporary housing assistance through VA’s SSVF
   EHA resources provided through the SS VF RRH program on the night of the count, the CoC
   should count those veterans as residing in emergency shelter and include them in the
   sheltered count.
   For a detailed listing of all projects to include in the PIT count, please see Appendix A.




HIC/PIT Count Data Collection Notice               Page 24                             October 2023
   4.1.2 Unsheltered Count
   CoCs must count all individuals or families who meet the criteria in paragraph (1)(1) of the
   homeless definition in 24 CFR 578.3. This includes individuals and families “with a primary
   nighttime residence that is a public or private place not designed for or ordinarily used as
   a regular sleeping accommodation for human beings, including a car, park, abandoned
   building, bus or train station, airport, or camping ground” on the night designated for the
   count. RRH-assisted households who are still unsheltered on the night of the count (e.g.,
   staying in an encampment and being assisted by an RRH project to obtain housing) must be
   included as part of the unsheltered count.

4.2 People Who Must NOT Be Included in the PIT Count
Individuals and families residing in the following locations on the night of the count are
prohibited from being included in the sheltered or unsheltered PIT count:
   A.    Persons residing in PSH programs, including persons housed using HUD Veterans
         Affairs Supportive Housing (VASH) vouchers.
   B.    Persons residing in OPH housing, including persons in a GPD Transition in Place (TIP)
         project on the night of the count.
        . Persons counted in any location not listed on the HIC (e.g., staying in projects with
          beds/units not dedicated for persons who are homeless).
         Persons temporarily staying with family or friends (1.e., “doubled-up” or “couch
         surfing”).
         Persons residing in housing they rent or own (1.e., permanent housing), including persons
         residing in rental housing with assistance from a RRH project on the night of the count.

4.3 Counting People in Ambiguous Sleeping Locations
When people are displaced from housing, they use whatever sleeping arrangements that are
available to them. In some locations, people are clearly unsheltered, sheltered, or housed (..e.,
the person does not meet the definition of homeless), while the housing status of people in other
sleeping locations is ambiguous. HUD is providing the following guidelines to determine how to
characterize someone’s sleeping situation for the purposes of the PIT count.
   A. Determine Whether Common Ambiguous Sleeping Locations are Considered
      Unsheltered
          CoCs should use the following standards to determine whether a household should be
          considered unsheltered as opposed to sheltered homeless. Note that these standards are
          limited to whether to consider a household unsheltered and do not represent eligibility for
          a specific program.
          1)   Tents:
               (a) HUD always considers persons sleeping in tents unsheltered if the tent is for an
                   individual, or a single household.
               (b) Persons sleeping communally in huge tents, such as a sprung shelter, are
                   considered sheltered if it is located on a campus maintained by a government or


HIC/PIT Count Data Collection Notice                Page 25                             October 2023
              other entity and provides barracks style sleeping accommodations for multiple
              individuals or households where toilets, showers, and communal food preparation
              or food service areas are provided.
      2)   Vehicles:
           (a) Cars, trucks, and vans. Households sleeping in cars, trucks, and vans are to be
               counted as unsheltered. This includes households sleeping in their vehicles in
               safe parking programs, in designated areas, or on a campus maintained by a
               government or other entity where toilets, showers, and communal food
               preparation or food service areas are provided.
           (b) Recreational vehicles (RVs): RVs, including camper vans, are ordinarily used as
               a regular sleeping accommodation, so not all persons living in RVs qualify as
               homeless under the McKinney-Vento Act definition. However, homeless people
               living in RVs must be counted as:
                   i.   Sheltered if the RV
                             1) is located in a mobile home park or campus that advertises itself as
                               providing temporary stays and
                             2) the RV is regularly connected to water, sewer and utilities or a
                               septic system, well and generator, or the park or campus provide
                               toilets, showers, and communal food preparation or food service
                               areas; Or
                  ii. | unsheltered if the RV does not meet the criteria in 1. for sheltered homeless
                        people living in RVs.

      3)   Tiny homes and sheds: Tiny homes are ordinarily used as a regular sleeping
           accommodation, so not all persons living in tiny homes qualify as homeless under the
           McKinney-Vento Act.         Sheds, including huts, storage sheds, and community cabins,
           are not ordinarily used as a regular sleeping accommodation, but under certain
           circumstances persons living in sheds do not qualify as homeless under the
           McKinney-Vento Act. However, persons experiencing homelessness living in tiny
           homes and sheds are to be counted as follows:
           (a) HUD considers persons living in these units unsheltered if the unit does not
               contain a toilet, shower, kitchen, sleeping and living space, or has those but is not
               connected to water, sewer and utilities, or a septic system, well and generator,
               unless it is on a campus maintained by an organization, such as a governmental
               entity, nonprofit, or religious organization, where toilets, showers, and communal
               food preparation or food service areas are provided.
           (b) Residents of these types of units are to be counted as sheltered
              (1)      if the unit contains a toilet, shower, kitchen, sleeping and living space and
                       is connected to sewer, water and utilities or a septic system, well and
                       generator; or
              (11)     even if the unit does not contain a toilet, shower, kitchen, sleeping and
                       living space, or is not connected to sewer, water and utilities or a septic
                       system, well and generator, if it is located on a campus maintained by an



HIC/PIT Count Data Collection Notice                Page 26                            October 2023
                      organization, such as a governmental entity, nonprofit, or religious
                      organization, where at least toilets, showers, and communal food
                      preparation or food service areas are provided.
           (c) Special considerations
               (1)    If the unit is located on a campus, the campus must have enough toilets
                      and showers per capita for the resident population within a reasonable
                      distance from the units to count the residents as sheltered.
               (ii)   In very cold and very hot climates (regular seasonal patterns fall below 32
                      degrees or above 100 degrees Fahrenheit), such as Iowa and Arizona, the
                      unit must have heat or air conditioning to be counted as sheltered, but
                      climate control would not be needed in moderate climates.
   B. Determining Whether the Household is Housed
      The CoC must also determine whether to consider a household as housed instead of
      homeless. CoCs must only count people who are homeless in their PIT count. The test
      of whether someone is homeless or housed is whether they meet HUD’s definition of
      homeless at 24 CFR 578.3; however, during the PIT count CoCs should evaluate the
      nature of the program providing assistance and the nature of the housing to determine
      how to count a household. CoCs should consider how programs advertise themselves;
      whether they advertise long term permanent residency, or short-term temporary stays.
      Some general rules, not intended to be exclusive or cover all situations, are:
      1)   People living in tents, sprung shelters, cars, trucks and vans are never to be
           considered housed.
      2)   People living in RVs are considered housed if they are regularly connected to water,
           sewer and utilities or a septic system, well and generator, meet local codes, and the
           household owns or rents the RV and the land upon which it is located.
      3)   Residents of tiny homes and sheds are considered housed if the home meets local
           codes and contains a toilet, shower, kitchen, sleeping and living space, and is
           connected to water, sewer and utilities.   The household must either own or rent the
           land and unit. The unit must also have climate control if located in very cold and
           very hot climates (regular seasonal patterns fall below 32 degrees or above 100
           degrees Fahrenheit).
   C. Counting People in Structures that are Hard to Assess
      The PIT count is a count of households and people experiencing homelessness. When
      counting people sleeping in RVs, tents, or other locations that have low visibility, the
      CoC must derive an estimate based on how many people are sleeping in those situations.
      Do not simply count structures without having additional information about how many
      people are in those kinds of sleeping situations. CoCs should not apply multipliers from
      other CoCs to their own CoC with regard to these, or other homeless estimates. Each
      CoC is unique and any extrapolation applied to a CoC’s count must be based on data
      derived from that CoC.




HIC/PIT Count Data Collection Notice              Page 27                             October 2023
4.4 The Timing of the PIT Count
A critical step to ensuring that the same number of persons is reported on the HIC and PIT count
is to conduct both counts during the same time period. HUD requires that CoCs identify the date
on which the count was conducted; however, the term ‘night’ signifies a single period of time
from sunset to sunrise, which spans two actual dates. The ‘night of the count’ begins at sunset on
the date of the count and ends at sunrise on the following day, as shown in the illustration below.

    12:01am                                         12:01am

  Date of Count                                  Date after Count


        (     The date ofthecount            ) The night of the count (

                                        Sunset                          Sunrise
                                    Date of Count                      Date after
                                                                         Count

The Night of the Count - Illustrated
Often, CoCs conduct unsheltered counts at times that could be generally referred to as ‘the
middle of the night.’ For example, before sending individuals conducting the unsheltered count
out at 3 a.m. in January, it 1s important to identify that if ‘the date of the count’ 1s January 25,
then ‘the night of the count’ starts at sunset on January 25, and ends at sunrise by January 26 — so
while the date of the count is January 25, the unsheltered count might actually be conducted on
the following date.
For the sheltered count, include all persons who:
   A.   Entered on or before the date of the count; and
   B.   Exited after the date of the count (or have not yet exited).

4.5 Population Data
CoCs must collect and report information on the demographic characteristics of all people reported
as sheltered or unsheltered by household type and, within each household type, by age category,
gender, race, and ethnicity. CoCs must also report information by household type for veteran and
youth households. Since CoCs are unlikely to have demographic data from all people included in the
PIT count, CoCs might have to estimate characteristics for some people. Such estimates must adhere
to HUD’s minimum standards for PIT counts. A technical assistance provider has developed a
resource, the Point-in-Time Count Methodology Guide, to assist CoCs with estimates.
CoCs must provide demographic data for both sheltered and unsheltered persons according to the
following three household types:
   A.   Persons in households with at least one adult and one child. This category includes
        households with one adult and at least one child under age 18.
   B.   Persons in households without children. This category includes single adults, adult couples
        with no children, and groups of adults (including adult parents with their adult children).




HIC/PIT Count Data Collection Notice                 Page 28                          October 2023
    C.   Persons in households with only children. This category includes persons under age 18,
         including children in one-child households, adolescent parents (under age 18) and their
         children, adolescent siblings, or other household configurations composed only of children.
CoCs must report the total number of persons and households, by age category, for each household
type, per below.
    A.   Persons in households with at least one adult and one child:
             (1) The number of children under age 18;
             (2) The number of youth ages 18 to 24;
             (3) The number of adults ages 25 to 34;
             (4) The number of adults ages 35 to 44;
             (5) The number of adults ages 45 to 54;
             (6) The number of adults ages 55 to 64; and
             (7) The number of adults ages 65 and older.
    B.   Persons in households without children:
             (1) The number of youth ages 18 to 24;
             (2) The number of adults ages 25 to 34;
             (3) The number of adults ages 35 to 44;
             (4) The number of adults ages 45 to 54;
             (5) The number of adults ages 55 to 64; and
             (6) The number of adults ages 65 and older.

CoCs must report data on the gender, race, and ethnicity for all sheltered and unsheltered persons. In
some instances, a CoC may not have certain demographic data for a person experiencing
homelessness. This may be because the person refused to provide the information or it was not
possible to collect it during the PIT count. In these instances, a CoC should estimate the missing
demographic information using available data and a methodology consistent with HUD PIT
methodology standards and guidance. The PIT Count Extrapolation Tool, is a resource developed by
a technical assistance provider and available on HUD Exchange, that may also be useful to calculate
these estimates.
Please note that an individual may identify with several race categories and CoCs should allow them
to identify with multiple race categories. However, for the purpose of data reporting, people that
identify with multiple race categories should only be counted under “multiple races” and should not
be counted in each specific race category they identified with. For example, Jane indicated that she is
“Black or African American” and “White.” For the PIT count, Jane is only included in the count of
persons who are “multiple races” and she is not included in the count of persons who are “Black or
African American” or “White.”
CoCs must also collect and report data on veterans, including the total number of veteran households,
the total number of veterans, the total number of persons in veteran households, and the gender, race,
and ethnicity of veterans. A “veteran household” includes households with one or more veterans who


HIC/PIT Count Data Collection Notice                Page 29                             October 2023
might be presenting with other persons. Please note that data for the gender, race, and ethnicity of
non-veterans in veteran households will only be reported under “All Households” population data in
Appendix C. CoCs should not include veterans in VADOM or VA-funded CWT/TR facilities in
their PIT count.
CoCs must report data on persons in Youth Households, including the gender, race, and ethnicity for
parenting youth and unaccompanied youth, as outlined in Appendix C. However, while gender, race,
and ethnicity are reported for all unaccompanied youth, CoCs will only report the gender, race, and
ethnicity on the parents in the parenting youth households.

Parenting youth are youth who identify as the parent or legal guardian of one or more children who
are present with or sleeping in the same place as that youth parent, where there is no person over age
24 in the household. Parenting youth are either a subset of households with at least one adult and one
child if the parenting youth is between 18 and 24, or households with only children if the parenting
youth is under 18. CoCs should report the numbers of children in parenting youth households
separately for households with parenting youth under 18 and households with parenting youth who
are 18 to 24.

Unaccompanied youth are persons under age 25 who are not presenting or sleeping in the same place
as their parent or legal guardian, any household member over age 24, or their own children.
Unaccompanied youth may be a subset of any household type: they are a subset of households
without children if all household members are 18 to 24. They are a subset of households with at least
one adult and one child if the household includes at least one household member under 18, at least
one member between 18 and 24, and no members over age 24. They are a subset of households with
only children if all household members are under 18.

Relationship of Household Types and Youth Categories

                                      From Households with at
     From Households without                                            From Households with
               Children               Least One Adult and One                Omi Claillehe
                                                Child

       4                      >            Parenting Youth                  Parenting Youth
                                                (18-24)                           (under 18)

           Unaccompanied                  Children of those                   ,
             Youth (whole                  Parenting Youth                 cern oor’
           Household 18-24)                                                     8
                                           Unaccompanied                                 :
                                         Youth (under 18 and                Unaccompanied
                                             18-24 in one                    Youth (whole
       S                      y,             Household)                  Household under 18)


Veterans, parenting youth, and unaccompanied youth data are a subset of the “All Households”
data and should still be included in the “All Households” data.
CoCs must also report the number of persons and households experiencing chronic homelessness in
each household type for “All Households,” “Veteran Households,” and “Youth Households.”



HIC/PIT Count Data Collection Notice               Page 30                                 October 2023
Veterans and youth experiencing chronic homelessness are also a subset of “AII Households” and
should still be included in the “All Households” data.
For purposes of the PIT count, persons living in transitional housing at the time of the PIT count
should not be counted as chronically homeless. Please refer to Appendix B for additional details on
the definitions for chronically homeless persons for purposes of the PIT count.
A household experiencing chronic homelessness includes at least one adult or minor head of
household who is identified as chronically homeless. For households of more than one person, when
one household member qualifies as chronically homeless, all members of that household should be
counted as chronically homeless. For example, if one adult in a two-adult household is identified as
chronically homeless, both adults should be counted as a chronically homeless person in the
households without children category of the PIT count.
Appendix C illustrates the population data reporting requirements in a table format for reference.

4.6 Additional Homeless Population Data
CoCs must collect and report counts of people who qualify as one of the specific additional
populations among sheltered and unsheltered persons according to the chart below. Additional
homeless population data should be limited to adults. Reporting on the number of sheltered and
unsheltered survivors of domestic violence will continue to be optional. However, for CoCs that
choose to identify and report on survivors of domestic violence, they must only report the number of
survivors of domestic violence who are currently experiencing homelessness because of domestic
violence, dating violence, sexual assault, or stalking, as opposed to reporting on survivors who have
ever experienced these circumstances.
When collecting data on disability status for the PIT count, CoCs must ensure:
    A.   Volunteers administering the survey know that these questions must be asked of all
         persons being surveyed and it is completely voluntary whether persons respond to
         questions about disability status, and
    B.   Persons being surveyed are informed prior to responding to any disability question that
         their response is voluntary and that their refusal to respond will not result in a denial of
         Service.
No questions should be posed regarding the nature or severity of the person’s disability (e.g.,
medical and health information). Where information is necessary to establish that an individual
fits into a particular additional homeless population (e.g., survivors of domestic violence), the
individual should be apprised of the criteria and asked whether he or she meets the definition.
Appendix D illustrates the additional homeless population data reporting requirements in a table for
reference.

4.7 Using HMIS Data for the PIT
CoCs are strongly encouraged to use HMIS to generate PIT count data for projects with 100 percent
of their beds participating in HMIS. Before submitting data, verify with project staff that HMIS data
are complete and correct for the night of the PIT count and that exit dates have been entered for all
persons who exited the project on or before the date of the PIT count. PIT count data that may need
to be derived from HMIS, rather than reported directly from a data field include: gender, chronically


HIC/PIT Count Data Collection Notice                Page 31                              October 2023
homeless status, substance use disorder, serious mental illness, and domestic violence. For more
information please see the Sheltered PIT Count and HMIS Data Element Crosswalk resource which
was developed by a technical assistance provider.

4.8 PIT Count Date Exception
Per Sections 578.3 and 578.7 of the CoC Program interim rule, CoCs must conduct their PIT
count in the last 10 calendar days of January or at such other time as required by HUD. CoCs
may request an exception to the required timeframe for good cause. If HUD grants an exception
to conducting the PIT count within the last 10 days of January, HUD usually requires that the
count be conducted within the last 10 days of February. To submit an exception request, CoCs
must send an email to HICPITCount@hud.gov that includes why an exception is being requested
and when they propose to conduct the count.
HUD only grants exceptions for three types of good cause, which include:
   A.   A longstanding tradition for performing such a count at a date between December | and
        March 31;
   B.   Unanticipated inclement weather (e.g., snowstorm, hurricane, tornado) and other natural
        disasters; and
   C.   Other reasons HUD deems would have a negative impact on the accuracy and completeness
        of a CoC’s count.

4.9 PIT Count Methodology Questions
CoCs are required to report to both the sheltered and unsheltered counting methodologies. This
information is used by HUD to understand the approaches used by CoCs to conduct their PIT
counts and the consistency of the approach with HUD published methodology guidance and
standards. For the sheltered population, CoCs will report on data sources used to complete the
count (for example, HMIS, provider surveys, and client-level surveys); any sampling strategy
used; and their de-duplication strategy. For additional sheltered populations (defined in 4.5) or
subsets of populations (such as people experiencing chronic homelessness, unaccompanied
youth, and veterans), CoCs will report data sources used for the count; ways in which CoCs
collected demographic and other data on characteristics; and whether CoCs statistically adjusted
data in some way.
CoCs will also need to report on the unsheltered count methodologies used. CoCs will be asked
to report the approach used to count the number of people staying in unsheltered locations on the
night of the count (e.g., complete census, known location count, or random sample of locations);
whether and how the CoCs statistically adjusted their count to account for uncanvassed areas;
and de-duplication approaches used. For additional unsheltered populations (defined in 4.5) or
subsets of populations (such as people experiencing chronic homelessness, unaccompanied
youth, and veterans), CoCs will report on the methods used to collect demographic and other
data on characteristics on the unsheltered population on the night of the PIT count.
For both sheltered and unsheltered counts, CoCs will also be asked to select reasons they believe
their CoC experienced changes in their PIT counts, if applicable.
HUD may request CoCs provide additional information concerning the sampling sizes used for
sheltered and unsheltered total person counts and the count of people with different demographic


HIC/PIT Count Data Collection Notice              Page 32                              October 2023
and population characteristics. This will allow HUD to better understand the number of actual
people a CoC 1s able to count and obtain information for, compared with the number of people a
CoC is estimating information for, using different methodologies.




HIC/PIT Count Data Collection Notice           Page 33                           October 2023
APPENDIX A — SUMMARY         OF PROJECTS TO INCLUDE IN THE HIC AND PIT COUNT




                  Emergency shelters for | Include all emergency              Yes         Yes
                  persons experiencing     shelters funded by HUD ESG
                  homelessness             and/or other federal, state and
                                           local public and private
                                           sources, including domestic
                                           violence shelters.

                                            If ESG funded, in the “HUD
                                            McKinney-Vento Funded”
                                            field, must identify project in
                                            HIC as HUD: ESG-
                                            Emergency Shelter
                  Emergency shelters for | Include all emergency              Yes         Yes
                  youth experiencing       shelters for youth
                  homelessness             experiencing homelessness
                                           funded by federal, state, and
                                           local public and private
                                           sources
    Emergency     Hotel/motel vouchers    | Include only vouchers paid        Yes         Yes
      Shelter                               for by charitable
                                            organizations or by federal,
                                            state, or local government
                                            programs for low-income
                                            individuals
                  VA-funded Contract         Include all VA-funded CRS        Yes         Yes
                  Residential Services       (the consolidation of
                  (CRS - aconsolidation    | HCHV/EH and HCHV/RT)
                  of the former HCHV         projects
                  Community Contract        In the “Additional Federal
                  Emergency Housing         Funding Sources” field, must
                  and Community             PUNGIIE      SOUTCES    °
                               ar           identify project in HIC as
                  Contract Residential
                  Treatment Programs)       VA. CRS Contract
                                            Residential Services

                  VA-funded Supportive | Include VA-funded SSVF               Yes         Yes
                  Services for Veteran   EHA inventory
                  Families (SSVF)
                  Emergency Housing
                  Assistance (EHA)
                  project




HIC/PIT Count Data Collection Notice             Page 34                            October 2023
                  HHS-funded Runaway | In the “Additional Federal          Yes         Yes
                  and Homeless Youth   Funding Sources” field, must
                  (RHY) Basic Center   identify project in HIC as
                  Programs (BCP)       HHS: RHY — BCP

                  HUD-funded             Include all transitional          Yes         Yes
                  transitional housing   housing projects funded by
                  projects               HUD, including YHDP-
                                         funded projects
                                         If CoC funded, in the “HUD
                                         McKinney-Vento Funded”
                                         field, must identify project in
                                         HIC as HUD: CoC-
                                         Transitional Housing
                                         For YHDP-funded projects,
                                         HUD: YHDP — Youth
                                         Homeless Demonstration
                                         Program (YHDP)
                  Transitional housing   Include all HUD CoC               Yes         Yes
                  projects with HUD      funded rapid re-housing
                  Joint TH/RRH           projects that are funded by
                  funding                the Joint TH/RRH funding
                                         In the “HUD McKinney-
                                         Vento Funded” field, must
                                         identify project in HIC as
                                         HUD: CoC — Joint
                                         Component TH/RRH
                  Other transitional     Include all transitional          Yes         Yes
                  housing projects for   housing projects for persons
                  persons experiencing   experiencing homelessness
                  homelessness           funded by other federal, state,
                                         and local public and private
                                         sources




HIC/PIT Count Data Collection Notice          Page 35                            October 2023
                   HHS-funded RHY               In the “Additional Federal      Yes         Yes
                   transitional housing         Funding Sources” field, must
                   projects, including:         identify project in HIC as
                    e    Transitional           HHS: RHY TLP or RHY
                           Living Programs      MGH
                           (TLP)
                       e   Maternity Group
                           Homes for
                           Pregnant and
                           Parenting Youth
                           (MGH)
                       e   Support System
                           for Rural
                           Homeless Youth
                           (Demo TLP)
                   Other transitional           Include all transitional        Yes         Yes
                   housing projects for         housing projects for youth
                   youth experiencing           experiencing homelessness
    Transitional   homelessness                 funded by federal, state, and
      Housing                                   local public and private
                                                sources
                   VA-funded transitional | Include VA-funded GPD,              Yes         Yes
                   housing projects,        except low demand and
                   including:               transition in place projects,
                   e    VAGrant and Per | 20d CWT/TR projects
                           Diem — Bridge        In the “Additional Federal
                           Housing              Funding Sources” field, must
                   e       VAGrant and Per | identify project in HIC as
                           Diem — Service           e     VA: GPD Bridge
                           Intensive                e     VA: GPD Service
                           Transitional                   Intensive
                           Housing                  e     VA: GPD Hospital
                   e       VA Grant and Per               to Housing
                           Diem — Hospital to
                           Housing
                   e       VA Grant and Per
                           Diem — Clinical
                           Treatment




HIC/PIT Count Data Collection Notice                    Page 36                       October 2023
                    HUD-funded Safe        Include all HUD CoC            Yes         Yes
                    Haven programs         Program
                                           In the “HUD McKinney-
                                           Vento Funded” field, must
                                           identify project in HIC as
                                           HUD: CoC-Safe Haven
    Safe Haven      VA-funded Health      Include all VA-funded           Yes         Yes
                    Care for Homeless     HCHV/SH projects and VA
                    Veterans (HCHV) VA_ | GPD- low demand projects
                    pow Demane Sale        In the “Additional Federal
                             5             Funding Sources” field, must
                    VA Grant and Per       identify project in HIC as
                    Diem —Low Demand     | VA: GPD—Low Demand or
                                           VA: Community Contract
                                           Safe Haven Program
                    RRH                    Include all HUD CoC and        Yes         No
                    HUD-funded rapid re- | ESG-funded rapid re-
                    housing projects       housing projects, including
                                           YHDP-funded projects
                                           In the “HUD McKinney-
                                           Vento Funded” field, must
                                           identify project in HIC as
                                           HUD: ESG-Rapid Re-
                                           Housing or CoC-Rapid Re-
                                           Housing
                                           For YHDP-funded projects,
                                           HUD: YHDP — Youth
                                           Homeless Demonstration
                                           Program (YHDP)
  Rapid Rehousing
                    RRH                    Include all HUD CoC            Yes         No
                    Rapid re-housing       funded rapid re-housing
                    projects with HUD      projects that are funded by
                    Joint TH/RRH           the Joint TH/RRH funding
                    funding                In the “HUD McKinney-
                                           Vento Funded” field, must
                                           identify project in HIC as
                                           HUD: CoC — Joint
                                           Component TH/RRH




HIC/PIT Count Data Collection Notice            Page 37                         October 2023
                  RRH                      Include all rapid re-housing      Yes         No
                  Other rapid re-        projects for persons
                  housing projects for | ¢XPeriencing homelessness
                  persons experiencing | funded by other federal,
                  homelessness           state and local public and
                                           private sources

                  RRH                      In the “Additional Federal        Yes         No
                  VA-funded               Funding Sources” field, must
                  Supportive Services _ | identify project in HIC as
                  for Veteran Families | VA: SSVF
                  (SSVF) projects
                  PSH                      Include all permanent             Yes         No
                  Permanent supportive   | Supportive housing projects
                  housing projects for     funded by HUD, including
                  persons experiencing   | YHDP-funded projects,
                  homelessness             and/or other federal, state and
                                           local public and private
                                           sources
                                           For scattered site projects,
                                           include total number of units
                                           available for occupancy or
                                           total number of vouchers
    Supportiv :                            available for use in the CoC
     Housing                               on night designated for the
                                           count
                                           If HUD funded, in the “HUD
                                           McKinney-Vento Funded”
                                           field, must identify project in
                                           HIC as HUD: CoC-
                                           Permanent Supportive
                                           Housing, CoC-Supportive
                                           Services Only, or HUD:
                                           YHDP — Youth Homeless
                                           Demonstration Program
                                           (YHDP),
                  PSH                      Include all HUD-funded            Yes         No
                  HUD-funded Veterans | Projects utilizing VASH
                  Affairs Supportive       vouchers
                  Housing                  In the “Additional Federal
                                           Funding Sources” field, must
                                           identify project in HIC as
                                           HUD: HUD/VASH




HIC/PIT Count Data Collection Notice               Page 38                         October 2023
                  Other permanent         Include any PH project that is   Yes         No
                  housing projects,       designated for persons
                  excluding PSH and       experiencing homelessness
                  RRH, for persons        that provides housing and
                  experiencing            services or housing only, but
      Other       homelessness            for which disability is not
    Permanent                             required for entry, includes
  Housing (OPH)                           SRO projects.
                  Permanent housing       Include any HUD PIH-
                  projects funded by      funded projects, including
                  Public and Indian       EHV programs
                  Housing (PIH),
                  including the
                  Emergency Housing
                  Vouchers (EHV)
                  VA-funded other         Include VA-funded GPD TIP        Yes         No
                  permanent housing       projects
                  projects, including:    In the “Additional Federal
                  e   VA Grant and Per | Funding Sources” field, must
                      Diem Transition in | identify project in HIC as
                      Place               VA: GPD TIP




HIC/PIT Count Data Collection Notice           Page 39                           October 2023
APPENDIX B— KEY TERMS

These definitions do not fully correspond to the program requirements of HUD funding streams
and must only be used for the purposes of the HIC and PIT.

Adults — Persons age 18 and older.
Child — Persons under age 18.
Chronically Homeless Person - A person who:
    A.   Is homeless and lives in a place not meant for human habitation, a safe haven, or in an
         emergency shelter; and
    B.   Has been homeless and living or residing in a place not meant for human habitation, a safe
         haven, or in an emergency shelter continuously for at least 1 year or on at least four separate
         occasions in the last 3 years where the combined length of time homeless in those
         occasions is at least 12 months; and
    C.   Has a disability.
         Note: For purposes of PIT reporting:
               (1)   When a household with one or more members includes an adult or minor head of
                     household who qualifies as chronically homeless, then all members of that
                     household should be counted as a chronically homeless person in the applicable
                     household type table. For example, if one adult in a two adult household is
                     identified as chronically homeless, both adults should be counted as a chronically
                     homeless person in the households without children category of the PIT count.
Disability! — An individual with one or more of the following conditions:
    A.   A physical, mental, or emotional impairment, including an impairment caused by alcohol or
         drug abuse, post-traumatic stress disorder, or brain injury that:
               (1)   Is expected to be long-continuing or of indefinite duration;
               (2)   Substantially impedes the individual's ability to live independently; and
               (3)   Could be improved by the provision of more suitable housing conditions.
    B.   A developmental disability, as defined in section 102 of the Developmental Disabilities
         Assistance and Bill of Rights Act of 2000 (42 U.S.C. 15002); or
    C.   The disease of Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome (AIDS) or any condition arising from
         the etiologic agency for Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome.
Adults with HIV/AIDS — This population category of the PIT includes adults who have been
diagnosed with AIDS and/or have tested positive for HIV.
Adults with a Serious Mental Illness (SMI) — This population category of the PIT includes adults
with a severe and persistent mental illness or emotional impairment that seriously limits a person's

1 Please note that a different definition of disability applies for purposes of compliance with Section 504 of the
Rehabilitation Act of 1973, the Americans with Disabilities Act, and the Fair Housing Act.   See 28 C.F.R. 35.108 for
additional information.



HIC/PIT Count Data Collection Notice                       Page 40                                    October 2023
ability to live independently. Adults with SMI must also meet the qualifications identified in the term
for “disability” (e.g., “is expected to be long-continuing or indefinite duration’).
Adults with a Substance Use Disorder—This population category of the PIT includes adults with a
substance abuse problem (alcohol abuse, drug abuse, or both). Adults with a substance use disorder
must also meet the qualifications identified in the term for “disability” (e.g., “is expected to be long-
continuing or indefinite duration’).
Survivors of Domestic Violence—This population category of the PIT includes adults who are
currently experiencing homelessness because they are fleeing domestic violence, dating violence, sexual
assault, or stalking.
Veteran—This population category of the PIT includes adults who have served on active duty in the
Armed Forces of the United States. This does not include inactive military reserves or the National
Guard unless the person was called up to active duty.
Victim Service Provider — A private nonprofit organization whose primary mission is to provide
services to survivors of domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, or stalking. This term
includes rape crisis centers, battered women’s shelters, domestic violence transitional housing
programs, and other programs.
Youth — Persons under age 25. HUD collects and reports youth data based on persons under 18 and
persons between ages 18 and 24.
Parenting Youth — A youth who identifies as the parent or legal guardian of one or more children
who are present with or sleeping in the same place as that youth parent, where there is no person age
25 or older in the household.
Unaccompanied Youth — Unaccompanied youth are persons under age 25 who are not accompanied
by a parent or guardian or any other household member age 25 or older, and who are not a parent
presenting with or sleeping in the same place as his/her child(ren). Unaccompanied youth are single
youth, youth couples, and groups of youth presenting together as a household.




HIC/PIT Count Data Collection Notice                 Page 41                               October 2023
         APPENDIX C — POPULATION REPORTING REQUIREMENTS                    FOR THE PIT COUNT


         All Households

         Households with at Least One Adult and One Child
                                                                 Sheltered      Sheltered
                                                                                            Unsheltered   Total
                                                                      ES           TH

Total number of households

Total number of persons (adults & children)

   Number of children (under age 18)

   Number of youth (age 18 to 24)

   Number of adults (age 25 to 34)

   Number of adults (age 35 to 44)

   Number of adults (age 45 to 54)

   Number of adults (age 55 to 64)

   Number of adults (age 65 or older)

                                                                 Sheltered      Sheltered
Gender (adults and children)                                                                Unsheltered   Total
                                                                      ES           TH

Female

Male

Transgender

A gender other than singularly female or male (e.g., non-
binary, genderfluid, agender, culturally specific gender)

Questioning

                                                                 Sheltered      Sheltered
Ethnicity (adults and children)                                                             Unsheltered   Total
                                                                      ES           TH

Non-Hispanic/Non-Latin(a)(o)(x)

Hispanic/Latin(a)(o)(x)

                                                                 Sheltered      Sheltered
Race (adults and children)                                                                  Unsheltered   Total
                                                                      ES           TH

White

Black, African American, or African

Asian or Asian American




         HIC/PIT Count Data Collection Notice               Page 42                             October 2023
                                                                 Sheltered      Sheltered
                                                                                              Unsheltered    Total
                                                                      ES             TH

American Indian, Alaska Native, or Indigenous

Native Hawanian or Pacific Islander

Multiple Races

                                                                 Sheltered      Sheltered
Chronically Homeless                                                                          Unsheltered    Total
                                                                      ES             TH

Total number of households                                                           NA

Total number of persons                                                              N/A



         Households without Children

                                                Sheltered    Sheltered       Sheltered
                                                                                            Unsheltered     Total
                                                   ES           TH              SH

Total number of households

Total number of persons

   Number of youth (age 18 to 24)

   Number of adults (age 25 to 34)

   Number of adults (age 35 to 44)

   Number of adults (age 45 to 54)

   Number of adults (age 55 to 64)

   Number of adults (age 65 or older)
                                                Sheltered    Sheltered       Sheltered
Gender                                                                                      Unsheltered     Total
                                                   ES           TH              SH

Female

Male

Transgender

A gender other than singularly female or
male (e.g., non-binary, genderfluid,
agender, culturally specific gender)

Questioning
                                                Sheltered    Sheltered       Sheltered
Ethnicity                                                                                   Unsheltered     Total
                                                   ES           TH              SH

Non-Hispanic/Non-Latin(a)(o)(x)



         HIC/PIT Count Data Collection Notice               Page 43                                October 2023
                                        Sheltered    Sheltered   Sheltered
                                            ES          TH          SH       Unsheltered    Total

Hispanic/Latin(a)(0)(x)
                                        Sheltered    Sheltered   Sheltered
Race                                        ES          TH          SH       Unsheltered    Total

White

Black, African American, or African

Asian or Asian American

American Indian, Alaska Native, or
Indigenous

Native Hawaiian or Pacific Islander

Multiple Races

                                        Sheltered    Sheltered   Sheltered
       i
Chronically Homeless                       ES             TH        SH       Unsheltered    Total
                                                                                              ota

Total number of persons                             N/A




        HIC/PIT Count Data Collection Notice        Page 44                         October 2023
         Households with Only Children (under age 18)

                                           aia          ania   ia   Unsheltered   | Total


Total number of households

Total number of children (persons under
age 18)

Gender                                     aia          ania   ia   Unsheltered   | Total

Female

Male

Transgender

A gender other than singularly female or
male (e.g., non-binary, genderfluid,
agender, culturally specific gender)

Questioning

Ethnicity                                  ai           aia         Unsheltered   | Total

Non-Hispanic/Non-Latin(a)(o)(x)

Hispanic/Latin(a)(0)(x)

Race                                       aia          ania   ia   Unsheltered   | Total

White

Black, African American, or African

Asian or Asian American

American Indian, Alaska Native, or
Indigenous

Native Hawaiian or Pacific Islander

Multiple Races

Chronically Homeless                       aia          ania   ia   Unsheltered   | Total

Total number of persons                                 N/A




         HIC/PIT Count Data Collection Notice       Page 45               October 2023
         Veteran Households Only

         Veteran Households with at Least One Adult and One Child


                                                             ai       ania   Unsheltered    Total

Total number of households

Total number of persons

Total number of veterans

Gender (veterans only)                                       ai       ania   Unsheltered    Total

Female

Male

Transgender

A gender other than singularly female or male (e.g., non-
binary, genderfluid, agender, culturally specific gender)

Questioning

Ethnicity (veterans only)                                    ai       ania   Unsheltered    Total

Non-Hispanic/Non-Latin(a)(o)(x)

Hispanic/Latin(a)(0)(x)

Race (veterans only)                                         ai       ania   Unsheltered    Total

White

Black, African American or African

Asian

American Indian, Alaska Native, or Indigenous

Native Hawaiian or Pacific Islander

Multiple Races

Chronically Homeless                                         ai       ania   Unsheltered    Total

Total number of households                                            N/A

Total number of persons                                               N/A




         HIC/PIT Count Data Collection Notice               Page 46                 October 2023
         Veteran Households without Children

                                                ee       aia    eT   Unsheltered   | Total


Total number of households

Total number of persons

Total number of veterans

Gender (veterans only)                          ae       ia     ae   Unsheltered | Total

Female

Male

Transgender

A gender other than singularly female or male
(e.g., non-binary, genderfluid, agender,
culturally specific gender)

Questioning

Ethnicity (veterans only)                       ee       ania   ia   Unsheltered | Total

Non-Hispanic/Non-Latin(a)(o)(x)

Hispanic/Latin(a)(0)(x)

Race (veterans only)                            ee       ania   ia   Unsheltered | Total

White

Black, African American, or African

Asian or Asian American

American Indian, Alaska Native, or Indigenous

Native Hawaiian or Pacific Islander

Multiple Races

Chronically Homeless                            ee       ania   ia   Unsheltered | Total

Total number of persons                                  N/A




         HIC/PIT Count Data Collection Notice        Page 47              October 2023
         Youth Households

         Unaccompanied Youth Households
                                                ee       ania   ia   Unsheltered   | Total


Total number of unaccompanied youth
households

Total number of unaccompanied youth

   Number of unaccompanied youth (under age
   18)

   Number of unaccompanied youth (age 18 to
   24)

Gender (unaccompanied youth)                    ee       ania   ia   Unsheltered | Total

Female

Male

Transgender

A gender other than singularly female or male
(e.g., non-binary, genderfluid, agender,
culturally specific gender)

Questioning

Ethnicity (unaccompanied youth)                 ee       ania   ia   Unsheltered | Total

Non-Hispanic/Non-Latin(a)(o)(x)

Hispanic/Latin(a)(0)(x)

Race (unaccompanied youth)                      ee       ania   ia   Unsheltered | Total

White

Black, African American, or African

Asian or Asian American

American Indian, Alaska Native, or Indigenous

Native Hawaiian or Pacific Islander

Multiple Races

Chronically Homeless                            ee       ania   ia   Unsheltered   | Total




         HIC/PIT Count Data Collection Notice        Page 48              October 2023
                                                      ee           ania   ia   Unsheltered   | Total


 Total number of persons                                           N/A




          Parenting Youth Households

                                                                     ae   ia    Unsheltered | Total

Total number of parenting youth households

Total number of persons in parenting youth households

Total Parenting Youth (youth parents only)

Total Children in Parenting Youth Households

 Number of parenting youth under age 18

        Children in households with parenting youth under age 18

Number of parenting youth age 18 to 24

        Children in households with parenting youth age 18 to 24

Gender (youth parents only)                                          ae   ia    Unsheltered | Total

Female

Male

Transgender

A gender other than singularly female or male (e.g., non-binary,
genderfluid, agender, culturally specific gender)

Questioning

Ethnicity (youth parents only)                                       ae   ia    Unsheltered | Total

Non-Hispanic/Non-Latin(a)(0)(x)

Hispanic/Latin(a)(0)(x)

Race (youth parents only)                                            ae   ia    Unsheltered | Total

White

Black, African American, or African

Asian or Asian American




          HIC/PIT Count Data Collection Notice                Page 49               October 2023
                                                      Sheltered   | Sheltered
                                                          ES             TH     Unsheltered   | Total

American Indian, Alaska Native, or Indigenous

Native Hawaiian or Pacific Islander

Multiple Races
       ;                                              Sheltered   | Sheltered
Chronically Homeless                                      ES           TH       Unsheltered | Total

Total number of households                                         N/A

Total number of persons                                            N/A




        HIC/PIT Count Data Collection Notice    Page 50                            October 2023
      APPENDIX D — ADDITIONAL HOMELESS POPULATIONS REPORTING
      REQUIREMENTS FOR THE PIT COUNT

      Additional Homeless Populations



                                                  Sheltered   | Sheltered   | Sheltered
                                                      ES           TH            SH       Unsheltered   Total
                                                                                                          ota


Adults with a Serious Mental Illness

Adults with a Substance Use Disorder

Adults with HIV/AIDS

Adult Survivors of Domestic Violence (optional)




      HIC/PIT Count Data Collection Notice             Page 51                               October 2023
