             CLACKAMAS
                   COUNT Y



      REQUEST     FOR PROPOSALS         #2018-102

                        FOR

                  Elevator Services

     BOARD OF COUNTY COMMISSIONERS
            JIM BERNARD, Chair
        SONYA FISCHER, Commissioner
       KEN HUMBERSTON,           Commissioner
            PAUL SAVAS, Commissioner
       MARTHA     SCHRADER,        Commissioner




                    Donald Krupp
                County Administrator

                   George Marlton
            Procurement Division Director


                    Tralee Thorn
                       Analyst

PROPOSAL    CLOSING DATE, TIME AND LOCATION

   DATE:        November 7, 2018

   TIME:        2:00 PM, Pacific Time

   PLACE:       Clackamas County Procurement Division
                Clackamas County Public Services Building
                2051 Kaen Road, Oregon City, OR 97045
                                                        SCHEDULE


Request for Proposals Issuied.............ccscccccessssnceecesseseececeesensneees October 17, 2018

Protest of Specifications Deadline...             cece ecsccccecessntteceeesssnteeeees October 24, 2018, 5:00 PM, Pacific Time

Deadline to Submit Clarifying Questions...........cccceesssceesessrteeeees October 31, 2018, 5:00 PM, Pacific Time

Request for Proposals Closing Date and Time.............ceeeeseneeee November 7, 2018, 2:00 PM, Pacific Time

Deadline to Submit Protest of Award.......cccccccccccecsseeseeeeeeees Seven (7) days from the Intent to Award

Anticipated Contract Start Date. ..... cc eecescccccessssnceecseessneeeeeees January, 2019




2018-102
Elevator Service Contract                                    Page ii
                                                 TABLE OF CONTENTS
                                                                                                                                    Page

Section 1 — Notice of Request for Proposals ........cccccccccsccccccscceccecceeceeceeeeceeseeseeseesseeeeeesesseaaaaaaeqaees 1

Section 2 — Instructions tO PrOPOSETS ...........ccccseesssnssensecsecceceeceeceeeceeeeeeeeeeceeseeseeseeeeeeesssaaaasaaaaaaaegs 2

Section 3 — Scope Of WOTK .........cccccscccccccccessssennneeceeeeeeeeessseaeeeseeeeeeeeesseeeeeseccnseeeessseeeeeeesenseseasaeeeess 6

Section 4 — Evaluation and Selection Criteria .........                    ees sscceeessseececessseceecessssaceccesssaaeeeeeesseeeesenees 11

Section 5 — Proposal Content (Including Proposal Certification)............ccccsssscceeeessneeeeeeeneeeeees 12




2018-102
Elevator Service Contract                                       Page iil
                                 SECTION 1
                     NOTICE OF REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS

Notice is hereby given that Clackamas County through its Board of County Commissioners will
receive sealed Proposals per specifications until 2:00 PM, November 6, 2018 (“Closing”), to
provide Elevator Services. No Proposals will be received or considered after that time.

The resulting contract from this RFP require the consultant to begin work in January 2019 with
work set to commence through June 30, 2024.

Proposal packets are available from 7:00 AM to 6:00 PM Monday through Thursday at
Clackamas County Procurement Division, Clackamas County Public Services Building, 2051
Kaen Road, Oregon City, OR 97045, telephone (503) 742-5444 or may be obtained at
http://www.clackamas.us/bids/. Sealed Proposals are to be sent to Clackamas County
Procurement Services — Attention George Marlton, Director at the above Kaen Road address, or
may be emailed to procurement @clackamas.us.

Contact Information
Procurement Process and Technical Questions: Tralee Thorn, tthorn@clackamas.us or phone at 503-742-
5453.


The Board of County Commissioners reserves the right to reject any and all Proposals not in
compliance with all prescribed public bidding procedures and requirements, and may reject for
good cause any and all Proposals upon the finding that it is in the public interest to do so and to
waive any and all informalities in the public interest.   In the award of the contract, the Board of
County Commissioners will consider the element of time, will accept the Proposal or Proposals
which in their estimation will best serve the interests of Clackamas County and will reserve the
right to award the contract to the contractor whose Proposal shall be best for the public good.

Clackamas County encourages bids from Minority, Women, and Emerging Small Businesses.




                                                Page 1
                                           SECTION 2
                                  INSTRUCTIONS TO PROPOSERS

Clackamas County (“County”) reserves the right to reject any and all Proposals received as a result of this
RFP. County Local Contract Review Board Rules (“LCRB”) govern the procurement process for the County.
2.1       Modification or Withdrawal of Proposal: Any Proposal may be modified or withdrawn at any time
prior to the Closing deadline, provided that a written request is received by the County Procurement Division
Director, prior to the Closing. The withdrawal of a Proposal will not prejudice the right of a Proposer to submit
a new Proposal.

2.2      Requests for Clarification and Requests for Change: Proposers may submit questions regarding
the specifications of the RFP. Questions must be received in writing on or before 5:00 p.m. (Pacific Time), on
the date indicated in the Schedule, at the Procurement Division address as listed in Section 1 of this RFP.
Requests for changes must include the reason for the change and any proposed changes to the requirements.
The purpose of this requirement is to permit County to correct, prior to the opening of Proposals, RFP terms
or technical requirements that may be unlawful, improvident or which unjustifiably restrict competition.
County will consider all requested changes and, if appropriate, amend the RFP. County will provide reasonable
notice of its decision to all Proposers that have provided an address to the Procurement Division for this
procurement. No oral or written instructions or information concerning this RFP from County managers,
employees or agents to prospective Proposers shall bind County unless included in an Addendum to the RFP.

2.3      Protests of the RFP/Specifications: Protests must be in accordance with LCRB C-047-0730.
Protests of Specifications must be received in writing on or before 5:00 p.m. (Pacific Time), on the date
indicated in the Schedule, or within three (3) business days of issuance of any addendum, at the Procurement
Division address listed in Section | of this RFP. Protests may not be faxed. Protests of the RFP specifications
must include the reason for the protest and any proposed changes to the requirements.

2.4      Addenda: If any part of this RFP is changed, an addendum will be provided to Proposers that have
provided an address to the Procurement Division for this procurement. It shall be Proposers responsibility to
regularly check the Bids and Contract Information page at http://www.clackamas.us/bids/ for any published
Addenda or response to clarifying questions.

2.5      Submission of Proposals: Proposals must be submitted in accordance with Section 5.

All Proposals shall be legibly written in ink or typed and comply in all regards with the requirements of this
RFP. Proposals that include orders or qualifications may be rejected as irregular. All Proposals must include a
signature that affirms the Proposer’s intent to be bound by the Proposal (may be on cover letter, on the
Proposal, or the Proposal Certification Form) shall be signed. If a Proposal is submitted by a firm or
partnership, the name and address of the firm or partnership shall be shown, together with the names and
addresses of the members. If the Proposal is submitted by a corporation, it shall be signed in the name of such
corporation by an official who is authorized to bind the contractor. The Proposals will be considered by the
County to be submitted in confidence and are not subject to public disclosure until the notice of intent to award
has been issued.

No late Proposals will be accepted. Proposals submitted after the Closing will be considered late and will be
returned unopened. Proposals may not be submitted by telephone or fax.

2.6      Post-Selection Review and Protest of Award: County will name the apparent successful Proposer in
a “Notice of Intent to Award” letter. Identification of the apparent successful Proposer is procedural only and
creates no right of the named Proposer to award of the contract. Competing Proposers will be notified in writing
of the selection of the apparent successful Proposer(s) and shall be given seven (7) calendar days from the date
on the “Notice of Intent to Award” letter to review the file at the Procurement Division office and file a written

2018-102
Elevator Service Contract                             Page 2
protest of award, pursuant to LCRB C-047-0740. Any award protest must be in writing and must be delivered
by hand-delivery or mail to the address for the Procurement Division as listed in Section 1 of this RFP.

Only actual Proposers may protest if they believe they have been adversely affected because the Proposer would
be eligible to be awarded the contract in the event the protest is successful. The basis of the written protest must
be in accordance with ORS 279B.410 and shall specify the grounds upon which the protest 1s based. In order to
be an adversely affected Proposer with a right to submit a written protest, a Proposer must be next in line for
award, i.e. the protester must claim that all higher rated Proposers are ineligible for award because they are
non-responsive or non-responsible.

County will consider any protests received and:
        a. reject all protests and proceed with final evaluation of, and any allowed contract language
            negotiation with, the apparent successful Proposer and, pending the satisfactory outcome of this
            final evaluation and negotiation, enter into a contract with the named Proposer; OR
         b. sustain a meritorious protest(s) and reject the apparent successful Proposer as nonresponsive, if
            such Proposer is unable to demonstrate that its Proposal complied with all material requirements
            of the solicitation and Oregon public procurement law; thereafter, County may name a new
            apparent successful Proposer; OR
         c. reject all Proposals and cancel the procurement.

2.7      Acceptance of Contractual Requirements: Failure of the selected Proposer to execute a contract and
deliver required insurance certificates within ten (10) calendar days after notification of an award may result in
cancellation of the award. This time period may be extended at the option of County.

2.8       Public Records: Proposals are deemed confidential until the “Notice of Intent to Award” letter is issued.
This RFP and one copy of each original Proposal received in response to it, together with copies of all documents
pertaining to the award of a contract, will be kept and made a part of a file or record which will be open to public
inspection. If a Proposal contains any information that is considered a TRADE SECRET under ORS 192.345(2),
SUCH INFORMATION MUST BE LISTED ON A SEPARATE SHEET CAPABLE OF SEPARATION
FROM THE REMAINING PROPOSAL AND MUST BE CLEARLY MARKED                                                WITH THE
FOLLOWING LEGEND:

“This information constitutes a trade secret under ORS 192.345(2), and shall not be disclosed except in
accordance with the Oregon Public Records Law, ORS Chapter 192.”

The Oregon Public Records Law exempts from disclosure only bona fide trade secrets, and the exemption from
disclosure applies only “unless the public interest requires disclosure in the particular instance” (ORS 192.345).
Therefore, non-disclosure of documents, or any portion of a document submitted as part of a Proposal, may
depend upon official or judicial determinations made pursuant to the Public Records Law.

2.9       Investigation of References: County reserves the right to investigate all references in addition to those
supplied references and investigate past performance of any Proposer with respect to its successful performance
of similar services, its compliance with specifications and contractual obligations, its completion or delivery of
a project on schedule, its lawful payment of subcontractors and workers, and any other factor relevant to this
RFP. County may postpone the award or the execution of the contract after the announcement of the apparent
successful Proposer in order to complete its investigation.

2.10     ©RFP Proposal Preparation Costs and Other Costs: Proposer costs of developing the Proposal, cost
of attendance at an interview (if requested by County), or any other costs are entirely the responsibility of the
Proposer, and will not be reimbursed in any manner by County.

2.11.    Clarification and Clarity: County reserves the right to seek clarification of each Proposal, or to make
an award without further discussion of Proposals received. Therefore, it is important that each Proposal be
submitted initially in the most complete, clear, and favorable manner possible.
2018-102
Elevator Service Contract                              Page 3
2.12     Right to Reject Proposals: County reserves the right to reject any or all Proposals or to withdraw any
item from the award, if such rejection or withdrawal would be in the public interest, as determined by County.

2.13.     Cancellation: County reserves the right to cancel or postpone this RFP at any time or to award no
contract.

2.14     Proposal Terms: All Proposals, including any price quotations, will be valid and firm through a
period of one hundred and eighty (180) calendar days following the Closing date. County may require an
extension of this firm offer period. Proposers will be required to agree to the longer time frame in order to be
further considered in the procurement process.

2.15     Oral Presentations: At County’s sole option, Proposers may be required to give an oral presentation of
their Proposals to County, a process which would provide an opportunity for the Proposer to clarify or elaborate
on the Proposal but will in no material way change Proposer’s original Proposal. If the evaluating committee
requests presentations, the Procurement Division will schedule the time and location for said presentation. Any
costs of participating in such presentations will be borne solely by Proposer and will not be reimbursed by
County. Note: Oral presentations are at the discretion of the evaluating committee and may not be conducted;
therefore, written Proposals should be complete.

2.16     Usage: It is the intention of County to utilize the services of the successful Proposer(s) to provide
services as outlined in the below Scope of Work.

2.17.    Review for Responsiveness: Upon receipt of all Proposals, the Procurement Division or designee
will determine the responsiveness of all Proposals before submitting them to the evaluation committee. If a
Proposal is incomplete or non-responsive in significant part or in whole, it will be rejected and will not be
submitted to the evaluation committee. County reserves the right to determine if an inadvertent error is solely
clerical or is a minor informality which may be waived, and then to determine if an error is grounds for
disqualifying a Proposal. The Proposer’s contact person identified on the Proposal will be notified, identifying
the reason(s) the Proposal is non-responsive. One copy of the Proposal will be archived and all others
discarded.

2.18     RFP Incorporated into Contract: This RFP will become part of the Contract between County and
the selected contractor(s). The contractor(s) will be bound to perform according to the terms of this RFP, their
Proposal(s), and the terms of the Sample Contract.

2.19     Communication Blackout Period: Except as called for in this RFP, Proposers may not communicate
with members of the Evaluation Committee or other County employees or representatives about the RFP during
the procurement process until the apparent successful Proposer is selected, and all protests, if any, have been
resolved. Communication in violation of this restriction may result in rejection of a Proposer.

2.20      Prohibition on Commissions and Subcontractors: County will contract directly with
persons/entities capable of performing the requirements of this RFP. Contractors must be represented directly.
Participation by brokers or commissioned agents will not be allowed during the Proposal process. Contractor
shall not use subcontractors to perform the Work unless specifically pre-authorized in writing to do so by the
County.     Contractor represents that any employees assigned to perform the Work, and any authorized
subcontractors performing the Work, are fully qualified to perform the tasks assigned to them, and shall
perform the Work in a competent and professional manner. Contractor shall not be permitted to add on any fee
or charge for subcontractor Work.        Contractor shall provide, if requested, any documents relating to
subcontractor’s qualifications to perform required Work.

2.21.     Ownership of Proposals: All Proposals in response to this RFP are the sole property of County, and
subject to the provisions of ORS 192.410-192.505 (Public Records Act).

2018-102
Elevator Service Contract                            Page 4
2.22      Clerical Errors in Awards: County reserves the right to correct inaccurate awards resulting from its
clerical errors.

2.23      Rejection of Qualified Proposals: Proposals may be rejected in whole or in part if they attempt to
limit or modify any of the terms, conditions, or specifications of the RFP or the Sample Contract.

2.24      Collusion: By responding, the Proposer states that the Proposal is not made in connection with any
competing Proposer submitting a separate response to the RFP, and is in all aspects fair and without collusion
or fraud. Proposer also certifies that no officer, agent, elected official, or employee of County has a pecuniary
interest in this Proposal.

2.25    Evaluation Committee: Proposals will be evaluated by a committee consisting of representatives
from County and potentially external representatives. County reserves the right to modify the Evaluation
Committee make-up in its sole discretion.

2.26     Commencement of Work: The contractor shall commence no work until all insurance requirements
have been met, the Protest of Awards deadline has been passed, any protest have been decided, a contract has
been fully executed, and a Notice to Proceed has been issued by County.

2.27 _—_— Best and Final Offer: County may request best and final offers from those Proposers determined by
County to be reasonably viable for contract award. However, County reserves the right to award a contract on
the basis of initial Proposal received. Therefore, each Proposal should contain the Proposer’s best terms from
a price and technical standpoint. Following evaluation of the best and final offers, County may select for final
contract negotiations/execution the offers that are most advantageous to County, considering cost and the
evaluation criteria in this RFP.

2.28   Nondiscrimination: The successful Proposer agrees that, in performing the work called for by this
RFP and in securing and supplying materials, contractor will not discriminate against any person on the basis
of race, color, religious creed, political ideas, sex, age, marital status, sexual orientation, gender identity,
veteran status, physical or mental handicap, national origin or ancestry, or any other class protected by
applicable law.

2.29      Intergovernmental Cooperative Procurement Statement: Pursuant to ORS 279A and LCRB, other
public agencies shall have the ability to purchase the awarded goods and services from the awarded
contractor(s) under terms and conditions of the resultant contract. Any such purchases shall be between the
contractor and the participating public agency and shall not impact the contactor’s obligation to County. Any
estimated purchase volumes listed herein do not include other public agencies and County makes no guarantee
as to their participation. Any Proposer, by written notification included with their Proposal, may decline to
extend the prices and terms of this solicitation to any and/or all other public agencies. County grants to any
and all public serving governmental agencies, authorization to purchase equivalent services or products
described herein at the same submitted unit bid price, but only with the consent of the contractor awarded the
contract by the County.




2018-102
Elevator Service Contract                             Page 5
                                               SECTION 3
                                            SCOPE OF WORK

3.1.      INTRODUCTION

Clackamas County is seeking Proposals from qualified vendors to provide maintenance and repairs of
elevators found throughout Clackamas County buildings.

Please direct all Technical/Specifications or Procurement Process Questions to the indicated
representative referenced in the Notice of Request for Proposals and note the communication
restriction outlined in Section 2.19.

3.2       BACKGROUND

The Clackamas County Facilities Management division is responsible for maintaining elevators and lifts
in designated Clackamas County owned and leased buildings. These buildings provide essential
administrative, emergency communications, law enforcement, health and social services, and
infrastructure maintenance operations for the citizens of Clackamas County. The County is seeking
contractors to provide maintenance services for fifteen (15) elevators and two (2) platform lifts in ten (10)
designated Clackamas County owned facilities. Scope may include electric and hydraulic equipment,
serving passenger and freight loads.

The awarded contractor shall provide all transportation, equipment, tools, materials, supplies, and labor to
perform these services.

Awarded contract is anticipated to be for five (5) consecutive fiscal years, effective upon contract
execution through June 30, 2024. Clackamas County fiscal year is July Ist through June 30th.

3.3.      SCOPE OF WORK

3.3.1.  Scope:
The purpose of this RFP is to provide all necessary materials and labor to maintain and repair elevators
found within Clackamas County buildings.

General Requirements

e      The Contractor shall apply and pay for all necessary permits to perform any work associated with or
       described in this Request for Proposals. The county will be responsible for renewal permits to
       operate.
e      Contractor shall perform scheduled work continuously until completed at each facility, unless
       delayed due to necessary repairs, for prescribed work breaks, or due to unsafe or unproductive
       conditions beyond the Contractor’s control. Contractor shall immediately notify the Contract
       Administrator when such conditions arise and with an anticipated return date and time.
e      Clackamas County will provide potable water access and 120v power supply for Contractor’s
       operations. Any additional requirements or needs of the Contractor shall be included in their
       proposal.
e      Contracted personnel may be required to provide valid photo identification and to pass a background
       check prior to entering restricted areas. Contract Administrator shall inform Contractor in writing of
       any requirements within seven (7) days following contract execution and no less than forty-five (45)
       days prior to each service period thereafter. Contractor shall submit Information required for these
       background checks to the Contract Administrator no less than thirty (30) days in advance of service.
2018-102
Elevator Service Contract                            Page 6
     On scheduled service dates, contracted personnel are to report to Contract Administrator or their
     designee to be escorted to and through restricted areas by appropriate County personnel.
     Contractor shall provide Contract Administrator copies of current licenses for each technician prior
     to technician performing any work under this contract.
     Contractor shall schedule, perform, and document all work in compliance with the State of Oregon
     and local jurisdiction requirements, in accordance with industry best management practices and
     manufacturer specifications, and to maintain all product warranties.
     Contractor shall follow all applicable American Society of Mechanical Engineers (“ASME”) Codes,
     Standards, and referenced publications, current at time of service, including but not limited to:
             o    A17.1 Safety Code for Elevators and Escalators.
             o    A17.2 Guide for Examination of Elevators, Escalators, and Moving Walks.
              o A18.1 Safety Standard for Platform Lifts and Stairway Chairlifts.
     Contractor shall take reasonable precautions to protect all adjacent improvements, such as utility
     infrastructure, buildings, vehicles, equipment, hardscape, irrigation and lighting systems, and
     softscape, from work performed. County reserves the right to restrict the use of any methods and
     products that may cause damage to facilities or harm to surrounding environments.
     Contractor shall provide a written Maintenance Control Program for each Service Location as
     prescribed by ASME, and maintain updates.
     Contractor shall maintain all records and reports included by not limited to record of all equipment
     and component replacement, including date replaced, make, model, version, serial number, location
     (facility and space) installed, and space served, so that County may maintain current systems
     inventory.
     All deficiencies and corrective actions must be documented on service records. If a deficiency can be
     corrected at the time of examination/testing, then only one record 1s required. If a deficiency requires
     the technician to address a replacement or repair on a return visit, then a deficiency report shall be
     submitted at time of initial examination/testing, and then a corrective action report submitted upon
     satisfaction of examination/testing.
     Contractor shall provide electronic or hard copy of all product warranties and manuals with related
     invoicing for any replaced or repaired components and equipment.
     This contract and related subcontracts or reciprocal agreements may not be assigned or services
     otherwise supported outside of contract agency without a minimum thirty (30) day advance notice
     and written approval by the County.

Appearance and Conduct

Contractor personnel shall wear a standardized outer garment in good condition that clearly identifies the
name of the Contractor while performing contracted duties on County property. Contractor personnel
shall perform all services in a professional manner, and any concerns or grievances shall be reported to
the Contract Administrator.

Safety and Security

Contractor field technicians shall be trained and competent to safely perform their duties, wear
appropriate personal protective equipment (“PPE”), and follow all procedures to safely operate equipment
and apply products. Contractor shall also immediately report to Facilities Management main phone line
any injuries and vandalism or other damage on County facilities, as well as any observed potential
hazards to person or property.




2018-102
Elevator Service Contract                          Page 7
Safety Data Sheets (“SDS’’)

Contractor shall clean up after all services on-site, including collecting and properly disposing of all
equipment, components, scrap materials, and debris; and sweeping, vacuuming, and/or wiping down work
site. Materials shall be diverted from landfill to the maximum extent possible, in accordance with the
County’s Sustainability Policy Disposal of Waste hierarchy. Loose dry recyclable paper and packaging
may be disposed in County recycling containers on site. Bagged trash may be disposed in County trash
containers on site. Contractor shall return worn components to supplier for remanufacturing where
applicable, and collect all regulated and bulky scrap recyclable materials, such as spent or damaged
batteries, electronic materials, and metal casing, and deliver to the County for proper recovery.

Site Clean-up and Disposal

Contractor shall clean up after all services on-site, including collecting and properly disposing of all
equipment, components, scrap materials, and debris; and sweeping, vacuuming, and/or wiping down work
site. Materials shall be diverted from landfill to the maximum extent possible, in accordance with the
County’s Sustainability Policy Disposal of Waste hierarchy. Loose dry recyclable paper and packaging
may be disposed in County recycling containers on site. Bagged trash may be disposed in County trash
containers on site. Contractor shall return worn components to supplier for remanufacturing where
applicable, and collect all regulated and bulky scrap recyclable materials, such as spent or damaged
batteries, electronic materials, and metal casing, and deliver to the County for proper recovery.

Elevator List / Locations


           Facility Name                Location                     Make                  Model             Serial No.

                                  12800 SE 82™ Ave,
 Bowman Training Center           Clackamas OR.              Dover                    7135               EH8019
                                  97015

                                  9101 SE Sunnybrook
 Brooks Building                  Blvd, Clackamas OR. | Otis                          AAA21241U     | 9229933
                                  97015

                                  9101 SE Sunnybrook
 Brooks Building                  Blvd, Clackamas OR. | Otis                          24                 8619935
                                  97015

                                  2200 Kaen Rd,
 C-COM Building                   Oregon City OR.            Montgomery Kone          ?                  ?
                                  97045

                                  1710 Red Soils Ct,
                                           .    R                                                        CP-HH-
 Central Utility Plant Building   Oregon City OR.            Montgomery Kone          5505-56            91643
                                  97045

                                  807 Main St, Oregon    | Saveria Incline Platform                      Pending
 Courthouse - Courtroom 8         City OR. 97045             Lift                                        Installation

                                  807 Main St, Oregon    | Otis & Montgomery
 Courthouse                       City OR. 97045           Kone

2018-102
Elevator Service Contract                           Page 8
                                 807 Main St, Oregon            ,
 Courthouse                      City OR. 97045              Otis                    AAA21305DH | 201316293


                                 150 Beavercreek Rd,
 Development Services            Oregon City OR.             Otis                    ABA21241U_     | 49900751
 Building (DSB)                  97045

                                 150 Beavercreek Rd,
 Development Services            Oregon City OR.             Otis                    ABA21241U_     | 49890751
 Building (DSB)                  97045

                                 150 Beavercreek Rd,
 Development Services            Oregon City OR.             Otis                    ABA21241U_     | 49880751
 Building (DSB)                  97045

                                 150 Beavercreek Rd,
 Development Services            Oregon City OR.             Otis                    ABA21241U__|     48790750
 Building (DSB)                  97045

                                 821 Main St, Oregon                     .
 Holman Building                 City OR. 97045              Garaventa Lift          HY-US            33193


         ,    ,        wy:       2051 Kaen Rd ’                                                       20215392
 Public Services Building        Oregon City OR.             Montgomery Kone         451H200          n13794/30
 (PSB)                           97045
                                 2051 Kaen Rd
         .    .        wy:                      °                                                     202133938
 Public Services Building        Oregon City OR.             Montgomery Kone         451H201          013795/20
 (PSB)                           97045
                                 2051 Kaen Rd
         .    .        wy:                      ?                                                     202153948
 Public Services Building        Oregon City OR.             Montgomery Kone         451H202          013796/20
 (PSB)                           97045
                                 1810 Red Soils Ct,             |                                     628716160
 Silver Oak Building             Oregon City OR.             Otis                    AAA21242E        9
                                 97045

                                 1024 Main St,
 Stokes Building                 Oregon City OR.             Dover                   EP-60-20         E-88172
                                 97045


3.3.2.   Work Schedule:
Contractor shall preform work all routine maintenance on Facilities Management regularly scheduled
work days, Monday through Friday, 7:00 AM to 6:00 PM, except for testing that may be facilitated by
having a non-occupied building on any County holidays not observed by Contractor. In the event that
work performed would require back-up power to be off-line, work may need to be scheduled for after
business hours for the affected facility. Contractor shall perform examinations and tests in accordance
with ASME recommended intervals, and routine maintenance in accordance with applicable manufacturer
specifications. Contractor shall perform all routine work in the months of August, November, February,
and May. The County shall provide protocols within two (2) County business days of contract execution,
for processes such as notification of work to be performed. Contractor shall coordinate dates and times of
2018-102
Elevator Service Contract                           Page 9
service with the Contract Administrator in order to minimize disruption of County business. Contractor
shall confirm routine service dates and times at least ten (10) business days in advance in order for
County to provide notice to occupants.

On-Call Services
Contractor shall provide diagnostics, programming, and repairs identified during routine maintenance or
upon request in writing by the County. All electrical repairs (line and low voltage) must be first
authorized by the County Supervising Electrician. The County is responsible for maintaining all
permanent and hard-wired back-up power supplies, as well as all data/communication systems, and for
related wiring up to elevator and lift systems. Contractor is responsible for connecting/terminating power
and data/communication to elevator and lift systems. Contractor shall provide a 24-hours per day manned
phone line and alternate for emergency service requests, confirm requests within thirty (30) minutes, and
technician(s) shall report to site within two (2) hours or as otherwise instructed to resolve or to provide
interim solution and make recommendations and quote time and materials for repairs. Contractor shall
respond on-site to all non-emergency trouble calls within twenty-four (24) hours of being notified by
County, and complete any necessary repairs within seventy-two (72) hours.

Locations
Clackamas County will provide a list of service locations for sites and current inventory of equipment.
This list is subject to additions or deletions with a contract amendment. Any locations added during the
term of this contract shall be under the rates of this contract. All locations shall be within Clackamas
County bounds.
Access to and from County leased facilities, as well as from adjacent properties not occupied by the
County, shall be the responsibility of the County to secure appropriate and legal permissions and with the
Contract Administrator to coordinate scheduling with third parties.

3.3.3.  Term of Contract:
The term of the contract shall be from the effective date through June 30, 2024.

3.3.4    Sample Contract: Submission of a Proposal in response to this RFP indicates Proposer’s
willingness to enter into a contract containing substantially the same terms (including insurance
requirements) of the sample contract identified below. No action or response to the sample contract is
required under this RFP. Any objections to the sample contract terms should be raised in accordance with
Paragraphs 2.2 or 2.3 of this RFP, pertaining to requests for clarification or change or protest of the
RFP/specifications, and as otherwise provided for in this RFP. This RFP and all supplemental information
in response to this RFP will be a binding part of the final contract.

The applicable Sample Goods & Services Contract for this RFP can be found at
http://www.clackamas.us/bids/terms.html.

Goods & Services Contract (unless checked, item does not apply)
_] Travel Expense Reimbursement is Authorized

The following insurance requirements will be applicable.
x   Professional Liability: combined single limit, or the equivalent, of not less than $1,000,000 per
    occurrence, with an annual aggregate limit of $2,000,000 for damages caused by error, omission or
    negligent acts.
x   Commercial General Liability: combined single limit, or the equivalent, of not less than $1,000,000
     per occurrence, with an annual aggregate limit of $2,000,000 for Bodily Injury and Property Damage.
Dx] Automobile Liability: combined single limit, or the equivalent, of not less than $500,000 per
     occurrence for Bodily Injury and Property Damage.

2018-102
Elevator Service Contract                          Page 10
                                                SECTION 4
                                       EVALUATION PROCEDURE

4.1      An evaluation committee will review all Proposals that are initial deemed responsive and they shall rank
         the Proposals in accordance with the below criteria. The evaluation committee may recommend an
         award based solely on the written responses or may request Proposal interviews/presentations.
         Interviews/presentations, if deemed beneficial by the evaluation committee, will consist of the highest
         scoring Proposers. The invited Proposers will be notified of the time, place, and format of the
         interview/presentation. Based on the interview/presentation, the evaluation committee may revise their
         scoring.

         Written Proposals must be complete and no additions, deletions, or substitutions will be permitted
         during the interview/presentation (if any). The evaluation committee will recommend award of a
         contract to the final County decision maker based on the highest scoring Proposal. The County decision
         maker reserves the right to accept the recommendation, award to a different Proposer, or reject all
         Proposals and cancel the RFP.

         Proposers are not permitted to directly communicate with any member of the evaluation committee
         during the evaluation process. All communication will be facilitated through the Procurement
         representative.

4.2      Evaluation Criteria

         Category                                                           Points available:


         Proposer’s General Background and Qualifications                   0-45
         Understanding of Scope of Work                                     0-30
         Fees                                                               0-25
         Available points                                                   0-100


4.3      Once a selection has been made, the County will enter into contract negotiations. During negotiation,
         the County may require any additional information it deems necessary to clarify the approach and
         understanding of the requested services. Any changes agreed upon during contract negotiations will
         become part of the final contract. The negotiations will identify a level of work and associated fee that
         best represents the efforts required. If the County is unable to come to terms with the highest scoring
         Proposer, discussions shall be terminated and negotiations will begin with the next highest scoring
         Proposer. If the resulting contract contemplates multiple phases and the County deems it is in its
         interest to not authorize any particular phase, it reserves the right to return to this solicitation and
         commence negotiations with the next highest ranked Proposer to complete the remaining phases.




2018-102
Elevator Service Contract                          Page 11
                                                SECTION 5
                                           PROPOSAL CONTENTS

5.1.     Vendors must observe submission instructions and be advised as follows:

5.1.1.   Complete Proposals may be mailed to the below address or emailed to Procurement @clackamas.us.
The subject line of the email must identify the RFP title. Proposers are encouraged to contact Procurement to
confirm receipt of the Proposal. If the Proposal is mailed, an original copy and an electronic copy (on compact
disk or jump drive) must be included. The Proposal (hardcopy or email) must be received by the Closing Date
and time indicated in Section 1 of the RFP.


5.1.2.   Mailing address including Hand Delivery, UPS and FEDEX:

         Clackamas County Procurement Division — Attention George Marlton, Director
         Clackamas County Public Services Building
         2051 Kaen Road
         Oregon City, OR 97045

5.1.3.  County reserves the right to solicit additional information or Proposal clarification from the vendors, or
any one vendor, should the County deem such information necessary.

                   Provide the following information in the order in which it appears below:

5.2.     Proposer’s General Background and Qualifications (45 Points):
         Description of the firm.
         Credentials/licenses of key individuals that would be assigned to this project.
         Description of providing similar services to public entities of similar size within the past three (3) years.
         Description of what distinguishes the firm from other firms performing a similar service.

5.3.    Understanding of Scope of Work (30 Points):
Description of the firm’s ability to meet the requirements in Section 3.

5.4.     Fees (25 Points):
Fees should be sufficiently descriptive to facilitate acceptance of a Proposal. Fees and fee schedules should
outline all estimated expenses, routine examinations, testing and maintenance, shall be quoted at a fixed rate
itemized by the type of service, location and elevator unit, including labor, consumable product, equipment, and
soft cost. On call maintenance services shall be quoted for regular, non-regular (including after-hour, weekends
and holidays), and emergency labor rates.

5.5.     Completed Proposal Certification (see the below form)




2018-102
Elevator Service Contract                           Page 12
                                        PROPOSAL CERTIFICATION
                                      #2018-102 Elevator Service Contract

Submitted by:
                  (Must be entity’s full legal name, and State of Formation)

The undersigned, through the formal submittal of this Proposal response, declares that he/she has examined all related
documents and read the instruction and conditions, and hereby proposes to provide the services as specified in
accordance with the RFP, for the price set forth in the Proposal documents.

Proposer, by signature below, hereby represents as follows:
(a)       That no County elected official, officer, agent or employee of the County is personally interested directly or
indirectly in this contract or the compensation to be paid hereunder, and that no representation, statement or
statements, oral or in writing, of the County, its elected officials, officers, agents, or employees had induced it to enter
into this contract and the papers made a part hereof by its terms;
(b)       The Proposer, and each person signing on behalf of any Proposer certifies, in the case of a joint Proposal,
each party thereto, certifies as to its own organization, under penalty of perjury, that to the best of their knowledge
and belief:
      1. The prices in the Proposal have been arrived at independently, without collusion, consultation,
         communication, or agreement for the purpose of restraining competition as to any matter relating to such
         prices with any other Proposer or with any competitor;
      2.Unless otherwise required by law, the prices which have been quoted in the Proposal have not been
         knowingly disclosed by the Proposer prior to the Proposal deadline, either directly or indirectly, to any other
         Proposer or competitor;
      3.No attempt has been made nor will be made by the Proposer to induce any other person, partnership or
         corporation to submit or not to submit a Proposal for the purpose of restraining trade;
(c)      The Proposer fully understands and submits its Proposal with the specific knowledge that:
      1. The selected Proposal must be approved by the Board of Commissioners.
      2. This offer to provide services will remain in effect at the prices proposed for a period of not less than ninety
         (90) calendar days from the date that Proposals are due, and that this offer may not be withdrawn or modified
         during that time.
(d)      That this Proposal is made without connection with any person, firm or corporation making a bid for the
same material, and is in all respects, fair and without collusion or fraud.
(e)       That the Proposer shall use recyclable products to the maximum extent economically feasible in the
performance of the contract work set forth in this document.
(f)       That the Proposer accepts all terms and conditions contained in this RFP and that the RFP and the Proposal,
and any modifications, will be made part of the contract documents. It is understood that all Proposals will become
part of the public file on this matter. The County reserves the right to reject any or all Proposals.
(g)       That the Proposer holds current licenses that businesses or services professionals operating in this state must
hold in order to undertake or perform the work specified in these contract documents.
(h)       That the Proposer is covered by liability insurance and other insurance in the amount(s) required by the
solicitation and in addition that the Proposer qualifies as a carrier insured employer or a self-insured employer under
ORS 656.407 or has elected coverage under ORS 656.128.
(i)       That the Proposer is legally qualified to contract with the County.
(j)       That the Proposer has not and will not discriminate in its employment practices with regard to race, creed,
age, religious affiliation, sex, disability, sexual orientation, gender identity, national origin, or any other protected
class. Nor has Proposer or will Proposer discriminate against a subcontractor in the awarding of a subcontract because
the subcontractor is a disadvantaged business enterprise, a minority-owned business, a woman-owned business, a
business that a service-disabled veteran owns or an emerging small business that is certified under ORS 200.055.


2018-102
Elevator Service Contract                              Page 13
(k)       The Proposer agrees to accept as full payment for the services specified herein, the amount as shown in the
Proposal.

[_] Resident Bidder, as defined in ORS 279A.120
[_] Non-Resident Proposer, Resident State
Oregon Business Registry Number

Contractor’s Authorized Representative:


 Signature:                                                            Date:

 Name:                                                                 Title:

 Firm:

 Address:

 City/State/Zip:                                                       Phone:     (      )
 e-mail:                                                               Fax:

Contract Manager:

Name                                                Title:

Phone number:

Email Address:




2018-102
Elevator Service Contract                           Page 14
