Defending the Hidden Figures:
A Rebuttal        of Erroneous Attacks on Merit-Based,
Fair, and Competitive STEM Grants
Minority Staff Report
Prepared for Members of the Committee on Science, Space, & Technology
U.S. House of Representatives
April 2025




Pictured above: Senator
                      Ted Cruz (R-TX) unveils “Hidden Figures Way” to honor
underrepresented and marginalized women and minorities whose efforts made U.S.
leadership in space possible. (June 2019)
                         U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES COMMITTEE
                                SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY
                                                                                                                       ON
                                                                                                                                                          |
                                   DEMOCRATIC STAFF REPORT

Contents
IMtrOCucti
         ON...             eee eeeeeeccesssnceceessssacceeeessseeeecesssaeeecesssaeeeeeessaeeeecesssaeeeccesssaeeceesssaaeeeeeessaeeeeceessaeeeseseas 3
Background 0.0... ccccccceessssnnneccecceseesesssnneeeeeeeeeeessnneeeeeeeeeesesseaaaeeeeeeeeeeseaaaaeeceeeceeeeeesaaeeeeeeeseeeeeeeaaaeeees 4
   National Science Foundation’s Activities that Promote Representation in STEM..................... 4
   Summary of Recent Efforts to Suppress, Remove, and Censor Science at the National Science
   FOUMCAtION ....... ccc eesecccessseceeesnneccssseeeessaeeecesnaeccssneeecssacecceseeeeseaeeecesaceceesneeeeseaeeecesaaecessneeeeseaaeesenaags 6
Methodology 0... ceccesssssnnneccecceeeesessseeeceeeeeeessennneeeeeeeeesssseaaaeeeeeeeeeesesaaececeeeseseeeeaaaeeeeceeseseseeeaaaeeees 9
Cruz Report Disregards Congressional Statute Requiring NSF’s “Broader Impacts” ................. 11
Cruz Report Demands Cancelation of Sexual Harassment and Assault Prevention Projects....... 16
Cruz Report Demands Cancelation of Funding to Minority Serving and Rural Academic
IMSTItUTIONS........ eee eeeecceeennceeeeesssseececessscceeccssssaceccesssaeeeecessaceeecesseaaeecesssaaeeeessssaeeeecessaaeeesceseaaeeesees 18
   Case Study — University of Texas at El Paso, a Hispanic-Serving Institution...                                                          eee 18
   Historically Black Colleges and Universities...                                 eee eessececcsssnceeccesssaceceeesssaeeeesessaeeesenseaas 21
   Tribally Controlled Colleges and Universities 0.00... eeesccceccssneceecessssceeeeeessseeeecesssaneeseeseaas 22
   Community and Two-Year Colleges... eeeccssscccccceccesessennneeceeceeessesnneaeeceeeeeeeeeaaaeeeeseseensenaaas 24
   Women’s Colleges .......cccccccessscccccessnceecesenneeccesesneeeeeessneeeeeceeaaeeseesesaaeeeeessaaeeeeseeseeeeseneeaaeeeeeneags 25
Cruz Report Demands Cancelation of Grants that Serve EPSCoR states and Rural, Veteran, or
Religious COMMUNITIES... eccesssssnnncececceccesessenaaeeeeceeeeesesneaeeeeeeeeeseeaaeeeeceeeceeeeseaaaeeeeceeseeeeesaaas 27
Cruz Report Authors Frequently Misunderstand Simple Scientific Terms «0.0.0.0...                                                 eeeeeeeenneeeeees 29
Impacts of Senator Cruz’s Reckless Attacks 0.0... ccceecessssseceeceeeceeeeeesnneeeeceeccsseeeeaaeeeceeseeeeeeaas 31
CONCIUSION 2.0... cee eseccesseeeeesssceccssaceceseaeeeessaceccssaceessaacecesaeccssteeeessaaeecessaecceseeeeesaaeecesaaecenseeeeseaaeeeenas 35
   Appendix I — Cruz Report Methodology and Keyword List...                                                eee cesssecceceeeeeeesennteeeeeeeeeees 36
   Appendix II — Research Funding to be Removed by the Cruz Report, By Topic...                                                                     Al
   Appendix III - DET Terminology ........ cc cecceessssnnneceeceeeceeesneceeeeecceeeseenaeececeseseseeeeaaaeeeeeeeeeees 42




                                                                                                                                                      2

                               RANKING              MEMBER              ZOE       LOFGREN              (CA-18)
                    U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES COMMITTEE ON
                           SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY                                            A
                                    DEMOCRATIC STAFF REPORT                                          uy &

Introduction

In October 2024, Senator Cruz claimed to identify “3,483 grants—over 10% of all NSF grants
awarded during the Biden-Harris administration—totaling more than $2.05 billion [that] went to
questionable projects that promoted DEI or pushed neo-Marxist perspectives about enduring
class struggle.” These so-called findings were presented in a report, Diversion. Extremism.
Ideology: How the Biden-Harris NSF Politicized Science (hereafter, referred to as “Cruz
Report’). Eventually, in February 2025, Senator Cruz released his database of grants he
identified as “DEI” or “neo-Marxist.” To assert that this report is technically flawed is an
understatement. The authors lack a basic understanding of how National Science Foundation
(NSF) awards are selected, the scientific literacy to discern technical terms with multiple
meanings, and an understanding of laws, even those supported by Senator Cruz himself, that
protect these activities. This resulted in a slew of embarrassing mistakes — for example, the
authors’ seeming failure to review their own database resulted in grants being flagged for using
terms related to biodiversity or focusing on “female” leopard seals. At best, the Cruz Report is a
sloppy mess that should be viewed as nothing more than the political hit job it is. However, the
risks in today’s political climate cannot be ignored. If the Cruz Report is taken seriously by
federal science agencies, it jeopardizes the economic and national security of the United States
through its McCarthyistic tactics, undermining the important work of scientific researchers,
educators, and institutions who are acting in accordance with the law and making significant
contributions to scientific and technological advancements and the growth of a skilled domestic
STEM workforce.

Since the Cruz Report was published, the U.S. scientific enterprise has experienced devastating
setbacks at the hands of the Trump Administration and Elon Musk, using the same tactics found
in the Cruz Report. While the authors of the Cruz Report claimed to have the goal of
strengthening scientific research, their work has had quite the opposite effect. It has caused
severe damage and anxiety across the U.S. science enterprise, including the generation of “watch
lists” that inspire far-right terrorists to personally threaten leading scientific and education
professionals at our federal agencies.! Minority Science Committee Staff have written this staff
report to detail the numerous flaws in the Cruz Report, discuss the harmful consequences to the
U.S. STEM ecosystem, and emphasize the need and legal protections for these activities. This
staff report corrects the record on the Cruz Report’s findings to empower the National Science
Foundation, and other federal science agencies, to reject this attack on the merit review process
and continue funding important research that maintains U.S. leadership on the world stage.




! DEI watch list. (n.d.). https://www.deiwatchlist.com/about




                         RANKING          MEMBER         ZOE   LOFGREN   (CA-18)
                    U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES COMMITTEE ON
                           SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY                                                        A
                                   DEMOCRATIC STAFF REPORT                                                       uy &

Background

National Science Foundation’s Activities that Promote Representation in STEM

The National Science Foundation is an independent federal agency with a mission to promote the
progress of science; advance the national health, prosperity, and welfare; and secure the national
defense.” NSF is the only federal agency whose mission supports all fields of fundamental
science and engineering. Approximately 5% of NSF’s budget supports agency operations (staff,
IT, etc.); the remainder is awarded primarily in the form of grants and cooperative agreements to
academic institutions and other nonprofit research and STEM education organizations. While the
bulk of NSF grants support scientific research — which itself is critical to the development of a
STEM workforce — a sizeable fraction contributes to the development of a skilled STEM
workforce through research and innovation in formal and informal PreK-12, undergraduate, and
graduate STEM education, STEM teacher training, STEM education capacity-building at
colleges and universities, and scholarships and fellowships.°* In an average year, NSF funds
around 11,000 competitive awards for research, education, and training; supports around 1,900
colleges, universities, and other institutions; and supports around 350,000 researchers,
entrepreneurs, students, and teachers.*

Every American should have an equal opportunity to participate in the U.S. STEM enterprise.
Moreover, ensuring such access across our nation is essential to our long-term economic
security.> NSF supports a suite of Broadening Participation programs that seek to build career
pathways into STEM fields without undermining the meritocratic and competitive values
inherent in American science. These activities are no different than a baseball scout searching for
talent in young athletes from backgrounds and locations historically underrepresented in the
sport, to ensure that valuable talent isn’t being overlooked simply because of geography or
access; likewise, our federal research agencies fund activities that search for talent in
backgrounds and locations historically underrepresented in STEM, lest promising talent be left
undiscovered and therefore shut out from contributing to U.S. scientific excellence. These
programs vary greatly in the populations they are targeting to promote educational access and
opportunities in STEM. For example, NSF’s “Disability and Rehabilitation Engineering
(DARE)” program supports fundamental engineering research that improves the quality of life of
persons with disabilities, while NSF’s “Enabling Partnerships to Increase Innovation Capacity
(EPIIC)” program supports capacity-building efforts at academic institutions with limited
research resources.°’ Current metrics in the U.S. STEM workforce illustrate the importance of
such broadening participation efforts:


* About NSF. NSF - National Science Foundation. https://www.nsf.gov/about
> Education and training. (2025, March 5). NSF - National Science Foundation. https://www.nsf.gov/focus-
areas/education
+ About NSF. NSF - National Science Foundation. https://www.nsf.gov/about
> The State of U.S. Science and Engineering 2024 | NSF - National Science Foundation.
(n.d.). https://ncses.nsf.gov/pubs/nsb20243/key-takeaways
© Disability and Rehabilitation Engineering (DARE). (2023, June 16). NSF - National Science
Foundation. https://www.nsf.gov/funding/opportunities/dare-disability-rehabilitation-engineering
1 Enabling partnerships to increase Innovation Capacity (EPIIC). (2023, September 26). NSF - National Science
Foundation. https://www.nsf.gov/funding/opportunities/epiic-enabling-partnerships-increase-innovation-capacity




                         RANKING         MEMBER         ZOE    LOFGREN         (CA-18)
                    U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES COMMITTEE ON
                           SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY                                                                A
                                     DEMOCRATIC STAFF REPORT                                                             uy &
    e    Despite representing 14% of the U.S. population, U.S. residents living in nonmetropolitan
         or rural counties face challenges in their access to STEM education or workforce
         opportunities.®
    e    Despite representing half of the U.S. population, female workers accounted for only 26%
         of workers in science and engineering occupations in 2021.?
    e    Despite representing 19.5% of the U.S. population, Hispanic workers accounted for only
         9.5% of workers in science and engineering occupations in 2021.'°
    e    Despite representing 13.7% of the U.S. population, Black or African American workers
         accounted for only 6.8% of workers in science and engineering occupations in 2021."
    e    Despite representing 1.3% of the U.S. population, American Indian or Alaska Native
         workers accounted for only 0.2% of workers in science and engineering occupations in
         2021.”

The Cruz Report condemns grant recipients for talking about the work they did to bring
underrepresented talent into STEM, but it fails to explain that those researchers are following the
law in doing so. Pursuant to the America     COMPETES Reauthorization Act of 2010,'° NSF
requires that every proposal for funding, in addition to making a case for scientific merit,
describe how the project has the potential to benefit society and contribute to the achievement of
a specific, desired social outcome. !4 NSF does not prescribe what a broader impact should be for
each proposal, but many researchers cite activities such as public engagement, outreach to
groups historically underrepresented in science, and pedagogical activities as part of their
broader impacts proposal.

The Cruz Report authors made no effort to differentiate whether the ‘woke’ grants they flagged
were problematic due to broader impact considerations, broadening participation activities,
STEM education research, scientific research with a DEI-related purpose or using DEI-related
words, or the federal designation of an institution itself. The authors make a mockery of their
own conclusions by failing to take the elementary step of identifying and controlling for these
variables in their analysis. As such, the Cruz Report contains numerous false positives alongside
several other technical errors. In any scenario, eliminating broadening participation activities
does not just undermine the ability of the United States to develop a competitive STEM
workforce, but also prevents gifted Americans of all backgrounds from being able to contribute
to groundbreaking discoveries and drive solutions to our most pressing societal problems.



8 K-12 STEM education and workforce development in rural areas. (2024). In National Academies Press
eBooks. https://doi.org/10.17226/28269
? Arbeit, D. T. a. C. A. (n.d.). The STEM labor force: scientists, engineers, and skilled technical workers | NSF -
National Science Foundation. https://ncses.nsf.gov/pubs/nsb20245/representation-of-demographic-groups-in-
stem#women-in-stem
'0 Arbeit, D. T. a. C. A. (n.d.-b). The STEM labor force: scientists, engineers, and skilled technical workers | NSF -
National Science Foundation. https://ncses.nsf.gov/pubs/nsb20245/representation-of-demographic-groups-in-
stem#race-or-ethnicity-in-stem
l Thid
© Ibid
13 America COMPETES Reauthorization Act of 2010 (2011 - H.R. 5116), Sec. 526.
  Broader impacts. NSF - National Science Foundation. https://www.nsf.gov/funding/learn/broader-impacts




                           RANKING        MEMBER          ZOE    LOFGREN          (CA-18)
                    U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES COMMITTEE ON
                           SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY                                                             A
                                    DEMOCRATIC STAFF REPORT                                                           uy &
Summary of Recent Efforts to Suppress, Remove, and Censor Science at the National
Science Foundation

Senator Cruz published the report on October 9", 2024 — originally without a corresponding list
of the alleged ‘DEI’ grants.!>-!° Shortly following the publication of the Cruz Report, America
First Legal Foundation, a conservative nonprofit founded by Stephen Miller, sued the agency for
illegally concealing employment records of NSF agency officials.'’ Senator Cruz then released
the database of alleged ‘DEI’ grants on February 11", 2025.!° In his press release, Senator Cruz
stated that he “requested significant scrutiny of awards listed in the database.” The grant
database was also released in a publication by The Daily Wire, in which terms that matched
Senator Cruz’s DEI keywords were bolded, and the Senate Commerce Committee was cited as
the source.”
Relatedly, in the early weeks of his administration, President Trump released several executive
orders banning agency policies and activities related diversity, equity, and inclusion and gender,
effective immediately.””?!*? In the wake of these orders, NSF performed several actions,
including:
    e    Removal of the Document Library, which was an archive that preserved NSF documents
         to provide transparency into any changes in agency policy, descriptions, or programs to
         the scientific community.”* The removal of this resource effectively hid several of the
         actions below from the public.




'S New Cruz Investigation Reveals How Biden-Harris Diverted Billions from Scientific Research to DEI Activists.
(2024, October 10). U.S. Senate Committee on Commerce,     Science,   &
Transportation. https://www.commerce.senate.gov/2024/10/new-cruz-investigation-reveals-how-biden-harris-
diverted-billions-from-scientific-research-to-dei-activists
‘6 For the purpose of this report, Science Committee Minority staff used the phrases ‘DEI’ and ‘neo-Marxist’ in
ways that aligned with the use of those phrases in the Cruz Report. Please see Appendix III for more information on
how the term ‘DEI’ has been used in policymaking.
'7 America First Legal. (2024b, November 13). America First Legal Foundation v. National Science Foundation -
America First Legal. https://aflegal.org/litigation/america-first-legal-foundation-v-national-science-foundation/
'8 Cruz-Led investigation uncovers $2 billion in woke DEI grants at NSF, Releases full database. (2025, March 6).
U.S. Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, & Transportation. https://www.commerce.senate.gov/2025/2/cruz-
 led-investigation-uncovers-2-billion-in-woke-dei-grants-at-nsf-releases-full-database
 ? Rosiak, L. (2025, February 10). 27% of National Science Foundation grants went to DEI projects, study
finds. https://www.dailywire.com/news/27-of-national-science-foundation-grants-went-to-dei-projects-study-finds
 °° The White House. (2025, January 21). Ending radical and wasteful government DEI programs and
preferencing. https://www.whitehouse.gov/presidential-actions/2025/01/ending-radical-and-wasteful-government-
 dei-programs-and-preferencing/
71 The White House. (2025b, January 22). Ending illegal discrimination and restoring Merit-Based
 opportunity. https://www.whitehouse. gov/presidential-actions/2025/01/ending-illegal-discrimination-and-restoring-
merit-based-opportunity/
2? The White House. (2025a, January 21). Defending women from gender ideology extremism and restoring
biological truth to the federal government. https://www.whitehouse.gov/presidential-actions/2025/01/defending-
women-from-gender-ideology-extremism-and-restoring-biological-truth-to-the-federal-government/
?3 Document Library | NSF - National Science Foundation.
(n.d.). https://web.archive.org/web/20241127175104/https://www.nsf.gov/publications/




                         RANKING         MEMBER         ZOE     LOFGREN         (CA-18)
                    U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES COMMITTEE ON
                           SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY                                                            A
                                    DEMOCRATIC STAFF REPORT                                                          uy &
     e   Removal of scientific data and undisclosed, post-hoc editing of technical publications,
         including survey data in the 2023 National Survey of College Graduates by the National
         Center for Science and Engineering Statistics.”4
     e   Elimination of the Chief Diversity and Inclusion Officer position, an appointment
         required by Sec. 10327 of the CHIPS and Science Act.?>?°7!
     e   Removal of language from their websites indicating public commitments related to DEI,
         such as “The U.S. National Science Foundation is committed to expanding the
         opportunities in STEM to people of all racial, ethnic, geographic and socioeconomic
         backgrounds, sexual orientations, gender identities and to persons with disabilities.” 78
     e   Archiving several Dear Colleague Letters associated with DEI, climate change, minority-
         serving institutions, LGBTQI+ individuals, broadening participation, and Biden-Harris
         Administration executive orders.”
     e   Removal of “NSF Supports DEIA” career landing page, which detailed employee
         resource groups, including those focused on mental health, and special interest groups.° 0
     e   Removal of several sections of the Broadening Participation in STEM Page, including a
         list of related reports, studies, analyses, and resources.>!
     e   Censorship and removal of countless phrases associated with DEI, gender, and climate
         change.

On January 27", 2025, the Office of Management and Budget issued an illegal temporary pause
of agency grant, loan, and other financial assistance programs to the heads of executive
departments and agencies to comply with existing Trump Executive Orders.** NSF complied
with this order by removing the ability of awardees to access obligated funds on the Award Cash
Management System between January 28" and February 3"’.°> During this grant freeze, NSF also

** National Survey of College Graduates (NSCG) 2023 | NSF - National Science Foundation.
(n.d.). https://web.archive.org/web/20250114161649/https://ncses.nsf.gov/surveys/national-survey-college-
graduates/2023
°5 Leadership. (n.d.). NSF - National Science
Foundation. https://web.archive.org/web/20241 1281508 17/https://new.nsf.gov/about/leadership
°6 CHIPS and Science Act (2022 - H.R. 4346), Sec. 10327
?7 Mervis, J. (2025, January 23). Trump’s shutdown of federal diversity office at NSF breaks law that created it.
Science. https://www.science.org/content/article/trump-s-shutdown-federal-diversity-office-nsf-breaks-law-created-
it
°8 Broadening participation in STEM. (2024, October 24). NSF - National Science
Foundation. https://web.archive.org/web/20241 1271644 12/https://new.nsf.gov/funding/initiatives/broadening-
participation
°° Funding search. (2025, March 13). NSF - National Science
Foundation. https://www.nsf.gov/funding/opportunities
3° NSF supports DEIA. (n.d.). NSF - National Science
Foundation. https://web.archive.org/web/20241213123954/https://new.nsf.gov/careers/nsf-supports-deia
31 Resources. (n.d.). NSF - National Science
Foundation. https://web.archive.org/web/2024 12010223 14/https://new.nsf. gov/funding/initiatives/broadening-
participation/other-resources
>? OMB issues and rescinds memo ordering pause of federal funding | AAMC. (n.4.).
AAMC. https://www.aamc.org/advocacy-policy/washington-highlights/omb-issues-and-rescinds-memo-ordering-
pause-federal-funding
3 Boodman, E. (2025b, February 7). National Science Foundation restores payments after five-day pause, but
wotries Over science funding persist. STAT. https://www.statnews.com/2025/02/02/nsf-national-science-foundation-
payments-resume-after-trump-freeze/




                          RANKING         MEMBER         ZOE     LOFGREN         (CA-18)
                        U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES COMMITTEE ON
                               SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY                                                          A
                                      DEMOCRATIC STAFF REPORT                                                          uy &
announced that it would reexamine obligated, merit-reviewed, existing awards to comply with
political directives of the Trump Administration.*4 NSF staff were instructed by NSF leadership
to review approximately 10,000 grants that were flagged for containing one of dozens of
keywords and follow a set matrix for each, either clearing the grant as being in compliance with
the Trump EOs or putting it aside for more in-depth review for potential lack of compliance.*>*°
Science Committee Minority staff verified that all of the keywords used by NSF in their review
of awards match those that were used to flag ‘DEI’ grants in the Cruz Report.

These actions ignored both statute and long-standing agency policy in determining which awards
are funded by the agency. NSF is now providing proposers with conflicting guidance that
endangers the applicant’s proposal. On March 14"", 2025, NSF updated their website to inform
proposers that they should not avoid problematic keywords to make their proposal compliant
with executive orders.*’ Post-hoc reviews of grants for terms disfavored by Senator Cruz and the
Trump Administration are now occurring at other federal research agencies, resulting in
terminations of grants at the National Institutes of Health.** NIH has been canceling dozens of
grants related to HIV/AIDS research. Many populations historically underrepresented in
medicine have a disproportionately high risk of contracting HIV. We can connect the dots. Can
you?*?




4 Mervis, J. (2025, February 4). NSF reexamines existing awards to comply with Trump’s
directives. Science. https://www.science.org/content/article/nsf-reexamines-existing-awards-comply-trump-s-
directives
35 Mervis, J. (2025a,    January 30). EXCLUSIVE: NSF starts vetting all grants to comply with Trump’s
orders. Science. https://www.science.org/content/article/exclusive-nsf-starts-vetting-all-grants-comply-trump-s-
orders.
36 Johnson, C. Y., Dance, S., & Achenbach, J. (2025, February 6). Here are the words putting science in the
crosshairs of Trump’s orders. The Washington Post. https://www.washingtonpost.com/science/2025/02/04/national-
science-foundation-trump-executive-orders-words/
37 NSF implementation of recent executive orders. (n.d.). NSF - National Science
Foundation. https://www.nsf.gov/executive-orders#keywords
38-Wu, K. J. (2025, March 14). The NIH’s grant terminations are ‘Utter and complete chaos.’ The
Atlantic. https://www.theatlantic.com/health/archive/2025/03/nih-grant-terminations/682039/
° Christensen, J. (2025, March 5). ‘People will die based on these decisions’: Trump administration cuts funding for
dozens of HIV studies. CNN. https://www.cnn.com/2025/03/25/health/hiv-research-funding-cut/index.html




                            RANKING        MEMBER         ZOE    LOFGREN        (CA-18)
                   U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES COMMITTEE ON
                          SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY                                                A
                                 DEMOCRATIC STAFF REPORT                                                uy &

Methodology

The authors of the Cruz Report searched NSF’s database of awards (retrieved from
USASpending.gov, also searchable on NSF.gov) for variations of terms they deemed “DEI
keywords and phrases.” Their full description of their approach is provided in Appendix I of this
report.   A combination of undisclosed Python code, Excel formulas, and human review were used
to reach the final list of awards targeted for review. By their own admission, the authors
personally reviewed fewer than half of the grants that were flagged by their keyword search. Of
those reviewed, the authors found 2% to be incorrectly identified. Assuming the same portion of
the non-reviewed grants are also incorrectly identified, more than 70 of the grants identified do
not belong on this list even by Senator Cruz’s standards.
If a keyword was only mentioned once, the grant was cleared; if it was mentioned more than
once, it remained on the list of questionable grants. This approach lacks rigor, transparency, and
repeatability. The methodology does not adequately handle keyword context, data deduplication,
text cleaning for n-gram analysis, or labeling of organization type. We elaborate on these issues
below:
    e     Disambiguation: While the Cruz analysis claims to have taken steps to account for the
          context of keywords, such as ‘diversity’ in “diversity of biomes’, they did not apply
          robust analytic techniques to obtain semantic understanding, such as terms relating to
          biodiversity, that had nothing to do with DEI. Their approach consisted of applying a
          categorization qualifier formula in Excel — without the formula logic disclosed — and
          filtering out awards without multiple keyword matches followed by a manual review in
          which “the Committee searched for grants that used words that have multiple meanings
          [...] and then removed those without true scientific purpose.” The definition of a grant
          with “true scientific purpose” is not provided, nor is the list of words they considered to
          have multiple meanings, contributing to the lack of transparency and repeatability of their
          analysis.
    e     Text cleaning / pre-processing: The methodology does not account for data cleaning or
          pre-processing steps. An n-gram analysis would generally involve transparent and
          repeatable cleaning and pre-processing to handle special characters, formatting, and word
          variations in the text corpus being searched using techniques like stemming and
          lemmatization. Normalizing text into its base form, which was not performed or disclosed
          in this report, can improve accuracy. In addition, analysis of possible duplication was not
          performed or disclosed in this report, though Science Committee Democratic staff found
          that 14% of the award descriptions were found to be duplicates with no
          acknowledgement or description of award relationships.
    e     Mislabeling and misrepresentation: The authors of the Cruz report mislabel nonprofit
          organizations as for-profit entities, and they cite yearly funding totals for NSF that
          represent only a portion of the actual number reported by the agency, skewing their
          overall analysis.


In order to more clearly demonstrate the many flaws in the Cruz Report, we describe here what a
robust approach to identifying awards for review might look like. For example, a serious review
of NSF awards would identify the primary and secondary goals of each award based on the




                        RANKING       MEMBER      ZOE    LOFGREN      (CA-18)
                 U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES COMMITTEE ON
                        SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY                                                  A
                              DEMOCRATIC STAFF REPORT                                                   uy &
award description, as well as which described activities serve as a response to statutory
requirements, such as broader impacts criteria or broadening participation activities. We would
also suggest using an automated approach to identifying relevant research topics in each award,
which could enable subsequent human reviewers to more quickly consider how the research
contributes to advancement in critical areas. This could be achieved through traditional machine
learning approaches such as topic modeling or by integrating free open-source language models
into the Python tool developed by the Cruz Report authors and prompting for primary and
secondary goals of each award description.
Even without the use of more sophisticated approaches, the authors could use their existing
Python keyword search tool to identify components of each award description that might indicate
the criticality of the award in a given area. In this report, we perform some of this analysis with
the aim of demonstrating how the Cruz Report authors could easily use the tools, already at their
disposal, to conduct a more thorough analysis of awards and their potential impacts by simply
using different keyword inputs across several critical technology areas.
To demonstrate additional steps which could have been taken to identify potential impacts, we
ingested the data publicly released by Senator Cruz as well as 3 datasets used to analyze the
potential impact of targeting these projects. These datasets include:
   e   Universities: A list of Institution of Higher Education names classified as MSIs, HBCUs,
       MSIs, or TCUs, available in the press release accompanying this report
   e   States: A list of states and associated percentage of votes for Donald Trump or Kamala
       Harris in the 2024 U.S. presidential election, available in the press release accompanying
       this report
   e   Keywords: A list of keywords in critical technology and research areas identified by
       Science Committee professional staff, available in the press release accompanying this
       report
Standard cleaning and pre-processing steps were performed, including accounting for text case,
duplicate awards, and special characters before joining States and Universities on “RECIPIENT
STATE’ and ‘RECIPIENT STATE OF PERFORMANCHFE’ to obtain the data for figures in Cruz
Report Demands Cancelation of Grants that Serve EPSCoR states and Rural, Veteran, or
Religious Communities and Cruz Report Demands Cancelation of Funding to Minority Serving
and Rural Academic Institutions. We then analyzed “AWARD DESCRIPTIONS’ to identify
awards containing any of the keywords in Appendix II to obtain the data referenced in Jmpacts of
Senator Cruz’s Reckless Attacks. Any analysis that relies upon the database compiled by the
authors of the Cruz Report will be limited by its shortcomings. In an attempt to perform as robust
an analysis as possible with this limitation, Science Committee staff vetted their methodology
with subject matter experts outside the committee.




                                                                                                   10

                     RANKING       MEMBER       ZOE   LOFGREN       (CA-18)
                   U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES COMMITTEE ON
                          SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY                                                             A
                                   DEMOCRATIC STAFF REPORT                                                           uy &

Cruz Report Disregards Congressional Statute Requiring NSF’s
“Broader Impacts”
 42 USC 1862p-14: Broader Impacts Review Criterion. The Foundation shall apply a
 broader impacts review criterion to identify and demonstrate project support of the following
 goals:
 (1) Increasing the economic competitiveness of the United States.
 (2) Advancing of the health and welfare of the American public.
 (3) Supporting the national defense of the United States.
 (4) Enhancing partnerships between academia and industry in the United States.
 (5) Developing an American STEM workforce that is globally competitive through improved
 pre-kindergarten through grade 12 STEM education and teacher development, and improved
 undergraduate STEM education and instruction.
 (6) Improving public scientific literacy and engagement with science and technology in the
 United States.
 (7) Expanding participation of women and individuals from underrepresented groups in
 STEM.

NSF requires that every NSF proposal, including those for scientific research, include a “broader
impacts” proposal describing activities the research team will undertake to help ensure that the
outcome of the funded work benefits society and contributes to the achievement of specific,
desired social outcomes.*° Such outcomes could include (but are not limited to) “expanding
participation of women and individuals from underrepresented groups in STEM.” 4! The America
COMPETES Reauthorization Act of 2010 (42 USC 1862p-14) legally mandated the Broader
Impacts criterion in the review of all NSF awards. The Senate passed these bill provisions by
unanimous consent in 2010.7 A reauthorization of the broader impacts criterion under the
American Innovation and Competitiveness Act was similarly passed by the Senate by unanimous
consent and was signed into law on January 6", 2017, when Senator Cruz was already a sitting
Senator.** Notably, that bill was developed in the House by former Science Committee
Chairman Lamar Smith (R-TX), who also regularly questioned the value of much of NSF’s
funded science.** Neither NSF nor the law prescribes what broader impact goal is applicable to
any particular proposal, but many researchers cite activities such as public engagement, outreach
to groups historically underrepresented in science, and pedagogical activities to fulfill the
criterion. Many of these broader impact activities are unrelated to the core work being performed
in the grant and reflect common-sense activities, such as participating in science museum



“© Broader impacts. NSF - National Science Foundation. https://www.nsf.gov/funding/learn/broader-impacts
“1 42 USC 1862p-14: Broader Impacts Review Criterion.
(n.d.). https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?reg=(title:42%20section: 1862p-14%20edition:prelim)
“2 America COMPETES Reauthorization Act of 2010 (2011 - H.R. 5116). (n.d.).
GovTrack.us. https://www.govtrack.us/congress/bills/111/hr5116
‘3 American Innovation and Competitiveness Act (2017    - s. 3084). (n.d.).
GovTrack.us. https://www.govtrack.us/congress/bills/114/s3084
44 Smith Introduces Bipartisan Bill to Ensure NSF Research Advances ‘National Interest.’ House Committee on
Science, Space, and Technology. https://science.house.gov/2015/7/smith-introduces-bipartisan-bill-ensure-nsf-
research-advances-national-interest

                                                                                                                11

                         RANKING        MEMBER          ZOE      LOFGREN      (CA-18)
                  U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES COMMITTEE ON
                         SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY                                                           A
                                 DEMOCRATIC STAFF REPORT                                                          uy &
exhibits or performing science outreach in partnership with local schools. These efforts are
critical to getting American scientists out of the university and engaging more with the public.

As it turns out, most of the grants flagged in the Cruz Report were flagged for their broader
impacts work, rather than the core scientific research project. The Cruz Report does not reference
“broader impacts” in any form throughout the text or acknowledge this important context. We
provide numerous examples below.


 Examples of Senator Cruz Disregarding NSF’s “Broader Impacts”
 Flagged ‘DET grants to universities. Bold represents keywords that flagged the grant, per the
 Daily Wire’s publication of the database, sourced by the authors of the Cruz Report.
 EXAMPLE 1. GRANT TO VILLANOVA UNIVERSITY.
 EAGER: Transient cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) flow in brain concussion. Impacts to the head are
 identified as the common cause of concussion injury. An estimated 2.8 million people in the us sustain
 a traumatic brain injury (TBI) annually which contributes 30.5% of all injury-related deaths and costs
 an estimated $60 billion annually. To develop effective prevention and intervention strategies, it is
 critical to understand how the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)-bathed brain responds to sudden external
 impacts and what mechanical and cellular mechanisms drive the pathological development of
 concussive brain injury. However, due to the brain’s forbidding complexity, the small confines of the
 subarachnoid space (SAS) between the skull and the brain, the extremely transient feature, and the
 skull’s opacity preventing direct visualization of any complex physical interactions between the CSF
 flow and the compliant brain, the mechanism of brain concussion remains unclear. The proposal is
 aimed to tackle this challenging problem by integrating innovative analytical, numerical, and
 biomimetic approaches with concussion animal models to reveal, for the first time, the crucial roles of
 transient CSF flow during brain concussion. The project will fill a glaring knowledge gap, with high-
 payoff feature ensuing from its potentials to guide the creation of effective head protection, reduce the
 incidence of concussion, lead to significant cost savings, and benefit the society by saving lives. The
 project will also encompass significant educational activities, including curriculum reform, multi-year
 undergraduate research program, and outreach programs for annual Girl Scouts Day and high school
 academy for underrepresented minorities at Villanova University (VU), the VU athletic department
 and the local public libraries. The goal of the project is to examine the transient cerebrospinal fluid
 flow in the porous subarachnoid space (SAS) filled with arachnoid trabeculae (AT), as the head is
 exposed to rapid external impacts, and hence to elucidate the critical role of the CSF flow in
 transmitting and mitigating external impacts. The proposal integrates analytical, numerical,
 experimental (biomimetic and biomechanical) investigations, built upon solid and encouraging
 preliminary study results. Analytical and numerical models, capturing the key CSF flow physics that
 have been neglected to date, will be tested using a novel biomimetic experimental platform, and further
 evaluated by in vivo biomechanical study. The proposal is the first, and so far, the only study of its
 kind to attempt to uncover a long-standing mystery in brain biomechanics. It is expected to yield highly
 transformative results and provide the platform for future study in this research area. This award
 reflects NSF’s statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
 Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.

 EXAMPLE 2. GRANT TO NEVADA SYSTEM OF HIGHER EDUCATION
 Control of dentate gyrus function and context discrimination by CKK+ interneurons. Efficient memory
 processes rely on our brain's ability to store similar experiences as distinct memories. This process,
 performed in part by a structure in the brains of mammals called hippocampus, facilitates memory
 discrimination and is affected in brain disorders like dementia and post-traumatic stress disorders. As a
 result, animals and people suffering from these disorders experience difficulties recalling or accurately


                                                                                                             12

                       RANKING        MEMBER        ZOE    LOFGREN        (CA-18)
                 U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES COMMITTEE                             ON
                        SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY
                           DEMOCRATIC STAFF REPORT

retrieving memories. Our understanding of how the hippocampus encodes similar experiences as
distinct memories, allowing for easy discrimination during recall, is still limited. Recent advancements
in neuroscience suggest that coordinated activity between excitatory and inhibitory neurons enables a
specific computation known as pattern separation within the hippocampal circuit. This computation
transforms similar input patterns into highly dissimilar output patterns and is thought to be the basis for
memory discrimination. In the proposed research, the investigators aim to determine the contribution of
a specific type of inhibitory neurons called cholecystokinin-expressing (CKK) neurons to the
hippocampal circuit’s function. Their long-term goal is to enhance our understanding of critical
computations, like pattern separation, performed by this brain region, which are crucial for memory
discrimination. As part of this project, the investigators also provide a strong educational and training
environment to students and new generations of scientists with a strong emphasis in recruiting and
training minorities and under-represented groups in STEM, and they participate in outreach programs,
such as the big brother big sister event organized by the Reno Museum of Natural History, which they
use as a platform to share their research with the general public and students of all ages. The
investigators aim to determine the contribution of CKK neurons to hippocampal circuit function,
focusing on the plasticity of CKK neurons during the developmental period of juvenile mice. Their
previous work demonstrates that environmental enrichment (EE) leads to increased synapses formed by
CKK neurons in the dentate gyrus, suggesting their involvement in the maturation of hippocampal
function and pattern separation. For the proposed work, they use an EE paradigm in mice and take
advantage of viral mediated gene delivery technique combined with optogenetic approaches to
manipulate the activity of the CKK neurons. They determine how the remodeling of the inhibitory
CKK network adjusts the computation in the DG. In the first objective of the project, they determine
the contribution of CKK neurons to feedback and feedforward inhibitory microcircuits, both of which
can impact pattern separation. In the second objective, they measure the change in pattern separation
and filtering performance of the DG induced by the FE using a novel in-vitro electrophysiological
protocol. Together their research aims to unravel the mechanisms underlying pattern separation by
exploring the involvement of CKK neurons in the hippocampal circuit. By increasing our
understanding of these fundamental computations, they will shed light on the processes that support
efficient memory functioning and potentially contribute to the development of novel therapeutic
approaches for memory-related disorders. This project is jointly funded by the modulation program of
the neural systems cluster in the BIO Directorate and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR). This award reflects NSF’s statutory mission and has been deemed
worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.

EXAMPLE 3. GRANT TO BRANDEIS UNIVERSITY
Dynamic pathways to crystallization of DNA-coated colloids - Nontechnical abstract crystallization.
The spontaneous ordering of atoms, molecules, or other small particles has fascinated humankind for
centuries. The study of crystallization has led to fundamental developments in our understanding of
matter, for example, how water freezes to become ice. Crystallization is also central to a wide variety
of important industries, ranging from microelectronics to pharmaceuticals. Yet, despite the ubiquity of
crystallization in both fundamental and applied science, many mysteries regarding the dynamics of
crystallization remain. The scientific objective of this research project is to understand the dynamic
pathways by which crystals form and to use that understanding to develop new methods for making
macroscopic single crystals with exotic materials properties. The research will reveal new fundamental
knowledge about the physics of crystallization and lay the foundation for programmable nanomaterials
of the future, which could find applications in optical communications, light-harvesting, and other
next-generation technologies. The research project also trains students in the interdisciplinary field of
soft condensed matter physics and engages the public in conversations about science. More
specifically, the research team is developing student-led, student-focused summer programs designed
to provide undergraduate students with practical hands-on training in the laboratory, while also

                                                                                                            13

                      RANKING        MEMBER        ZOE     LOFGREN        (CA-18)
                  U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES COMMITTEE
                         SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY
                                                                                      ON
                                                                                                                   :
                            DEMOCRATIC STAFF REPORT

 promoting diversity and inclusion by creating a community of researchers and reinforcing group
 cohesion. The team is also creating outreach activities with a local science museum focused on
 enhancing interest and scientific literacy in the surrounding community.
 Technical Abstract: The goal of this research project is to understand the fundamental thermodynamic
 and kinetic driving forces that govern the dynamic pathways to crystallization, and to develop practical
 strategies for controlling those pathways to create new optical metamaterials from DNA-coated
 colloids. The proposed research is organized around two specific studies. In the first study, the research
 team is exploring how the kinetics of nucleation and growth emerge from the pair-interaction potential,
 as well as the details of the parent fluid phase and the child crystal phase. The research team uses an
 experimental approach combining droplet-based microfluidics with optical microscopy to
 systematically quantify the full dynamic evolution of hundreds of experiments running in parallel.
 They are also developing a suite of theoretical tools based on the statistical mechanics of multivalent
 interactions, classical nucleation theory, and classical theories of crystal growth to uncover microscopic
 information about the crystallization pathways and to create a data-driven framework to guide the
 design of their experiments. In the second study, the research team is utilizing their fundamental
 understanding of nucleation and growth to create rational nonequilibrium protocols for forming single
 crystals with prescribed structures, which could be used in future applications in photonics and
 plasmonics. Here they draw inspiration from traditional industrial practices, such as slow temperature
 ramps, temperature cycling, multistep nucleation and growth protocols, and seeded nucleation. While
 existing studies have focused primarily on expanding the diversity of static structures that form in
 equilibrium, the research team is working to understand the rich dynamical pathways by which those
 structures self-assemble and to develop new approaches to control those pathways in order to assemble
 macroscopic programmable materials from colloids. This award reflects NSF’s statutory mission and
 has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and
 broader impacts review criteria.


Sorting the flagged ‘DEI’ grants by NSF funding division is another way to illustrate that the
majority of grants have a primary purpose unrelated to broadening participation. Most NSF
grants with the primary aim to broaden participation are awarded by NSF divisions with an
emphasis on STEM       education, including the Directorate for STEM Education’s (EDU) Division
of Undergraduate Education, Division of Research on Learning in Formal and Informal Settings,
Division of Equity for Excellence in STEM, and Division of Graduate Education, as well as
Directorate for Engineering’s (ENG) Division of Engineering Education and Centers. The total
flagged grant funding from these divisions is $654M, less than a third of the total funding
reported in the Cruz Report as ‘neo-Marxist’ and ‘DEI’ grants. The total number of grants issued
by these divisions is 919, comprising just 26% of the total number of grants in the Cruz Report’s
database. The remaining 74% of awards were made by other offices and divisions across NSF,
representing the range of science, technology, engineering, and mathematics research funded by
NSF. The table below displays the breakdown of grants and funding numbers by division, as
categorized in the Cruz database. As detailed in this report's Methodology section, the Cruz
database was compiled with unreliable and unscientific methods. As such, any analysis
performed on the database will have those same problems, e.g., 14% of the grants are duplicates.
The table below should be considered with this in mind.


 Directorate   | Division                                         Number of Awards                    Total
 EDU            Division Of Undergraduate Education                                379 | $275,360,737.00
 EDU            Div Of Research On Learning In                                      170 | $121,080,477.00


                                                                                                              14


                        RANKING       MEMBER        ZOE    LOFGREN        (CA-18)
         U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES COMMITTEE                        ON
                SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY
                   DEMOCRATIC STAFF REPORT

EDU    Division Of Equity For Excellence In Stem                   161 | $115,721,343.00
EDU    Division Of Graduate Education                               87       $91,043,862.00
ENG    Div Of Civil, Mechan      Manuf Innov                       131       $57,590,635.00
ENG    Division Of Engineering Education                           122       $51,141,481.00
ENG    Division Of Chemical Bioengineering                         117       $36,952,483.00
ENG    Office Of Emerging Frontiers And                             41       $31,476,597.00
ENG    Division Electrical, Communication                           71       $29,292,.452.00
ENG    Nat Nanotechnology Coordinating Ofc                                      $725,000.00
ENG    Division Of Industrial Innovation                                3       $555,823.00
BIO    Emerging Frontiers                                           54       $40,679,292.00
BIO    Div Of Biological Infrastructure                             70       $35,803,760.00
BIO    Div Of Integrative Organismal Sys                            71       $35,215,466.00
BIO    Division Of Molecular And                                    46       $32.03 1,238.00
BIO    Division Of Environmental Biology                            41       $23,713,225.00
CISE   Ofc Of Adv Cyberinfrastructure                               42 |     $85,493,866.00
CISE   Div Of Computer      Network Systems                        139 |     $63,203,757.00

CISE   Div Of Infor   Intelligent Systems                          136       $46,457,263.00
CISE   Cise Information Tech Research                               51       $23,579,124.00
CISE   Div Of Computer      Comm Foundations                        54 |     $20,885,463.00
GEO    Integrative And Collaborative                                82 |     $59,342,875.00
GEO    Division Of Earth Sciences                                   73       $29,938,128.00
GEO    Division Of Atmospheric And                                  30       $26,587,497.00
GEO    Division Of Ocean Sciences                                   50       $23,964,696.00
GEO    Office Of Polar Programs                                     33       $15,094,755.00
MPS    Division Of Chemistry                                        71       $35,693,132.00
MPS    Division Of Materials Research                              102       $31,476,112.00
MPS    Division Of Mathematical Sciences                           113       $19,779,477.00
MPS    Division Of Physics                                          39       $18,868,710.00
MPS    Mps Multidisciplinary Activities                             61       $18,288,464.00
MPS    Division Of Astronomical Sciences                            15       $13,105,517.00
OD     Office Of Integrative Activities                            138 |     $96,465,180.00
OD     Ofc Interntl Science    Eng                                  4]       $20,251,710.00
OIRM   Div Of Human Resource Development                            80       $40,214,762.00
SBE    Div Of Social And Economic Science                          150       $53,227,880.00
SBE    Div Of Behavioral      Cognitive Sci                        204       $48,593,042.00
SBE    Sbe Office Of Multidisciplinary Act                          62       $17,767,175.00
TIP    Innovation And Technology Ecosystems                         66 | $178,086,953.00
TIP    Translational Impacts                                        55       $52,549,476.00
TIP    Technology Frontiers                                         29 |     $40,537,675.00
TIP    Strategic Partnerships Office                                  2         $881,355.00



                                                                                           15


              RANKING          MEMBER         ZOE   LOFGREN   (CA-18)
                   U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES COMMITTEE ON
                          SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY                                                             A
                                  DEMOCRATIC STAFF REPORT                                                            uy &

Cruz Report Demands Cancelation of Sexual Harassment and Assault
Prevention Projects
The National Science Foundation has several programs and research activities that aim to
prevent sexual assault and harassment in STEM. The research is focused on better understanding
the factors contributing to, and consequences of, sex-based and sexual harassment affecting
individuals in the STEM workforce, including trainees. Several activities, including assessment
and research approaches, were authorized in Sec. 10534 of the CHIPS and Science Act under the
“Combating Sexual Harassment in Science” subtitle.*° Despite the statutory direction and critical
importance of these efforts, the Cruz Report attacked several projects aimed at preventing sexual
harassment and assault. In the report authors’ own words, “grants that involved Gender presented
far-left ideological theories about men, women, and other identities. These grants went beyond
attempts to provide opportunities to increase female participation in science. Many projects
casually yet authoritatively asserted, without evidence, that white men were barriers to
opportunity and emphasized the need to create ‘identity-affirming environments’ rather than
invest in scientific research and development.”

The zero-sum game presented here — that if we are investing in creating equal opportunities for
women in male-dominated, often hostile spaces, then we are not investing in scientific research
and development — is deeply ignorant. A 2023 study found that women obtaining undergraduate
degrees in male-dominated STEM fields are nearly three times as likely to be raped as women in
gender-balanced STEM fields.*° While it fits Senator Cruz’s worldview to assert that there is no
“evidence” that men are “barriers to opportunity” for women in STEM, that study is just one
example of how that is untrue. A 2018 National Academies report found that women who
experience sexual harassment have statistically distinguishable outcomes from women who do
not experience sexual harassment, and that “the net result of sexual harassment is therefore a loss
of talent, which can be costly to organizations and to science, engineering, and medicine.”’*’ Not
only are sexual assault and harassment morally abhorrent and unacceptable, but these actions in
the STEM classroom and workplace are demonstrably harmful to the scientific enterprise writ
large. The sexual harassment and assault prevention research projects demonized in the Cruz
Report are critical in the effort to create safer research environments where all people can be
welcomed as full participants.




45 CHIPS and Science Act (2022 - Public Law No: 117-167), Sec. 10534
*© Study Suggests Women STEM Majors at Disproportionate Risk of Sexual Violence. Georgia State University.
https://news.gsu.edu/2023/03/19/study-suggests-women-stem-majors-at-disproportionate-risk-of-sexual-violence/
47 Sexual Harassment of Women. National Academy of Sciences.
https://nap.nationalacademies.org/catalog/24994/sexual-harassment-of-women-climate-culture-and-consequences-
in-academic

                                                                                                                16

                        RANKING         MEMBER        ZOE      LOFGREN       (CA-18)
                 U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES COMMITTEE                              ON
                        SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY
                           DEMOCRATIC STAFF REPORT

Example of Senator Cruz Demanding Cancelation of Funding of Efforts to Prevent
Sexual Harassment and Assault. Flagged ‘DEI grant to a university. Bold represents
keywords that flagged the grant, per the Daily Wire’s publication of the database, sourced by
the authors of the Cruz Report.
CAREER: The Efficacy of Sexual Assault Mandatory Reporting Policies. Sexual assault is a serious
threat to safety and educational access within institutions of higher education, especially
for women and underrepresented groups. The U.S. Department of Education Office for Civil Rights
has attempted to remedy this issue via Title [IX guidance, instructing institutions to establish policies
that can address sexual assault and ensure assault survivors’ equal access to education. As colleges and
universities interpret and implement federal legal directives, little attention has been paid to assessing
whether the resulting policies achieve their intended aims. Many institutions have created policies that
require most employees to report sexual assault they learn about to university officials, even if the
person who experienced the sexual assault does not want to report. It is assumed that these mandatory
reporting policies will increase reports and benefit survivors, but there is a lack of evidence to support
those assumptions. Regaining a sense of autonomy and control is essential for survivors’ healing after
an assault, and some mandatory reporting policy practices may cause unintended harm. Therefore,
understanding the effects and outcomes of college and university mandatory reporting policies for
sexual assault is essential for creating policies that best support survivors and ensure equal access to
education. This career project will collect qualitative data from both institutions of higher education
(e.g., mandatory reporting policy text) and institutional members (1.e., faculty/staff members and
students) at two institutions of higher education. The analysis of these institutional and individual-level
data will achieve three research aims. Research Aim 1| will evaluate how institutional mandatory
reporting policies are reflected in and deviate from faculty/staff and students’ understandings and
attitudes of those policies. Research Aim 2 will determine the impact of mandatory reporting policies
on faculty/staff and students’ behaviors and outcomes. Research Aim 3 will then elucidate faculty/staff
and students’ perspectives on mandatory reporting policy practices that afford survivors greater
autonomy. These aims will support and be supported by education aims focused on enhance student
training and dissemination in qualitative research methods and analysis, and through a graduate
seminar and hands-on experience researching MR policies. Education Aim 2 will provide opportunities
for institutional leaders and policymakers to learn about the use of qualitative research to evaluate and
create evidence-based policy. Findings from this research will advance our understanding of how
college and university mandatory reporting policies for sexual assault are translated from paper into
practice, determine the efficacy of such policies for addressing sexual assault and supporting sexual
assault survivors (e.g., ensuring their access to education), and facilitate evidence-based policymaking.
This award reflects NSF’s statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.




                                                                                                              17

                       RANKING        MEMBER        ZOE    LOFGREN        (CA-18)
                    U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES COMMITTEE ON
                           SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY                                                              A
                                   DEMOCRATIC STAFF REPORT                                                             uy &

Cruz Report Demands Cancelation of Funding to Minority Serving and
Rural Academic Institutions

STEM talent exists across the nation among students from all backgrounds. Although
traditionally, research-intensive universities were the primary path for students to pursue
advanced STEM degrees, NSF has made a concerted effort to support research and fund STEM
capacity-building at diverse institutions across the country — diverse with respect to their size, the
populations they serve, and their geographic setting. Many of these institutions, including rural-
serving institutions, community colleges, and minority-serving institutions, focus on providing
opportunities to populations that historically had limited access to STEM pathways. These
collective NSF efforts have enhanced the agency’s ability to support the development of a skilled
domestic STEM workforce.

The Cruz Report calls for the cancelation of many scientific proposals simply on the basis of the
institution’s role in serving disproportionately minority populations. Many of the grants were
flagged for ‘DEI’ terminology because the proposals, naturally, referred to the legally codified
status of the institution — including terms such as Historically Black College and University
(HBCU), Minority-Serving Institution (MSI), Hispanic Serving Institution (HSI), and Tribally
Controlled Colleges and Universities (TCU), all codified in the Higher Education Act of 1965
(HEA, P.L. 89-329).*8 Many of these activities, especially those in collaboration with minority-
serving institutions, were also codified in the CHIPS and Science Act (P.L. 117-167) and are
protected by law. Although not a focus of our analysis, Alaska Native and Native Hawaitian-
Serving Institutions (ANNHSJ), Asian American and Native American Pacific Islander-Serving
Institutions (AANAPISI), Native American-Serving Nontribal Institutions, and Predominantly
Black Institutions are additional institution types vulnerable to award cancelation if the Cruz
Report’s keyword-based strategy were implemented by federal science agencies, as the Senator
desires. The Cruz Report also takes aim at several projects focused on broadening STEM
workforce representation of rural, veteran, and disabled communities.


Case Study — University of Texas at El Paso, a Hispanic-Serving Institution

HSIs are defined in statute as nonprofit institutions of higher education with an enrollment of at
least 25% Hispanic undergraduate full-time equivalent students.*? HSIs vary widely in the scope
of their academic activities; for example, the University of Arizona, University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, New Mexico Military Institute, and San Jacinto Community College
are all definitionally HSIs.°° NSF has long funded proposals at HSIs, and it makes complete
sense that the broader impacts activities described in those proposals often point to the
institution’s status as an HSI and the fact that the majority of its student population comprises

“8 Dortch, C. (2018). Overview of Programs Supporting Minority-Serving Institutions Under the Higher Education
Act. In Congressional Research Service (No. IF10959). Retrieved February 17, 2025,
from https://crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/IF/IF10959/3
4 20 USC CHAPTER 28,       SUBCHAPTER V, Part A: Hispanic-Serving Institutions.
(n.d.). https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim  @ title20/chapter28/subchapter5/partA &edition=prelim
°° Hispanic Association of Colleges and Universities (2022). Hispanic-Serving Institutions (HSIs) 2022-23.
In HACU Analysis of 2022-23 IPEDS Data. https://www.hacu.net/images/hacu/OPAI/2024 HSILists.pdf

                                                                                                                  18

                         RANKING         MEMBER         ZOE    LOFGREN         (CA-18)
                    U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES COMMITTEE                               ON
                           SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY
                              DEMOCRATIC STAFF REPORT

underrepresented groups. Either this didn’t click for the authors of this report, or they see no
problem with disqualifying HSIs for the sin of referring to their legally codified status. In his
report, Senator Cruz demanded the cancelation of many grants for no discernible reason other
than that the term “Hispanic” was flagged in the proposal.

Science Committee Members and university leaders saw this coming before Senator Cruz
published his database. On February 5‘ 2025, the House Committee on Science, Space, and
Technology hosted a hearing entitled The State of U.S. Science and Technology: Ensuring U.S.
Global Leadership. During the hearing, Representative Valerie Foushee directed a question to
the panel of witnesses on the potential impact of the shoddy keyword-based methodology,
warning that it could toss out all research “that has anything to do with people who aren’t white,
able-bodied men.” But don’t just take Democratic Members’ and Committee staff's word for it.
Among the responses to Rep. Foushee’s question, former Republican Congresswoman and
Trump-appointed Secretary of the Air Force, Dr. Heather Wilson, in her current capacity as
President of the University of Texas at El Paso, stated the following:>!


       Quote from Dr. Heather Wilson, President of the University of Texas at El Paso

 “T read the report as well and I identified some of the same things you did. Just because somebody...
 you know, my institution is a Hispanic-Serving Institution under Title V of the Higher Education Act.
 That appears, probably, in every grant that’s submitted; which means that even if it is a piece of
 research on graphene particles, it will show up in [Senator Cruz’s] report. So I question the
 methodology of the report. And I completely understand staff resources are limited on the Hill, I get
 that, but I wouldn’t say that report was particularly dispositive. And if we’re going to do word searches
 to identify, to eliminate large numbers that [policymakers] don’t need to look at and then look at the
 others — fine — but let’s go forward, not try to renegotiate grants and contacts [where] we’ ve already got
 students hired and PhDs doing the work, and where this was probably something required and added
 on by the NSF, so let’s move forward, not backwards.”


Approximately one week after this hearing, Senator Cruz released his database of grants. He
ultimately demanded cancelation of $15.6 million in NSF funding to the University of Texas at
El Paso. We provide an example of an NSF Engine project flagged as a ‘DEI’ grant. This award
would have provided $15 million in regional economic building for defense and aerospace
engineering for Arizona and Texas through collaborations involving the University of Texas at
El Paso. Reportedly for other reasons, this award is now on hold by NSF.”


 Example of Senator Cruz Demanding Cancelation of a Grant to an HSI. Flagged ‘DET’
 grant to University of Texas at El Paso. Bold represents keywords that flagged the grant, per
 the Daily Wire’s publication of the database, sourced by the authors of the Cruz Report.
 NSF ENGINES: Paso del Norte Defense and Aerospace Innovation Engine. The Paso del Norte
 Defense and Aerospace Innovation Engine is working to fuel the growth of a dynamic aerospace and


>! The State of U.S. Science and Technology: Ensuring U.S. Global Leadership - YouTube.
(n.d.). https://www.youtube.com/live/3HN1MjPHTEA        ?7t=5694s
>? Spencer, J. (2024, May 9). Letter sent to NSF reveals why UTEP Innovation Engine grant is under
review. KFOX. https://kfoxtv.com/news/local/letter-sent-to-nsf-reveals-why-utep-aerospace-center-grant-is-under-
review

                                                                                                                   19

                         RANKING         MEMBER        ZOE     LOFGREN        (CA-18)
                 U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES COMMITTEE                            ON
                        SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY
                           DEMOCRATIC STAFF REPORT

defense (A&D) manufacturing sector in West Texas and southern New Mexico. The NSF ENGINE
will increase the competitiveness of Paso del Norte small and medium manufacturers (SMMs) in A&D
markets by creating an innovation platform that combines an emerging digital engineering paradigm,
skilled workforce development, and other resources to reduce costs for startups and SMMs     while
increasing access to cutting-edge design and testing tools needed to spur growth. The NSF ENGINE re-
imagines the Paso del Norte region as an advanced manufacturing and knowledge-based economy that
increases the share of jobs in advanced industries in the region from 3.2% to 25%. This can be
accomplished by redeploying local manufacturing capabilities to support U.S. A&D industries and
upskilling the local talent workforce and expanding access for K-12 students to next-generation STEM
skills so that more people in the region have a path to the middle class. SMMs remain extraordinarily
critical to maintaining a vibrant and secure U.S. A&D supply chain, but fewer and fewer SMMs are
participating in the defense industrial base. Because they often have a smaller workforce, limited
resources, and no budget or infrastructure for research and development, SMMs are
increasingly excluded from the highly stratified U.S. innovation ecosystem. The NSF ENGINE is
tackling the national challenge of reinvigorating the once vital manufacturing base of the U.S. economy
and increasing economic mobility and workforce participation in the Paso del Norte region through the
creation of innovation sector jobs. Five of 14 defense critical technologies identified by the U.S.
Department of Defense are included in the ecosystem: Advanced Materials; Trusted AI and Autonomy;
Space Technology; Renewable Energy Generation and Storage; and Hypersonics. Paso del Norte is an
eight-county region that sits on the U.S.-Mexico border in the American Southwest. It includes six
counties in West Texas and two in southern New Mexico. The cities of El Paso and Las Cruces are the
largest metropolitan areas in the region of service. The U.S. Economic Development Administration
(EDA) designates six of the eight counties (Culberson, Dofia Ana, El Paso, Hudspeth, Presidio, and
Sierra) as persistent poverty counties, meaning that poverty rates have stayed above 20 percent for at
least 30 years. The median income for families in this region is well below the national average and
this gap has widened since 1997. One reason for low incomes is the lack of high-paying STEM jobs in
the region, relative to other markets. To revitalize the U.S. A&D industrial base and propel the Paso del
Norte region toward more economic parity and increased competitiveness, the NSF ENGINE will help
SMMs to develop more innovation in their approaches and gain affordable access to defense-critical
research and development. Some of the key components of the NSF ENGINE are new open-access
physical and technical support infrastructures based at universities and facilities in the region that
SMMs can utilize to build their innovation capacity and workforce talent. The NSF ENGINE’s public
innovation architecture will be an ecosystem that fosters engineering and manufacturing innovation to
speed the development of capabilities among regional SMMs to access use-inspired R&D. This public
innovation architecture is a way to disrupt the traditional R&D process by ensuring broad and
affordable access to innovation processes. The public innovation infrastructure will be a combination
of resources to develop hard and soft infrastructure, which includes expanding the available local
skilled workforce, physical infrastructure in El Paso for SMMs, digital infrastructure that can be
accessed throughout the region, and capacity building for innovation in translation and
commercialization. This public infrastructure will reduce costs for startups and SMMs to enter and
compete in the A&D market. The talent infrastructure supports the region’s innovation industry
through upskilling of local workforce talent and K-12 outreach to build interest in careers in the A&D
industry. Project lead organizations, the aerospace center and the W.M. Keck Center for 3D Innovation
at the University of Texas at El Paso have developed new approaches to solving the STEM talent crisis
facing the nation with a unique student-centered research model. Skill development strategies have
produced graduates who are in high demand because of their abilities to immediately provide value to
employers. This research model excels at opening new pathways into the A&D sector for groups
traditionally underrepresented in the workforce. The centers’ students are 80% Latino, two-thirds
come from families who make less than $37,000, and half are first-generation college students. The
two centers are national leaders in training female engineers, 29% of their students are women, which
is much higher than peer institutions in the same fields. The NSF ENGINE will expand this model with

                                                                                                        20

                      RANKING        MEMBER        ZOE    LOFGREN       (CA-18)
                    U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES COMMITTEE                                   ON
                           SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY
                                                                                                                          a




                              DEMOCRATIC STAFF REPORT

 a technician training program called Aerospace and Defense Technologies and Manufacturing Training
 Centers (ADTECH). A&D manufacturers often complain that new graduates of engineering and
 technician programs often lack the skills needed to be immediately productive and require expensive
 additional on-site training to be ready for the demands of their new job. The ADTECH skills
 development platform, which expands on the success of programs at UTEP, will use proven skills-
 focused strategies to train a technician workforce that can meet the demands of A&D and advanced
 manufacturing employers. This agile training platform will integrate best practices in vocational
 training including supporting an open talent ecosystem, digital learning opportunities, and
 comprehensive partnership coordination that meets the needs of local SMMs. The NSF ENGINE builds
 from significant investments and partnerships that have been developed over the two decades to fuel
 growth in this sector. This growth will lift the region’s median income to the national average and
 increase the region’s corporate footprint. The capital influx will spill over into other regional industries,
 creating broad and inclusive wealth building in this historically poor region where a majority of
 residents identify as Latino. This award reflects NSF’s statutory mission and has been deemed worthy
 of support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
 criteria.- subawards are planned for this award.


HSIs are essential for promoting scientific literacy and workforce opportunities for Americans of
all backgrounds. In his report, Senator Cruz ultimately demands cancelation of $60 million in
funding to HSIs.


Historically Black Colleges and Universities

HBCUs are institutions founded long before the passage of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, with the
intention of serving Black Americans locked out of many colleges and universities.°> Examples
of these institutions include North Carolina A&T University, Howard University, Florida A&M
University, and Alabama State University. These universities offer Americans of all backgrounds
accessible, affordable, and competitive opportunities to prepare for careers in STEM. Despite
representing 13.7% of the U.S. population, Black or African American workers only represented
6.8% of workers in science and engineering occupations in 2021.°* HBCUs continue to play an
essential role in realizing a diverse and competitive U.S. workforce.®* Despite this need, Senator
Cruz calls for the cancelation of $64 million in funding for HBCUs. Many of these grants are for
science and engineering research across a range of fields and have nothing to do with ‘neo-
Marxist’ studies. The applicants’ sin was to mention that the research team was likely to include
students from groups historically underrepresented in science. Again, this can only be explained
either by the authors’ utter laziness preventing them from noticing erroneous inclusions of
research that had nothing to do with ‘woke’ science, or a belief that extending opportunities to
Black students at historically Black institutions should be disqualifying.

3 20 USC 1061: Definitions.
(n.d.). https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?reg=(title:20%20section:1061%20edition:prelim)%200R%20(eranuleid
:USC-prelim-title20-section1061)&f=treesort&num=0&edition=prelim
>4 Arbeit, D. T. a. C. A. (n.d.-b). The STEM labor force: scientists, engineers, and skilled technical workers | NSF -
National Science Foundation. https://ncses.nsf.gov/pubs/nsb20245/representation-of-demographic-groups-in-
stem#race-or-ethnicity-in-stem
>> Minority Serving Institutions. National Academy of Sciences.
https://nap.nationalacademies.org/catalog/25257/minority-serving-institutions-americas-underutilized-resource-for-
strengthening-the-stem

                                                                                                                     21

                          RANKING         MEMBER          ZOE     LOFGREN         (CA-18)
                   U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES COMMITTEE ON
                          SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY                                                         A
                                 DEMOCRATIC STAFF REPORT                                                         uy &


 Example of Senator Cruz Demanding Cancelation of a grant to an HBCU. Flagged ‘DET
 grant to Howard University. Bold represents keywords that flagged the grant, per the Daily
 Wire’s publication of the database, sourced by the authors of the Cruz Report.
 Collaborative Research: CISE-MSI: RCBP-RF: CNS: Enabling Secured and Artificial Intelligence
 Assisted Cell-Free Communications. This award is funded in whole or in part under the American
 Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (public law 117-2). Although fifth-generation (SG) New Radio (NR) is being
 extensively implemented for multi-modal use-cases in cellular communications, including massive
 internet of things and ultra-reliable low-latency communications, new use cases have emerged as socio-
 economic needs continue to evolve, and 5G NR is unable to accommodate them. The cell-centric
 paradigm of wireless networks, constrained by inter-cell interference, is transitioning toward a
 ubiquitous cell-free infrastructure that is more user-centric and interference-resistant while providing
 users with macro-diversity. Low-complexity, high-throughput, ultra-reliable, and low-latency
 applications make the cell-free architecture an essential element of the next generation of
 communication systems. The aerial communication network has emerged as a promising topology for
 beyond 5G communications, where aerial communication nodes, e.g., drones, etc., will be served from
 the conventional base stations or terrestrial access points in a cellular or cell-free architecture,
 respectively, in conjunction with terrestrial users. This CISE-MSI project will investigate the potential,
 feasibility, infrastructure, and security of the cell-free aerial terrestrial integrated network (CF-ATIN)
 for the next generation of communication systems. The project will also develop the educational and
 recruiting capacity to train engineers from historically underrepresented engineering groups. This
 project will conduct a fundamental study on CF-ATIN, address several challenges in secured
 communication protocol design, and explore how to integrate advanced techniques in the network to
 enhance system performance while assuring low computational complexity. In particular, this project
 will (1) Address physical layer signal processing challenges inherent to CF-ATIN and develop artificial
 intelligence-driven solution approaches, (2) Explore how cell-free networks have synergic integration
 with other emerging applications for the next generation of wireless communication systems, such as
 free-space optics, (3) Conduct data sanitization for secured message transmissions and develop trust
 evaluation algorithm, and (4) Develop a prototype for CF-ATIN to implement the designed innovative
 algorithms. This award reflects NSF’s statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
 through evaluation using the Foundation’s intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.


Tribally Controlled Colleges and Universities

TCUs are defined in statute as institutions formally controlled, sanctioned, or chartered by the
governing body of an Indian tribe.°° Although distinct from TCUs, Native American-Serving
Nontribal Institutions also exist as a codified definition for institutions whose undergraduate
student bodies are no less than 10% Native American and at least 50% recipients of Title IV
needs-based assistance.°’ Examples of these institutions include Diné College, Navajo Technical
University, Salish Kootenai College, Sinte Gleska University, and United Tribes Technical
College. NSF has a long history of promoting higher education opportunities in STEM to
Indigenous students who in turn use their STEM skills to bring such benefits to their

6 25 USC 1801: Definitions.
(n.d.). https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?reg=(title:25 %20section:1801%20edition:prelim)%200R%20(eranuleid
:USC-prelim-title25-section]1801)&f=treesort&num=0&edition=prelim
*7 20 USC 1059f: Native American-serving, nontribal institutions.
(n.d.). https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:20%20section:1059f%20edition:prelim)#: ~:text=20%20USC
%201059f%3 A %20Native%20American%2Dserving %2C%20nontribal%20institutions

                                                                                                            22

                        RANKING        MEMBER        ZOE    LOFGREN        (CA-18)
                    U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES COMMITTEE                                ON
                           SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY
                              DEMOCRATIC STAFF REPORT

communities as the building of affordable homes, providing clean water, repair of infrastructure,
prevention of detrimental environmental impact, and creating jobs.°* Despite the positive impact
of these programs for tribal communities, as well as the need for greater Indigenous
representation in STEM, Senator Cruz demanded the cancelation of $4.3 million in NSF grants
to TCUs and similar institutions.


 Example of Senator Cruz Demanding Cancelation of a Grant to a TCU. Flagged ‘DET’
 grant to Nebraska Indian Community College. Bold represents keywords that flagged the
 grant, per the Daily Wire’s publication of the database, sourced by the authors of the Cruz
 Report.
 ICE-TI: NICC’s Baccalaureate in Indigenous Environmental Health. A goal of the Tribal
 Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP) is to increase the Science, Technology,
 Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) instructional and research capacities of specific
 institutions of higher education that serve the nation's indigenous students. Expanding the
 STEM curricular offerings at these institutions increases the opportunities for their students to
 pursue challenging, rewarding careers in STEM fields, provides for research studies in areas
 that may be culturally significant, and encourages a community and generational appreciation
 for science and mathematics education. This project at Nebraska Indian Community College
 (NICC) aligns with this goal through the development and delivery of the institution’s first
 four-year STEM degree. Designed to specifically address indigenous community contexts,
 students who complete the degree will possess a strong, multidisciplinary understanding of
 environmental problems, their impacts on human health and well-being, and solutions to
 manage those issues. Data compiled through a feasibility study indicate that workforce
 demand for this expertise and skill set is strong in NICC’s region, providing significant career
 opportunities for graduates and contributing to the community’s economic stability. The new
 Bachelor of Science in Indigenous Environmental Health will build on NICC’s existing
 Associate of Science in General Science Studies. Project activities for developing and
 delivering this degree include curriculum design, hiring of additional faculty, equipping and
 enhancing additional STEM laboratories, and securing accreditations for the degree. The
 curriculum will include partnerships with tribal elders and STEM professionals as students
 investigate local place-based environmental issues relevant to the indigenous community. Core
 program requirements include the successful completion of a set of upper-level courses across
 health, environmental, and indigenous science disciplines as well as the design and completion
 of both senior capstone and senior research projects. The delivery of this degree has the added
 significances of advancing NICC’s STEM degree offerings to the baccalaureate level while
 providing culturally responsive career opportunities that will benefit its graduates and the
 community at large. This award reflects NSF’s statutory mission and has been deemed worthy
 of support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
 review criteria.




8 Willis, A. (2023, July 5). TCUs and NSF seek to increase representation in engineering. Tribal College Journal of
American Indian Higher Education. https://tribalcollegejournal.org/tcus-and-nsf-seek-to-increase-representation-in-
engineering/

                                                                                                                 23

                         RANKING         MEMBER        ZOE     LOFGREN         (CA-18)
                    U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES COMMITTEE ON
                           SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY                                                          A
                                   DEMOCRATIC STAFF REPORT                                                         uy &
Community and Two-Year Colleges

Community colleges, as defined in statute, are nonprofit institutions of higher education,
including many two-year state institutions of higher education, at which the highest degree
awarded to students is an associate’s degree.’ Examples of these institutions include Alamo
College District, Pima Community College, Santa Barbara City College, Montgomery County
Community College, and MiraCosta College. These institutions, which often provide affordable
career and education opportunities aligned with local industrial needs, are essential for creating a
skilled workforce for emerging technologies. They also serve as a pathway for many students,
especially low-income students, into a 4-year institution and eventually an advanced STEM
degree. Despite the critical role that community colleges play in the development of a STEM
workforce, Senator Cruz demanded the cancelation of several grants for programs at community
or two-year colleges because they dared to describe how they serve diverse populations —
including, as seen below, students with disabilities. Though it is currently fashionable for
Republicans to direct extreme vitriol toward elite four-year universities, two-year colleges have
largely escaped similar criticism, and Republicans and Democrats alike have seemed to agree
that they are valuable for training a skilled workforce in communities across the country. But
Senator Cruz appears to find it offensive and wasteful that this community college received an
award to make it more effective and accessible for disabled students. Perhaps he would prefer
they stay out of the student body and, consequently, out of the STEM workforce.



 Example of Senator Cruz Demanding Cancelation of Funding for Community Colleges.
 Flagged ‘DET grant to American Mathematical Association of Two-Year Colleges. Bold
 represents keywords that flagged the grant, per the Daily Wire’s publication of the database,
 sourced by the authors of the Cruz Report.
 Facilitating accessibility in STEM at two-year colleges. This project aims to serve the national interest
 by providing science and math faculty with practical skills to teach students with disabilities at two-
 year colleges. A greater proportion of the student population at two-year colleges have documented
 disabilities compared with four-year institutions. To improve inclusivity and diversity in STEM, it is
 important that students with disabilities achieve success at rates comparable to the whole population.
 While reasonable accommodations are provided for each student, more nuanced techniques will
 enhance the student experience, provide more opportunities for success, and give guidance to faculty.
 This training conference will bring expertise to science and math faculty at two-year colleges, engaging
 them in specific, practical, and immediately implementable skills to better engage with neurodivergent
 students, and students with visual, auditory, or mobility disabilities. Conference participants will learn
 techniques, initiate a community of practice to support each other, and become faculty liaisons within
 their own institutions and regional groups. The overall goal of this project is to convene a conference
 that prepares two-year college faculty to support students with disabilities. Participants in the
 conference will include two-year college faculty in math, physics, and chemistry. The conference will
 offer workshops to help faculty enhance student graphical literacy among students with visual
 disabilities, and to ensure laboratory safety for students with mobility disabilities. Participants will gain
 first-hand knowledge of accessibility challenges through a student-led science museum tour and a panel
 discussion. Disciplinary and cross disciplinary discussions will support the creation of communication
 channels to brainstorm specific strategies for inclusive teaching while providing opportunities for


° 15 USC 9401: Definitions.
(n.d.). https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title: 15 %20section:9401%20edition:prelim)

                                                                                                              24

                         RANKING         MEMBER        ZOE     LOFGREN         (CA-18)
                    U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES COMMITTEE
                           SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY
                                                                                              ON
                                                                                                                           :
                              DEMOCRATIC STAFF REPORT

 participants to develop and facilitate similar workshops in their home institutions. The conference will
 be organized by the leaders of three two-year college professional organizations and convened in
 Minneapolis, Minnesota with expected attendance of 24 participants. Dissemination will involve
 multiple modalities, including presentations at conferences, professional disciplinary societies and a
 handbook of helpful practices will be widely distributed. The NSF program description on advancing
 innovation and impact in undergraduate STEM education at two-year institutions of higher education
 supports projects that advance STEM education initiatives at two-year colleges. The program
 description promotes innovative and evidence-based practices in undergraduate STEM education at
 two-year colleges. This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
 through evaluation using the Foundation’s intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.


Women’s Colleges

Women’s colleges are private institutions of higher education that primarily or exclusively admit
female students. Only about 32 active women’s colleges exist in the United States, including
Barnard College, Wesleyan College, Sweet Briar College, and Bryn Mawr College. The
importance of these institutions in creating access and opportunities for women in higher
education, including in STEM, has been acknowledged by Congress.°! Despite making up half of
the U.S. population, women accounted for only 26% of workers in science and engineering
occupations in 2021.°* While they may not represent a significant fraction of the U.S. research
enterprise, women’s colleges are an important pathway for many women in STEM. Despite the
important role they play, Senator Cruz called for cancelation of $1.3 million in grants to
women’s colleges. Why? Because they mention “women.”


 Example of Senator Cruz Demanding Cancelation of Funding for Women’s Colleges.
 Flagged ‘DET grant to a Smith College. Bold represents keywords that flagged the grant, per
 the Daily Wire’s publication of the database, sourced by the authors of the Cruz Report.
 LEAPS MPS: Number-theoretic and combinatorial properties of increasing sequences of positive
 integers. This project aims to study increasing sequences of positive integers, such as the evens, the
 odds, prime numbers, and Fibonacci numbers. We will study increasing sequences by exploring
 complementary sequences, that is, sequences such that every integer appears in one of them and no
 integer appears in both. Any increasing sequence of positive integers can be thought of as part of a
 complementary pair by taking the other set to be all positive integers that are not in the given
 increasing sequence. Complementary sequences also may have applications in other areas. For
 instance, the so-called Beatty sequences have applications in pure and applied mathematics, music,
 biology, computer graphics, linear filters, and quasi-crystallography. Mathematicians use greedy
 algorithms, such as the minimum excluded (MEX) algorithm, to generate complementary sequences.
 In previous work, the PI discovered some surprising connections between the use of the MEX
 algorithm to generate Beatty sequences and continued fractions. This project will extend these findings


°° Women’s College Coalition | Directory of Women’s Colleges & Degrees.
(n.d.). https://www.womenscolleges.org/
°! Ranger, Ms. G., DeLauro, Ms. D., & Balint, Ms. B. (2024). Recognizing and thanking the Nation’s women’s
colleges and universities and recognizing March 5 as ‘“National Women’s Colleges and Universities
Day.”’ https://www.congress.gov/118/bills/hres 109 1/BILLS-118hres109 lih.pdf
6 Arbeit, D. T. a. C. A. (n.d.). The STEM labor force: scientists, engineers, and skilled technical workers | NSF -
National Science Foundation. https://ncses.nsf.gov/pubs/nsb20245/representation-of-demographic-groups-in-
stem#women-in-stem

                                                                                                                      25

                          RANKING         MEMBER         ZOE     LOFGREN         (CA-18)
                 U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES COMMITTEE
                        SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY
                                                                                   ON
                                                                                                              |
                           DEMOCRATIC STAFF REPORT

to general complementary sequences. The significance of this research lies in uncovering new
properties of positive integers and providing insights into problems studied using the MEX algorithm
and continued fractions. These discoveries could also shed light on the applications of complementary
sequences. Additionally, the PI will engage in educational and outreach activities enhancing diversity
in mathematics, including forming an undergraduate research group and mentoring math-PhD-bound
post baccalaureate students at Smith College (home to the center for women in mathematics), and
conducting math outreach for middle/high-school students. The PI will also continue with his work in
mentorship and engagement with people of Dominican descent in the U.S. More precisely, this
research project can be described as follows: Classical results and recent developments in number
theory, combinatorics, graph theory, combinatorial game theory and theoretical computer science are
obtained by applying the MEX algorithm and generating complementary sets. Recently the PI
introduced a novel generalization of the MEX algorithm which reveals, surprisingly, that applying the
MEX algorithm to generate Beatty complementary sequences is equivalent to prepending digits to the
continued fractions of irrational numbers. The PI has also shown that iterating the MEX algorithm
gives rise to a dynamical system whose orbits have a parametric family of fixed points that are
quadratic irrationals. These results lead naturally to the property that the even and the odd positive
integers are invariant when applying the MEX to generate complementary sequences. The goal of this
project is to study these connections between complementary sequences, the MEX algorithm,
continued fractions, and dynamical systems, extending them to general complementary sequences,
which includes all increasing sequences of positive integers. We will use combinatorial methods and
standard techniques from analytic and additive number theory, following strategies that have been
already employed by the PI. This award reflects NSF’s statutory mission and has been deemed worthy
of support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.




                                                                                                         26

                      RANKING       MEMBER        ZOE    LOFGREN       (CA-18)
                    U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES COMMITTEE ON
                           SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY                                                           A
                                     DEMOCRATIC STAFF REPORT                                                        uy &

Cruz Report Demands Cancelation of Grants that Serve EPSCoR states
and Rural, Veteran, or Religious Communities

In their efforts to ensure a skilled 21‘ Century STEM workforce, federal agencies, including the
NSF, have increasingly focused on including communities historically underrepresented in
STEM, including communities that face discrimination based on their religion or disability, first-
generation college students, persons who live in rural areas, veterans, and military spouses.°°
Despite the importance of ensuring that individuals across these communities have access to fair,
competitive, and affordable pathways to the STEM workforce, Senator Cruz wants to cancel
many of the projects that serve these groups.

EPSCoR. NSF’s Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR) enhances
the competitiveness of the nation through select investments in states and territories historically
underrepresented in federal funding.” These states and territories, until FY 2027, include
Alabama, Alaska, Arkansas, Delaware, Guam, Hawaii, Idaho, Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky,
Louisiana, Maine, Mississippi, Montana, Nebraska, Nevada, New Hampshire, New Mexico,
North Dakota, Oklahoma, Puerto Rico, Rhode Island, South Carolina, South Dakota, Vermont,
U.S. Virgin Islands, West Virginia, and Wyoming. Senator Cruz demanded the cancelation of
$334.7 million in NSF funding for these states, even as Congress has repeatedly acted to reaffirm
the importance of the EPSCoR program to our nation’s future STEM workforce and scientific
leadership.

Rural. Acting on recent provisions in the CHIPS and Science Act, NSF has a renewed focus on
building upon STEM education investments in rural and remote communities.® These
investments support and sustain high-quality learning, place-based learning, community-driven
research, and dual enrollment opportunities in rural schools.® In addition to these efforts to
broaden participation in rural areas, NSF funds critical research that benefits rural communities,
including research related to extreme weather and agriculture. Yet despite a hand-waving
parenthetical implying that rural areas deserve consideration that other “underrepresented,
underserved, socioeconomically disadvantaged, or excluded” populations do not,°’ Senator Cruz
demanded the cancelation of $231 million in awards with keywords including “rural.”




63 Tbid.
64 EPSCOR criteria for eligibility. (n.d.). NSF - National Science
Foundation. https://www.nsf.gov/funding/initiatives/epscor/epscor-criteria-eligibility
6 Amplifying STEM Education Investments in and with Rural and Remote Areas and Communities. (2024,
December 20). NSF - National Science Foundation. https://www.nsf.gov/funding/opportunities/dcl-amplifying-
stem-education-investments-rural-remote-areas
6° Panchanathan, S. & Committee on Equal Opportunities in Science and Engineering (CEOSE). (2024). Making
visible the invisible: STEM talent of rural America. https://www.govinto.gov/content/pkg/CMR-NS1-
00188078/pdf/CMR-NS 1-00188078.pdf
67 Division. Extremism. Ideology. How the Biden-Harris NSF Politicized NSF. Page 1. U.S. Senate Committee on
Commerce, Science, & Transportation. https://www.commerce.senate.gov/services/files/4BD2D522-2092-4246-
91 A5-58EEF99750BC

                                                                                                               27

                          RANKING         MEMBER          ZOE    LOFGREN    (CA-18)
                    U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES COMMITTEE ON
                           SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY                                                 A
                                   DEMOCRATIC STAFF REPORT                                                uy &
Veterans. NSF is heavily committed to programs that benefit veterans, such as providing access
to STEM education and workforce opportunities.°* Some of these projects have focused on
providing broad STEM education access to many groups, including veterans; others directly
focus on research or education opportunities tailored to veterans. Senator Cruz demanded the
cancelation of $40 million in awards with keywords including “veteran” in his report. Some of
these referenced programs directly focused on aiding people with military service. That speaks
louder than any time Senator Cruz has thanked a veteran for their service.

Judaism. Senator Cruz flagged several grants relating to Hebrew study or international
collaborations with Israel as awards that “advanced neo-Marxist warfare propaganda.” One of
these grants was focused on better understanding the differences between English and Hebrew (a
gendered language), in which Senator Cruz argued the grant had an inappropriate focus on
gender.’ Senator Cruz also demanded the cancelation of six awards totaling $3.3 million for
projects that involved collaboration with universities in Israel. This is despite the current
administration prioritizing the U.S.-Israel relationship and claiming that seizing billions of
dollars from institutions of higher education is an attempt to hold them accountable for alleged
antisemitism.

States that Voted for Donald Trump in the 2024 Presidential Election. In his attack against
liberalism and “neo-Marxism,” Senator Cruz ultimately called for $982 million dollars of grants
to be canceled in states that voted for Donald Trump in the 2024 election. Research funding — in
this case, nearly a billion dollars — has concrete regional impact, creating jobs downstream and
allowing surrounding communities and home states to maintain national and global scientific
leadership. Is the Senator calling for a brain drain from those states?




68 Veterans Research Supplement (VRS) program. (2023, September 28). NSF - National Science
Foundation. https://www.nsf.gov/funding/opportunities/dcl-veterans-research-supplement-vrs-program
© USAspending.gov. (n.d.). https://www.usaspending.gov/award/ASST_ NON _ 2310556 4900/
  Lapin, A. (2025, February 13). Ted Cruz believes a grant to study Hebrew is ‘woke DEI.’ Times of
Israel. https://www.timesofisrael.com/ted-cruz-believes-a-grant-to-study-hebrew-is-woke-dei/

                                                                                                     28

                         RANKING         MEMBER        ZOE     LOFGREN        (CA-18)
                 U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES COMMITTEE                        ON
                        SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY
                           DEMOCRATIC STAFF REPORT

Cruz Report Authors Frequently Misunderstand Simple Scientific Terms
Even a layperson would be shocked — and occasionally amused — by the Cruz Report’s numerous
scientifically illiterate claims. Several of the words included in Senator Cruz’s keyword list refer
not only to “DEI activities, but also to technical descriptions, or they have definitions outside the
scope of diversity, equity, and inclusion, such as: traumatic, female, diversified, biased,
inclusion, systematically, historically, victim, trauma, and barriers. After enumerating the many
approaches they had to take to remove false positives, the authors state additionally that “[their]
review of the grants still revealed some with scientific purpose, such as research that investigated
the diversity of black holes. The Committee searched for grants that used words that have
multiple meanings, such as ‘barrier’ and ‘black,’ and removed those without true scientific
purpose.” This review, however, missed many grants that had keywords relevant to projects with
scientific value that should be obvious to any reader. Below, we list several of these mistakes and
identify the field of study targeted by Senator Cruz’s demand for cancelation. The bolded words
in each example represent keywords that flagged the grant, per the Daily Wire’s publication of
the database, sourced by the authors of the Cruz Report. We encourage the Cruz Report authors
to take advantage of NSF’s Informal Science Education program to become more scientifically
literate for their future work for the Senator.

Regenerative Medicine. “[...] Accordingly, engineering adipose tissues is of critical importance
for understanding physiology and pathology (such as obesity and diabetes), and for repairing
body surface defects that can result from traumatic injury and invasive surgical procedures.
[...].”
Neuroscience. “[...] This project investigates the extent to which female frogs choose mates
using neural mechanisms that are susceptible versus resistant to confusion to understand how
neural mechanisms in listeners shape the evolution of vocal behavior. [...]”
Evolutionary Developmental Biology. “[...] Cis-regulatory basis of developmental plasticity and
growth in the development and evolution of beetle horns, a class of highly diversified weapons
[...]”
Animal Ecology.“[...] Leopard seals are large predators in the Southern Ocean and an extreme
example of female-biased dimorphism in mammals, where females are the larger than males.
Yet, the effects of these size differences are unknown.    [...]”
Artificial Intelligence. “[...] The past decade has witnessed the success of deep learning in image
processing and computer vision. However, increasing evidence has shown that deep neural
networks are strongly biased towards seeing image textures rather than geometric shapes. [...]”
Education Research. “[...] Inclusion of an elementary mathematics specialist on a team of
teachers has potential to systemically improve mathematics education, build students’
mathematical capacity to succeed, and increase student achievement in mathematics.[...]”
Accessibility and Assistive Technology. “[...] This project supports individuals with physical
disabilities that result in barriers to learning and engaging in programming, blocking access to
the widely available, lucrative, and upwardly mobile technology workforce. [...]’’
Agricultural Science. “[...] Mechanisms that diversify genomes, at both the sequence and
epigenetic levels, underlie phenotypic variation. With accelerated climate change, it is essential



                                                                                                     29

                      RANKING       MEMBER       ZOE      LOFGREN    (CA-18)
                       U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES COMMITTEE ON
                              SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY                                                A
                                   DEMOCRATIC STAFF REPORT                                                  uy &
that mechanisms diversifying crop genomes be understood and applied to feed future
generations.|[...]’’
Developmental Biology. “[...] Cnidarians are excellent laboratory models for making
fundamental biological discoveries in many scientific fields, including neurobiology,
developmental biology, immunology, and ecology. New advances in technology are now
allowing scientists to apply sophisticated technological approaches to
this historically understudied group of animals.[...]”
Spectrum Management. “[...] As it stands, very little of the RF spectrum is dedicated to science,
and the small amount of spectrum available can fall victim to neighboring RFI or re-allocation
for commercial use in the wake of the growing demand for bandwidth in commercial
applications.[...]”
Biotechnology. “[...] This project is disrupting the status quo and addressing an unserved
market by developing a small, portable, automated, high throughput, and cost-effective system
for extracting DNA from a variety of biosamples to prepare them for next-generation
sequencing.[...]”
Medical Diagnostics. “[...] Smartphone time-resolved luminescence imaging and detection
(stride) for point-of-care diagnostics -point-of-care ( poc ) sensors are powerful in-field tools to
quickly diagnose infectious disease early enough to prevent rapid spread, detect foodborne
pathogens in food-chains in real-time to ensure food quality and reduce food waste, distinguish
trace biomarkers in cellular/tissue levels to alter physicians for early treatment, etc. [...]”
Brain Injury. “[...] These models provide a realistic view of how the brain cells respond to
injuries such as blast trauma. This work will reveal how astrocytes sense and respond to
mechanical trauma.        [...]”
Materials Science. “[...] Additionally, this research team believes that the creation of a
molecular phototransistor sensitive to light color and polarization is realizable. The key goals
are: (1) to determine why voltage-controlled switching is not simply restricted to the interface.
(2) to identify the energy barriers to spin state switching and the origin of these
energy barriers. [...]”
Polymer Science. “[...] The central hypothesis of this project is that equilibrium advanced
sampling methods can be used to directly calculate the nucleation barrier to test these new
theories. While new to polymer crystallization, advanced sampling methods have been used
study nucleation in other fields, and they have distinct advantages over other methods.
Accordingly, this project will focus on a study of the nucleation barrier for folded-chain crystals
as a function of polymer molecular weight and as a function of polymer chemistry. [...]’’




                                                                                                       30

                         RANKING     MEMBER      ZOE    LOFGREN       (CA-18)
                   U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES COMMITTEE ON
                          SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY                                                            A
                                  DEMOCRATIC STAFF REPORT                                                           uy &

Impacts of Senator Cruz’s Reckless Attacks
We wish it were as simple as writing off the Cruz Report as lacking any substance or credibility.
Credible or not, the Cruz Report has sent a chill across the scientific community and slowed
scientific progress across numerous fields of research. The Cruz approach creates a culture of
fear and uncertainty in the research community, beyond just the specific grants targeted by
Senator Cruz’s report. In attempting to target ‘DEI’ and ‘neo-Marxist’ research, Senator Cruz is
putting at risk research efforts with bipartisan interest from Congress, the Trump and Biden
administrations, and even stated support from Senator Cruz himself. Moreover, these actions
jeopardize the economic and national security of the United States.
To understand the actual nature of the research and STEM education-related activities targeted
by Senator Cruz, it is important to know that the core research and broader impacts activities are
both described in the ‘award description’ that Cruz Report authors searched in their analysis.
Many awards were flagged only for their proposed broader impacts activities (e.g. outreach to
diverse populations) while the core research project was a technical research topic, for example
in computer science or engineering. If Senator Cruz wants to debate the merits or specifics of the
broader impacts criterion he voted for, let Congress have that debate. Instead, it appears he’d
rather just throw the proverbial baby out with the bathwater and trash the science being carried
out because the researchers dared to mention they might partner with a local K-12 school that has
a high minority population. America is no longer dominating the global race to develop science
and technology, as stated so clearly by former Republican Congresswoman and Secretary of the
Airforce, Dr. Heather Wilson, in her recent testimony before the Science Committee.’! The
People’s Republic of China is now leading in 37 of 44 critical technologies, and efforts like the
Cruz Report will further compromise the economic and national security of the United States by
eroding American science and narrowing the talent pipeline that Congress and federal science
agencies have worked so hard to widen.” Below, we list several critical research areas along
with the corresponding funding totals of the grants in each respective topic that have been
targeted in the Cruz Report.




1 The State of U.S. Science and Technology: Ensuring U.S. Global Leadership - YouTube.
(n.d.). https://www.youtube.com/live/3HNIMjPHTf£A?si=T    gb VbbuK9xBL6X YD&t=1493
” Needham, K. (2023, March 2). China leads US in global competition for key emerging technology, study
says. Reuters. https://www.reuters.com/technology/china-leads-us-global-competition-key-emerging-technology-
study-says-2023-03-02/

                                                                                                               31

                        RANKING        MEMBER         ZOE    LOFGREN        (CA-18)
                                     U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES COMMITTEE ON
                                            SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY                                          :
                                             DEMOCRATIC STAFF REPORT                                                uy &

                                            AWARD   AMOUNTS      BY KEYWORD
                           $350.00


                           $300.00


                           $250.00
  Award Amount(Millions)




                           $200.00


                           $150.00


                           $100.00


                            $50.00




                                                              Keyword




As can be seen above, many of the projects targeted by Cruz’s keyword list contain keywords
relevant to critical technology and research areas such as cancer research, quantum sciences, and
artificial intelligence.
For example, $18 million in awards flagged in the Cruz Report also contained the word ‘cancer,’
such as a “Research Training Groups in the Mathematical Sciences” award to the University of
Texas at Arlington, in which teams conduct research applying mathematical modeling to answer
questions on topics in cancer biology, computational neurology, and vector-borne diseases. The
research, guided by experimental work, would advance mathematics by developing state-of-the-
art stochastic modeling and optimal control frameworks for the dynamics of cancer biomarkers.
However, presumably due to UTA’s status a Hispanic-Serving Institution, this grant is one of the
thousands written off as “neo-Marxist warfare propaganda.” This is contradictory to the
supposed goals of Senator Cruz, who has stated that “we should want researchers spending time
trying to figure out how to cure cancer, how to cure deadly diseases, not bean counting to satisfy
the political agenda of Washington Democrats.”
His report also targets programs seeking to develop our workforce in key technology areas. For
example, $74 million in awards flagged in the Cruz Report also contained the word ‘quantum’ at
a time when both Democratic and Republican Senators have referred to quantum research and
development as “critical to our economic and national security.”’4 One targeted initiative,
Quantum Noir, aims to “expose and network young researchers in an important emerging
technology space, a space important to the nation’s technology future.” The research is led by
William L. Wilson, director of the Center for Nanoscale Systems at Harvard, who has stated that


3 Carr, T., & Manto, M. (2025, February 22). In the War Against DEI in Science, Researchers See Collateral
Damage. NOTUS. https://www.notus.org/healthcare/dei-science-research
™ Cantwell, Young, Durbin, Daines introduce National Quantum Initiative Reauthorization Act. (2024, December
3). U.S. Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, &
Transportation. https://www.commerce.senate.gov/2024/12/cantwell-young-durbin-daines-introduce-national-
quantum-initiative-reauthorization-act


                                                                                                               32

                                       RANKING   MEMBER   ZOE     LOFGREN    (CA-18)
                    U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES COMMITTEE ON
                           SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY                                                               A
                                    DEMOCRATIC STAFF REPORT                                                             uy &
“Quantum Noir is not a DEI initiative, it is a workforce development initiative.” Targeting this
program directly contradicts Senator Cruz’s recent comments on the importance of fostering
innovative technologies like artificial intelligence and quantum computing technology to create
new, high-paying jobs across the country.©
Both the Biden and Trump administrations have issued executive orders on the importance of
artificial intelligence, with President Trump stating as far back as 2019 that “continued American
leadership in Artificial Intelligence is of paramount importance to maintaining the economic and
national security of the United States.”’’ However, $217 million in awards flagged in the Cruz
Report also contained the term ‘artificial intelligence.’ In fact, the largest grant on Cruz’s list was
$29 million for the National Center for Supercomputing Applications (NCSA) at the University
of [inois at Urbana-Champaign. “I don't know exactly why we were flagged, because we're an
Al resource for the nation,” said NCSA Director William Gropp.”
Being made a target by Senator Cruz has real consequences, as the Senator no doubt understands
and perhaps intends. As noted by one researcher, “just being on the list is scary.”’? Anecdotally,
some of these researchers are receiving death threats and other trolling online. They begin to
second-guess every word they speak or write, which surely cannot be good for open scientific
inquiry. Such fear and uncertainty can lead to scientists leaving research careers or supporting
fewer graduate students due to funding uncertainty, contributing to the erosion of U.S. scientific
leadership. Despite the misinformation in some corners that academic scientists are living high
on the hog, most academic scientists make a modest living, with many living paycheck-to-
paycheck. Increased uncertainty about their work also serves as a distraction from focusing on
their research and potential breakthroughs that support the American scientific enterprise. The
collective outcomes of Senator Cruz’s campaign against scientists amount to a mountain of
missed opportunities: missed opportunities in scientific discovery, missed opportunities to
bolster our workforce in critical science and technology areas, and missed opportunities to
improve U.S. competitiveness as China races for — and in some fields, achieves — dominance.
The CEO of the American Association for the Advancement of Science recently captured the
impacts of this uncertainty in testimony to Congress, stating that “Uncertainty, whether in the
form of spending freezes, the threat of government shutdowns, or potentially canceling funding
that has already been approved, reverberates through the scientific community. Institutions must
of course change — disruption is not a bad thing and should happen every so often — but we
must be careful not to dismantle the very strengths that will keep us competitive long into the



™ Senate Committee targets $3 million in Harvard NSF research grants for ‘Far-Left Ideology’ | News | The
Harvard Crimson. (n.d.). https://www.thecrimson.com/article/2025/2/19/senate-report-grants/
7 Sen. Cruz: The Story of the 21st Century Will Be Written by Whichever Nation Can Innovate the Fastest. (2025,
March 6). U.S. Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, &
Transportation. https://www.commerce.senate.gov/2025/2/sen-cruz-the-story-of-the-2 1 st-century-will-be-written-
by-whichever-nation-can-innovate-the-fastest
™ Accelerating America’s leadership in artificial intelligence — The White
House (2019). https://trumpwhitehouse.archives.gov/articles/accelerating-americas-leadership-in-artificial-
intelligence/
”8 Carr, T., & Manto, M. (2025, February 22). In the War Against DEI in Science, Researchers See Collateral
Damage. NOTUS. https://www.notus.org/healthcare/dei-science-research
™ Magazine, U.,   & Magazine, U. (2025, February 22). In war against DEI in science, researchers see collateral
damage. Ars Technica. https://arstechnica.com/science/2025/02/in-war-against-dei-in-science-researchers-see-
collateral-damage/

                                                                                                                   33

                         RANKING         MEMBER         ZOE     LOFGREN         (CA-18)
                      U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES COMMITTEE ON
                             SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY                                                  :
                                   DEMOCRATIC STAFF REPORT                                                   uy &
future. It is not the message we want to be sending to those shaping our future, nor to our
               9980
adversaries.
The Science, Space, and Technology Committee Minority is hardly alone in calling out the
dangers of the Cruz Report. Journalists and outside parties have performed in-depth reviews of
their own, including direct interviews with impacted parties. Examples are provided in the list
below.
         US. Senate identifies $15 million worth of NSF grants to NU ‘promoting DEI’ | The
         Daily Northwestern
         Sen. Ted Cruz calls out “woke DEI’        science including bird evolution and stormwater
         drains | Lone Star Live
         Senate Committee Targets $3 Million in Harvard NSF Research Grants for ‘Far-Left
         Ideology’ | The Harvard Crimson
         Senate investigation led by Ted Cruz ’92 targets $2.4 million in Princeton research grants
         | The Princetonian
         In war against DEI in science, researchers see collateral damage | Ars Technica
         Ted Cruz names IU Trustees in list of ‘woke’ DEI grants from National Science
         Foundation | Indiana Daily Student
         The NSF’s Higher Ed Research "Hit List" | Inside Higher Ed
         Ted Cruz targets ‘woke DEI’ science grants at Georgia universities | The Atlanta         Journal-
         Constitution
         See how much science research funding flagged for DEI at CT schools | CT Insider
         UTEP leaders silent as Ted Cruz accuses researchers of using ‘woke DEI grants’ | El
         Paso Matters
         Federal list of forbidden words may jeopardize research at UCSD | KPBS
         Sen. Ted Cruz's list of 'woke' science includes self-driving cars and solar eclipses |
         KMUW
         A grant to study Hebrew is ‘woke DEI,” Ted Cruz says | Israel National News
         US. Senate report flags $4.7 million of Yale’s NSF funding for “promoting DEI” | Yale
         Daily News
         Sen. Cruz-Led Investigation Labels $18.7M in Cornell Research Grants as Promoting
         DEI, ‘Neo-Marxist Class Warfare Propaganda’ | The Cornell Daily Sun
         Mint Plants. Lifesaving Devices. This Is the Research Ted Cruz Calls “Woke.” |
         ProPublica




8° The State of U.S. Science and Technology: Ensuring U.S. Global Leadership - YouTube.
(n.d.). https://www.youtube.com/live/83HN1MjPHTEA    ?7t=5694s

                                                                                                        34

                        RANKING         MEMBER        ZOE     LOFGREN        (CA-18)
                 U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES COMMITTEE ON
                        SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY                                                :
                              DEMOCRATIC STAFF REPORT                                                 uy Gi)

Conclusion

Under the politically fashionable auspices of attacking supposed waste, institutions of higher
education, and disadvantaged populations, Senator Cruz issued a sloppy and unscientific report
that is nonetheless having serious consequences for the scientific enterprise. Diversity, equity,
and inclusion programs are not above scrutiny and debate, but this report offers no concrete
criticisms or productive proposals to consider to better accomplish the goals of increasing access
to STEM opportunities and enhancing our competitiveness by tapping into talent in every corner
of our country. Instead, it issues blunt attacks across the National Science Foundation,
endangering research activities that practically all Americans would recognize as fair, merit-
based, and important to our nation. The proposals attacked in the report went through NSF’s
gold-standard merit review process. Unfortunately, NSF itself is further undermining its merit
review by undertaking their keyword-based review of existing grants. While the outcomes of
their own internal keyword search and analysis have yet to be publicized, we are deeply
concerned that NSF chose to act on the Cruz Report rather than stand up for their merit review
process, for their own workforce, and for the scientific community at large. The actions of
Senator Cruz have caused long-term, perhaps irreparable damage to the scientific community’s
trust of NSF and its ability to perform its mission. Congressional reports can have outsized
impacts on agencies; the Committees devoted to science and technology have a responsibility to
conduct ethical and careful analyses to guide sound recommendations for U.S. science and
technology policy. We hope that future reports issued by the Senate Committee on Commerce,
Science, and Transportation reflect a more responsible exercise of our duty as public servants to
the American public.




                                                                                                 35

                      RANKING      MEMBER       ZOE    LOFGREN      (CA-18)
                 U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES COMMITTEE ON
                        SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY                                                 A
                              DEMOCRATIC STAFF REPORT                                                  uy &
Appendix I — Cruz Report Methodology and Keyword List

The text below is taken directly from Senator Cruz’s Report from Appendix A and B.

The Committee accessed USASpending.gov to capture all reported NSF grants active between
January 20, 2021, and April 4, 2024. Data was downloaded and exported to a CSV file, then
filtered by “award_base_action_date”’ to identify all NSF grants awarded between those dates.
This initially identified 32,198 total NSF grants awarded during the Biden-Harris administration.
The Committee then ran the project descriptions through an N-gram analysis to identify the
most-often-used terms and phrases in NSF Project Descriptions and parsed those terms for DEI
keywords and phrases. The keyword and phrase list was also supplemented by DEI terms
mentioned in DEI dictionaries maintained by the National Association of Counties and the
University of Washington’s College of the Environment. The Committee refined the list of terms
to include misspellings or different formatting, using over 800,000 variations and combinations
of the keywords and phrases to better identify problematic grants. The full list is available
[below].
Next, the Committee built a keyword tagging identifier Python program tool to analyze each of
the 32,198 NSF grant descriptions. The program tagged grants with the specific keywords and
phrases that appeared in the NSF Project Descriptions, which the Committee used to build a
database of all grants. Any grants that did not contain keywords or phrases were removed,
bringing the total number of grants to 29,099. After review, the Committee also removed any
grants that the Python program tagged with a single keyword or phrase to eliminate projects that
may use a keyword or phrase in a scientific way, such as the study of the diversity of biomes.
This reduced the database to 25,981 grants.
The Committee then separated the keywords into the five categories used to conduct the analysis
within this report: Status, Social Justice, Gender, Race, and Environmental Justice. There were
145 keywords and phrases that populated the Status category, 172 keywords and phrases used to
categorize the Social Justice category, 156 keywords and phrases for the Gender category, 188
keywords and phrases in the Race category, and 38 keywords and phrases in the Environmental
Justice category.
The Committee used a categorization “qualifier” tagging formula in Excel to sort the data and
confirm that phrases identified by the Python tool described DEI grants. For example, while the
Python tool could identify that a Program Description included the words “bias” and “cultural,”
the Excel qualifier only identified grants that mentioned “cultural bias” in the Program
Description. The Committee then removed grants that the qualifier formula did not identify as
DEI programs, bringing the total number of grants to 12,295. Grants that only included a single
keyword or phrase were also removed, reducing the database to 6,580 grants.
A review of the grants still revealed some with scientific purpose, such as research that
investigated the diversity of black holes. The Committee searched for grants that used words that
have multiple meanings, such as “barrier” and “black,” and removed those without true scientific
purpose. This step resulted in the Committee’s final database of 3,514 grants. The Committee
reviewed 1,461 of the grants individually, including all programs that were funded over $1
million, and removed another 31 grants, leaving the final 3,483 grants profiled in this report.
The individual review represented $1,266,598,691 (62%) of the final funding described in this
report. The Committee will provide the final database to any interested party upon request.

                                                                                                  36

                     RANKING       MEMBER       ZOE   LOFGREN       (CA-18)
                 U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES COMMITTEE ON
                        SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY                                                    A
                               DEMOCRATIC STAFF REPORT                                                    uy &

Keyword List
Status Activism; Activist; Activists; Advocacy; Advocate; Advocates; Affirmative Action; Bias
Toward; Bias Towards; Biased; Biased Toward; Biased Towards; Biases; Biases Toward; Biases
Towards; De Colonization; De Colonize; De Colonized; De Colonizing; De Segregate; De
Segregated; De Segregates; De Segregation; Decolonization; Decolonize; Decolonized;
Decolonizing; Desegregate; Desegregated; Desegregates; Desegregation; Discriminate;
Discriminated; Discrimination; Discriminatory; Divisiveness; Excluded; Exclusion; Exclusive;
Feel Seen And Heard; Hate Speech; Historically; Implicit Bias; Implicit Biases; Injustice;
Injustices; Institutional; Institutionalize; Institutionalized; Institutionally; Intergenerational
Trauma; Intersectional; Intersectionality; Marginalization; Marginalize; Marginalized; Micro
Aggression; Micro Aggressions; Micro Aggressive; Micro Aggressiveness; Microaggression;
Microaggressions; Microaggressive; Microaggressiveness; Minorities; Minority; Oppressed;
Oppressive; Oppressiveness; Oppression; Polarization; Polarize; Politicization; Politicize;
Political; Prejudice; Prejudices; Privilege; Privileged; Privileges; Reparation; Reparations;
Segregated; Segregation; Socio Economic; Socioeconomic; Status; Statuses; Stereotype;
Stereotypes; Stereotypical; Stereotyping; System Of Oppression; Systematic Oppression;
Systematically Oppressed; Systemic; Systemic Oppression; Systemical; Systemically;
Systemically Oppressed; Systems Of Oppression; Systems Of Power; Trauma; Traumatic; Under
Appreciated; Under Appreciation; Under Privilege; Under Privileged; Under Representation;
Under Represented; Under Served; Under Serving; Under Valued; Under Valuing;
Underappreciated; Underappreciation; Underprivilege; Underprivileged; Underrepresentation;
Underrepresented; Underserved; Underserving; Undervalued; Undervaluing; Unjust; Victim;
Victimhood; Victimized; Victims; Voices Are Acknowledged; Voices Heard; Voices Matter;
Unequal Opportunities; Unequal Opportunity; Safe Space; Safe Spaces; Sense Of Belonging;
Sense Of Belongingness; Welcoming Environment; Barrier; Barriers; Disabilities; Disability;
Ally; Allyship.

Social Justice Advance Diversity; Advance Inclusivity; Advance The Diversity; Advancing
Diversity; Advancing Inclusive; Alliance For Diversity; Background Inclusivity; Bi Cultural;
Bicultural; Black Cultural; Black Culture; Black Cultures; Broaden Diversity; Broaden The
Diversity; Commitment To Diversity; Community Diversity; Community Equity; Community
Inclusivity; Cultural Activism; Cultural Activist; Cultural Activists; Cultural Advocacy; Cultural
Advocate; Cultural And Ethnic; Cultural And Racial; Cultural Appropriation; Cultural
Appropriations; Cultural Bias; Cultural Competency; Cultural Connections; Cultural
Differences; Cultural Heritage; Cultural Humility; Cultural Inequalities; Cultural Inequality;
Cultural Inequities; Cultural Inequity; Cultural Injustice; Cultural Injustices; Cultural Justice;
Cultural Relevance; Cultural Segregation; Culturally Attuned; Culturally Biased; Culturally
Responsive; Culturally Sensitive; Culturally Sustainable; Culturally Sustaining; Culture And
Ethnicity; Culture And Race; Cultures And Ethnicities; Cultures And Races; DEI; DEI; Diverse
Background; Diverse Backgrounds; Diverse Communities; Diverse Community; Diverse Group;
Diverse Groups; Diverse Individual; Diverse Individuals; Diverse Status; Diverse Statuses;
Diverse Voices; Diversified; Diversify; Diversifying; Diversity And Equity; Diversity And
Inclusion; Diversity And Inclusivity; Diversity Awareness; Diversity Equity; Emphasis On
Diversity; Emphasize Diversity; Emphasizing Diversity; Encourage Diversity; Encouraging
Diversity; Enhance Diversity; Enhance The Diversity; Enhancing Diversity; Equal

                                                                                                     37

                      RANKING       MEMBER       ZOE    LOFGREN       (CA-18)
                 U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES COMMITTEE ON
                        SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY                                                    A
                               DEMOCRATIC STAFF REPORT                                                    uy &
Opportunities; Equal Opportunity; Equalities; Equality; Equitable; Equitable And Inclusive;
Equities; Equity; Ethnic And Cultural; Ethnic Cultural; Ethnic Culture; Ethnic Cultures; Ethnic
Diversity; Ethnic Equity; Ethnicities And Cultures; Ethnicity And Culture; Foster Diversity;
Fostering Diversity; Fostering Inclusive; Fostering Inclusivity; Fostering The Diversity; Group
Equity; Group Inclusivity; Hispanic Cultural; Hispanic Culture; Hispanic Cultures; Inclusion;
Inclusive; Inclusive Language; Inclusiveness; Inclusivity; Inclusivity And Diversity; Increase
Diversity; Increase The Diversity; Increases Diversity; Increases The Diversity; Increasing
Diversity; Increasing The Diversity; Indigenous Cultural; Indigenous Culture; Indigenous
Cultures; Inequalities; Inequality; Inequitable; Inequities; Inequity; Inter Cultural; Inter
Culturally; Intercultural; Interculturally; Lack Of Diversity; Latinx Cultural; Latinx Culture;
Latinx Cultures; Multi Cultural; Multi Culturally; Multicultural; Multiculturally; Promote
Diversity; Promoting Diversity; Segregated Cultures; Social Activism; Social Activist; Social
Activists; Social Advocacy; Social Advocate; Social Bias; Social Biases; Social Inequalities;
Social Inequality; Social Inequities; Social Inequity; Social Injustice; Social Injustices; Social
Justice; Social Justice Activism; Social Justice Advocacy; Social Justice Advocate; Socially
Biased; Socio Cultural; Socio Culturally; Sociocultural; Socioculturally; Structural Inequality;
Structural Inequity; Support Diversity; Supporting Diversity; Trans Cultural; Transcultural;
Socially Relevant; Culturally Relevant.

Gender Bigot; Bigotry; Black Female; Black Females; Black Male; Black Males; Black Men;
Black Women; Cisgender; Cisnormative; Cisnormativity; Colored Female; Colored Females;
Colored Male; Colored Males; Colored Men; Colored Women; Female; Female Voices;
Females; Femininity; Feminism; Feminist; Feministic; Fluid Identity; Gender; Gender
Acceptance; Gender Affirmation; Gender Affirming; Gender And Sexual; Gender Appreciation;
Gender Based; Gender Binary; Gender Discrimination; Gender Disparities; Gender Disparity;
Gender Diversity; Gender Dysmorphia; Gender Dysphoria; Gender Fluid; Gender Fluidity;
Gender Identity; Gender Ideology; Gender Inclusive; Gender Inclusivity; Gender Marginalized;
Gender Minorities; Gender Minority; Gender Neural; Gender Non Binary; Gender Non
Conforming; Gender Nonbinary; Gender Nonconforming; Gender Oppression; Gender
Preference; Gender Preferences; Gender Spectrum; Gender Stereotypes; Gender Transition;
Gender Transitioning; Gender Typical; Genders; Heterosexual; Hispanic Female; Hispanic
Females; Hispanic Male; Hispanic Males; Hispanic Men; Hispanic Women; Historically Male;
Indigenous Female; Indigenous Females; Indigenous Male; Indigenous Males; Indigenous Men;
Indigenous Women; Intersectional Feminism; Latina Female; Latina Females; Latina Male;
Latina Males; Latina Men; Latina Women; Latinx Female; Latinx Females; Latinx Male; Latinx
Males; Latinx Men; Latinx Women; LGBT; LGBTQ; LGBTQ+; LGBTQIA; Male Dominant;
Male Dominated; Masculine; Masculinity; Mis Gender; Misgender; Misogynistic; Misogyny;
Non Binary; Non Binary Gender; Non Conforming Gender; Nonbinary; Nonbinary Gender;
Nonconforming Gender; Oppressed Gender; Oppressed Genders; Oppressed Sexualities;
Pansexual; Predominately Male; Preferred Gender; Preferred Identity; Preferred Sex; Primarily
Male; Pronoun; Pronouns; Queer Theory; Self Identify; Sex Change; Sex Preference; Sex
Transition; Sexism; Sexist; Sexual Discrimination; Sexual Disparities; Sexual Disparity; Sexual
Identity; Sexual Minorities; Sexual Minority; Sexual Preference; Sexual Preferences; Sexualities;
Sexuality; Straight White; Toxic Masculinity; Transgender; Transgenderism; Transitioning
Gender; Transitioning Sex; Transjustice; Transphobia; Transphobic; Underrepresented Gender;
Voices Of Women; White Female; White Females; White Male; White Males; White Men;


                                                                                                     38

                      RANKING       MEMBER       ZOE    LOFGREN       (CA-18)
                 U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES COMMITTEE ON
                        SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY                                               A
                              DEMOCRATIC STAFF REPORT                                                uy &
White Women; Women; Women And Gender; Women And Underrepresented; Women
Underrepresented.

Race Anti Black; Anti Black Racism; Anti Racism; Anti Racist; Anti White; Antiblack;
Antiblack Racism; Antiracism; Antiracist; Antiwhite; BIPOC; BIPOCX; Black And Latinx;
Black Communities; Black Community; Black Indigenous And Latinx; Black Indigenous And
Other; Black Indigenous Latinx; Black Indigenous Other; Black Individual; Black Individuals;
Black Intellectualism; Black Lives Matter; Black Minorities; Black Minority; Black People;
Black Person; Black Thought; Black Voices; Blackness; Colored Communities; Colored
Community; Colored Individual; Colored Individuals; Colored Minorities; Colored Minority;
Colored People; Colored Person; Colored Voices; Critical Race Theory; Ethnic And Racial;
Ethnic Bias; Ethnic Communities; Ethnic Community; Ethnic Identities; Ethnic Identity; Ethnic
Individual; Ethnic Individuals; Ethnic Minorities; Ethnic Minority; Ethnic People; Ethnic Person;
Ethnic Racism; Ethnic Segregation; Ethnic Voices; Ethnical Racism; Ethnicities And Races;
Ethnicity; Ethnicity And Race; Hispanic Communities; Hispanic Community; Hispanic
Individual; Hispanic Individuals; Hispanic Minorities; Hispanic Minority; Hispanic People;
Hispanic Person; Hispanic Voices; Historical Racism; Historically Racist; Historically White;
Indigenous Communities; Indigenous Community; Indigenous Individual; Indigenous
Individuals; Indigenous Minorities; Indigenous Minority; Indigenous People; Indigenous Person;
Indigenous Voices; Institutional Racism; Institutionalized Racism; Institutionally Racist; Inter
Racial; Inter Racially; Interracial; Interracially; Latina Communities; Latina Community; Latina
Individual; Latina Individuals; Latina Minorities; Latina Minority; Latina People; Latina Person;
Latina Voices; Latinx Communities; Latinx Community; Latinx Individual; Latinx Individuals;
Latinx Minorities; Latinx Minority; Latinx People; Latinx Person; Latinx Voices; Multi Ethnic;
Multi Ethnically; Multiethnic; Multiethnically; Non Black; Non White; Nonblack; Nonwhite;
People Of Color; POC; POCX; Predominately White; Primarily White; Privileged White; Pro
Black; Pro White; Problack; Prowhite; Race And Culture; Race And Ethnicity; Race Based;
Racebased; Races And Cultures; Races And Ethnicities; Racial; Racial And Cultural; Racial And
Ethnic; Racial Bias; Racial Biases; Racial Disparities; Racial Disparity; Racial Diversity; Racial
Identity; Racial Inequalities; Racial Inequality; Racial Inequities; Racial Inequity; Racial
Injustice; Racial Injustices; Racial Justice; Racial Minorities; Racial Minority; Racial
Oppression; Racial Prejudice; Racial Prejudices; Racial Segregation; Racial Socialization; Racial
Solidarity; Racial Stereotypes; Racial Violence; Racially; Racially And Culturally; Racially
Bias; Racially Biased; Racially Oppressed; Racism; Racist; Segregated Ethnicities; Segregated
Ethnicity; Segregated Race; Segregated Races; Structural Racism; Structurally Racist; Systemic
Racism; Systemically Racist; Tokenistic; Tokensim; Trans Ethnic; Transethnic; White
Colonialism; White Colonization; White Colonizer; White Colonizers; White Fragility; White
Historically; White Nationalism; White Nationalist; White People; White Person; White
Privilege; White Serving; White Supremacy; Whiteness.

Environmental Justice Climate Action; Climate Conscious; Climate Consciousness; Climate
Equality; Climate Equity; Climate Justice; Climate Research; Eco Cultural; Ecocultural;
Environment Conscious; Environment Consciousness; Environmental Conscious; Environmental
Consciousness; Environmental Equality; Environmental Equity; Environmental Governance;
Environmental Justice; Environmental Social; Environmentalgovernance; Environmentally
Conscious; Environmentalsocial; ESG; ESG Effort; ESG Efforts; ESG Initiative; ESG


                                                                                                39

                     RANKING       MEMBER      ZOE    LOFGREN      (CA-18)
                 U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES COMMITTEE ON
                        SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY
                           DEMOCRATIC STAFF REPORT                                                    uy &
Initiatives; Green New Deal; Net Zero; Netzero; Social Environmental; Socialenvironmental;
Climate Injustice; Climate Justices; Climate Injustices; Climate Change; Green Infrastructure;
Green Society; Clean Energy




                                                                                                 40

                     RANKING       MEMBER      ZOE   LOFGREN       (CA-18)
                U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES COMMITTEE ON
                       SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY                            :
                             DEMOCRATIC STAFF REPORT                             uy &
Appendix II — Research Funding to be Removed by the Cruz Report, By Topic

   e   $321M in awards with keywords including “energy”.
   e   $233M in awards with keywords including “space”.
   e   $217M in awards with keywords including “artificial intelligence”.
   e   $205M in awards with keywords including “manufacturing”.
   e   $79M in awards with keywords including “transportation”.
   e   $123M in awards with keywords including “sensing”.
   e   $113M in awards with keywords including “agriculture”.
   e   $104M in awards with keywords including “disease”.
   e   $74M in awards with keywords including “quantum”.
   e   $45M in awards with keywords including “biotechnology”.
   e   $38M in awards with keywords including “robotics”.
   e   $18M in awards with keywords including “advanced materials”.
   e   $18M in awards with keywords including “cancer’’.
   e   $42M in awards with keywords including “poverty”.
   e   $57M in awards with keywords including “‘fire’’.
   e   $16M in awards with keywords including “earthquake”.




                                                                            41

                    RANKING       MEMBER      ZOE   LOFGREN       (CA-18)
                    U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES COMMITTEE ON
                           SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY                                                                A
                                    DEMOCRATIC STAFF REPORT                                                              uy &
Appendix III - DEI Terminology

For the purpose of this report, Science Committee Minority staff used the phrases ‘DEI’ and
‘neo-Marxist’ in ways that aligned with the use of those phrases in the Cruz Report. However,
there are no consensus definitions for “diversity, equity, and inclusion,’ or ‘woke’ or ‘neo-
Marxist’ for that matter. The Cruz Report did not provide a definition of what Senator Cruz
considered to be part of diversity, equity, or inclusion (DEI) or neo-Marxist and instead opted to
define such activities as those that contained at least one of approximately 200 keywords from a
curated list that included technical phrases such as “female” and “climate research” (for full list,
see Appendix I).

While we acknowledge that interpretation of DEI (and DEJA) may be context-dependent, we
found the definitions used by the previous administration to be helpful: °/
      e    The term “diversity” means the practice of including the many communities, identities,
           races, ethnicities, backgrounds, abilities, cultures, and beliefs of the American people,
           including underserved communities.
      e    The term “equity” means the consistent and systematic fair, just, and impartial treatment
           of all individuals, including individuals who belong to underserved communities
           that have been denied such treatment.
      e    The term “inclusion” means the recognition, appreciation, and use of the talents and skills
           of employees of all backgrounds.
      e    The term “accessibility” means the design, construction, development, and maintenance
           of facilities, information and communication technology, programs, and services so that
           all people, including people with disabilities, can fully and independently use them.

At no point in promoting DEJA did the Biden-Harris Administration seek to undermine merit-
based hiring. To the contrary, they instructed agencies that “all persons should receive equal
treatment under the law” and that “[a]ll employees and applicants for employment should receive
fair and equitable treatment in all aspects of personnel management” in accordance with
statute.®* While colloquial definitions often limit DEI to racial demographics, gender identity,
and sexual orientations, the Biden-Harris Administration included individuals who belong to
communities that face discrimination based on their religion or disability; first-generation
professionals or first-generation college students; individuals who belong to communities that
may face employment barriers based on older age or former incarceration; persons who live in
rural areas, veterans and military spouses, and persons otherwise adversely affected by persistent
poverty, discrimination, or inequality.®° All of these groups are incorporated in federal agency
DEI activities — by attacking all of NSF’s DEI programs, Senator Cruz attacked efforts involving
veterans, rural areas, and people living in poverty.




81 (2021, June 25). Executive Order on Diversity, Equity, Inclusion, and Accessibility in the   Federal Workforce. The
White House. https://bidenwhitehouse.archives.gov/briefing-room/presidential-actions/2021/06/25/executive-order-
on-diversity-equity-inclusion-and-accessibility-in-the-federal-workforce/
82 Ibid.
83 Thid.

                                                                                                                    42

                          RANKING         MEMBER         ZOE     LOFGREN         (CA-18)
