HealtnHiV
August 20, 2024


We would like to first commend the Board for its inclusion—and the effective synthesis—of the concerns
from constituent groups in its recent report. As the Board continues its efforts to evaluate the cost of
prescription drugs in the State of Oregon, ongoing stakeholder engagement remains incredibly important.

However,   we are concerned   that during the Board’s paused   considerations of HIV antiretroviral (ART)
drug affordability reviews, some of Oregon's largest community-based HIV service organizations, as well
as the state's AIDS Drug Assistance Program (ADAP), were not publicly included in these initial PDAB
stakeholder engagement opportunities. While we recognize that certain 340B entities were involved, we
believe that the absence of these critical HIV-focused advocacy groups and ADAP limits the
representativeness and inclusivity of the discussions, particularly concerning person-first HIV care
continuum considerations.

Additionally, it was mentioned during previous meetings that the Oregon Health Authority (OHA), which
oversees CAREAssist, has been in conversations with the Board and CAREAssist’s service contractors,
including 340B covered entities, regarding the potential effects of any resulting PDAB work products (such
as UPL effects on ecosystems).

As you are aware, CAREAssist is vital in helping low-income Oregonians living with HIV access and afford
necessary medications, medical care, and other outpatient support services. We would also welcome any
additional feedback from those discussions, or from others involving additional payors, such as OHA’s
HIV Care and Treatment Program, which plays a crucial role in coordinating services for people living with
HIV, including those on Medicaid. This program ensures that HIV providers have the necessary support
and resources to deliver care to low-income     individuals living with HIV who   are enrolled in Oregon
Medicaid.

We look forward to continued engagement in the Board’s ongoing work.

Respectfully stated,
Scott D. Bertani
Director of Advocacy, HealthHIV
Consumer Cost Factors in Capping Drug Prices

My name is Mark Sturbois and this will be the 3rd time | have testified to this committee.
| have pretty much the same message. | won't belabor the research and development
which is my only avenue to cure my untreatable terminal cancer. | will focus on outside
factors that are part of the equation .
| would like to incorporate some of the testimony from the last meeting in my remarks.
First we need to reform the independent board that decides reimbursement for
Medicare and Medicaid. This year they imposed a 3.4 to 3.6 increase when the Models
forecast 4 to 4.1%.
This causes many rural providers to stop accepting Medicare patients because they
start off losing money. This causes patients to have to drive to other areas just to see a
doctor.
This board needs to at least come to a break even point.
Second let’s stop allowing carriers to form a dummy non transparent company and buy
out rural and in store clinics and folding them into their networks. State leader Ben
Bowman has been a champion on this matter.
Third | learned from the last meeting that when the cost of insulin was capped some
manufacturers stopped making it because it ate into their profit margin creating
shortages in some cases.
Fourth many prescription benefit managers can change the preferred drug of choice for
certain conditions and offer incentives to prescribe. What this can do is take a drug
someone has been taking long term and move it from the let’s say $8 price range to
perhaps 30 or 40.
This plays havoc with small pharmacies like the Brooklyn Pharmacy in Portland who
testified at the last meeting that the flux is making it hard for him to stay in business.
Thank You for your time
             American
             Diabetes
            » Association.
       Connected for Life»


Oregon Prescription Drug Affordability Board and Drug Price Transparency Program
350 Winter Street NE
Salem, OR 97309-0405


Dear Members of the Oregon Prescription Drug Affordability Board and Drug Price
Transparency Program:

Thank you for the opportunity to comment on efforts led by the American Diabetes
Association (ADA) that would improve access to continuous glucose monitors (CGMs) for
Medicaid beneficiaries diagnosed with diabetes who use insulin or have a history of
problematic hypoglycemia.

Continuous glucose monitors help people with diabetes to manage their blood glucose
levels to avoid or delay serious short-term or long-term complications, hospitalizations,
and even death.

To ensure appropriate access to CGMs, ADA advocates for expanded coverage and
elimination of overly restrictive barriers. Through this work, ADA is partnering with people
with diabetes, health care professionals, advocacy groups, and policy makers to address
disparities with CGM access in Medicaid programs. Together, we are working for health
equity through improved access and positive health care outcomes for people with
diabetes.

In addition to providing glucose information directly to the person with diabetes, these
devices also support medication administration in the following ways:

   e     CGMs can connect with insulin pumps to automatically adjust insulin delivery.
   e     Data from using CGMs can help providers adjust medications to prevent adverse
         diabetes events.

New data featured at the American Diabetes Association’s June 2024 Scientific Sessions
highlighted the benefits of continuous glucose monitoring (CGM) in improving glycemic
control and overall diabetes management. '

Some key findings include:
   e   CGM   use in type 2 diabetes results in more than a 50% reduction in all-cause
       hospitalizations and acute diabetes-related hospitalizations. '
   e   The use of CGM    substantially improves glucose control in type 2 diabetes patients
       across all therapeutic treatments. '

Utilization controls and restrictive coverage policies sometimes prevent these devices from
being accessible to individuals who would benefit from them. A recent study conducted by
the American Diabetes Association (ADA) found that poorer, older, black and brown
Americans are less likely to get CGMs. ? According to the study, Medicaid beneficiaries who
take insulin were two to five times less likely to use   a CGM than those with commercial
health insurance coverage. *

Examples of current burdensome criteria for Medicaid beneficiaries in Oregon are the
requirement that a beneficiary has a baseline A1C of 8% and that they are on short-or
intermediate-acting insulin.

The ADA is advocating that the Oregon Health Plan provide coverage for continuous
glucose monitors and related supplies for the treatment of a Medicaid recipient if:

   e   The recipient has been diagnosed by his or her primary care physician, or another
       licensed health care practitioner authorized to make such a diagnosis, with type 1
       diabetes, type 2 diabetes, gestational diabetes, or any other type of diabetes; and
   e   ls treated with insulin; or
   e   The recipient has a history of problematic hypoglycemia

These changes would align with recent changes made by CMS with respect to Medicare.

To qualify for continued coverage, we recommend that the Medicaid recipient be required
to participate in follow-up care with his or her treating health care practitioner, in-person or
through telehealth, at least once every 6 months during the first 18 months after the first
prescription of the continuous glucose monitor has been issued to assess the efficacy of
using the monitor for treatment of his or her diabetes. After the first 18 months, we
recommend that follow-up care must occur at least once every 12 months.

We thank you for your consideration and encourage the Oregon Prescription Drug
Affordability Board & Drug Price Transparency Program to support efforts to improve access
to CGMs to improve health outcomes and address health disparities for Oregonians living
with diabetes.

Should you have any questions regarding these comments         please contact me at
mprokop@diabetes.org
Sincerely,

Matt Prokop
Director, State Government Affairs



‘American Diabetes Association 2024 Scientific Sessions:
https://diabetes.org/newsroom/press-releases/breakthrough-studies-automated-insulin-
delivery-and-cgm-type-2-
diabetes#:~:text=Using%20the%20same%20database%2C%20findings,2%20Diabetes%2
ONot%20Using%20Insulin

American Diabetes Association: https://diabetes.org/sites/default/files/2023-09/ADA-
CGM-Utilization-White-Paper-Oct-2022.pdf
   National
   Multiple Sclerosis
   Society


September       10, 2024

Oregon Division of Financial Regulation
Oregon Prescription        Drug Affordability Board
350 Winter St. SE
Salem, OR 97309

RE: National Multiple Sclerosis Society Policy Recommendations,                Upper Payment Limits

Dear Members        of the Oregon   Prescription   Drug Affordability Board:

Thank you for your continued engagement with all stakeholders and for focusing on the patient
perspective. We appreciate the Prescription Drug Affordability Board’s (Board) leadership and
investigation into the high cost of prescription medications. We encourage the Board to continue its
investigation into all practices that limit access to needed       life-changing therapies   and increase the price
that patients pay for those therapies.

Multiple     sclerosis (MS) is an unpredictable,   often disabling, disease of the central nervous system, which
interrupts    the flow of information within the brain and between the brain and the body. Symptoms
range from numbness         and tingling to blindness    and paralysis. The progression,   severity, and specific
symptoms of MS in any one person cannot yet be predicted, but advances in research and treatment are
moving us closer to a world free of MS. The Society works to cure MS while empowering                 people affected
by MS to live their best lives. To fulfill this mission, we fund cutting-edge research, drive change through
advocacy, facilitate professional education, collaborate with MS organizations around the world, and
provide services designed       to help people affected by MS move their lives forward.

The Society fully supports the establishment of Upper Payment Limits. We look forward to
commenting on the Board recommendations for any MS-related medications identified as cost
burdensome. We applaud the multiprong approach in identifying these medications by referencing data
as well as continuing to engage with stakeholders          who are impacted     by these costs

The National Multiple       Sclerosis Society knows that the price of the medication       is but one aspect of what
makes access to these high-cost prescriptions           out of reach for many people with MS and other
conditions. The Society will continue to look at the entire healthcare system           and encourages legislatures
and boards like this to continue their work in addressing all aspects of the prescription          drug supply chain
that get between      patients and their medications.


Respectfully,


Seth M. Greiner
Senior Manager, Advocacy
Seth.Greiner@NMSS.
                org
                                                             724 Columbia St. NW, Ste. 310 » Olympia, WA 98501         » PHRMA.ORG


RESEARCH      PROGRESS   »© HOPE




September 15, 2024


Oregon Prescription Drug Affordability Board
350 Winter Street NE
Salem, OR 97309-0405
pdab@dcbs.oregon.gov

Re: Oregon Prescription Drug Affordability Board: Draft UPL Approaches and Proposed Policy
Recommendations

Dear Members of the Oregon Prescription Drug Affordability Board:

The Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America (“PhRMA”) is writing in response to the Oregon
Prescription Drug Affordability Board’s (“Board’s”) agenda packet for its September 18, 2024 meeting,
including the Board’s draft discussion of potential approaches to UPL-setting (“UPL Approaches (General
Concepts)”) and Proposed Policy Recommendations (“Proposed Policy Recommendations”) documents
(collectively, the “Meeting   Materials”)... PhRMA    represents  the country’s    leading  innovative
biopharmaceutical research companies, which are laser focused on developing innovative medicines that
transform lives and create a healthier world. Together, we are fighting for solutions to ensure patients can
access and afford medicines that prevent, treat and cure disease.

PhRMA continues to have concerns that any Upper Payment Limit (“UPL”) scheme would arbitrarily cap
pharmaceutical prices, fail to recognize the complexity of the pharmaceutical supply chain, and overlook
meaningful policy alternatives that would substantially reduce the cost of medicines for Oregonians.”                            UPLs
could restrict patient access to medicines, result in fewer new treatments for patients, and ultimately do
not carry any guarantee of savings being passed on to patients. These concerns are not addressed in the
draft UPL Approaches document.               PhRMA cautions the Board against moving forward with recommending
any UPL plan given the risks and questions associated with such price controls. Below, PhRMA                                provides
more       details about      its concerns   regarding the potential       approaches    to UPL setting and        implementation
described in the Meeting Materials.

     I.          Lack of Opportunity for Meaningful Comment


PhRMA reiterates its concerns that stakeholders are not being provided adequate time to meaningfully
comment on the Board’s meeting materials.? Consistent with its general practice, the Board has only
provided two business days to analyze and comment                      on the concepts described in the Meeting Materials.


1 Referred to herein, respectively, as the “draft UPL Approaches” and “Proposed Policy Recommendations” documents. See
Meeting Materials (September 18, 2024), available at https://dfr.oregon.gov/pdab/Documents/20240918-PDAB-document-
package.pdf. PhRMA is not commenting on the “Presentation by OHSU Center for Evidence-Based Policy”. Similarly, the
“Medicare MFP modeling presentation & Senate Bill 192 upper payment limit discussion” material was not included in the
September meeting materials and PhRMA reserves its comments on those materials until a later date.
2 A proposed UPL scheme would raise concerns under the Supremacy Clause of the U.S. Constitution, among other constitutional
concerns. See, e.g., BIO v. District of Columbia, 496 F.3d 1362 (2007); Amgen v. Colo. Prescr. Drug Affordability Rev. Bd., No. 1:24-
cv-00810 (D. Colo. filed Mar. 22, 2024). In filing this comment letter, PHRMA reserves all rights to legal arguments with respect to
Oregon Senate Bill 844 (2021), as amended by Oregon Senate Bill 192 (2023) (collectively, the “PDAB Statute”). PHRMA also
incorporates by reference all prior comment letters to the extent applicable.
3 See Letter from PhRMA to Board (July 31, 2022), 2-3.
                                                                   1
                                                              724 Columbia St. NW, Ste. 310 » Olympia, WA 98501         » PHRMA.ORG


RESEARCH            PROGRESS   »© HOPE




In order to get meaningful feedback from a broad range of stakeholders, the Board should provide more
than         half    a week to analyze and    draft comments     on these     materials, especially given the complexity of
analyzing different UPL alternatives and the significant ramifications of any Board recommendations to the
Legislature. Key stakeholders may not be able to provide full written feedback given the Board’s artificially
short timeline. The Board should allow for a more reasonable time period to analyze and comment on its
policy deliberations as well as clear timelines and processes for the Board to address stakeholder feedback
in a manner that is clear and transparent.*

       ll.             Draft UPL Approaches


The draft UPL Approaches document lists several potential methods to calculate UPLs, but lacks key details
on how these methods would be implemented and operationalized. PhRMA reiterates that the lack of
specificity in the document inhibits our ability to meaningfully comment on these materials. In addition,
although the Board indicates that four states have enacted laws with authority to set a UPL for certain
medicines, no state has implemented a UPL to date.’ Similar to the policies contemplated in those other
states, the Board’s draft UPL Approaches document drastically oversimplifies the complexity of the
pharmaceutical payment and reimbursement system and the operational concerns posed by UPLs across a
variety of supply chain entities.®

PhRMA           notes that much of the discussion in the draft UPL Approaches document appears to reflect input
from a single source and does not incorporate the feedback that constituent stakeholders have provided to
the Board over the past few months via the constituent surveys, focus groups, and panel discussion. The
Board should consider whether the apparent lack of consideration of information from other stakeholders
may have biased the draft UPL Approaches document, and in particular, whether it may have not considered
the potential downsides of each approach or consideration of issues that could affect implementation in
Oregon. Finally, there is no mechanism to ensure that any savings generated by the various UPL approaches
would ultimately flow to Oregon patients. PhRMA reiterates that the Board should provide additional, and
far more detailed, policy proposals regarding UPL calculation methods.

These approaches lack sufficient detail to provide a meaningful evaluation of the impacts or challenges of
any approach. Notwithstanding its concerns, PARMA addresses each potential UPL approach described in
the draft UPL Approaches document                 below and seeks to offer its feedback and concerns regarding the
potential options based on the limited information that the Board has provided:




4 PhRMA also emphasizes that if UPL authority is ultimately enacted by the Oregon Legislature, the Oregon APA requires that a
separate rulemaking be conducted to establish the specific definitions, standards, and processes that will govern any UPL
processes. As detailed below, the draft UPL Approaches and other Meeting Materials fail to provide adequate specificity that
stakeholders would need to understand how a UPL would be operationalized and would not be sufficient to implement a future
UPL process. Even if granted the statutory authority to impose a UPL, the Board could not implement a UPL consistent with the
requirements of the Oregon APA unless the Board first adopts comprehensive regulations governing each procedural step, factor,
and methodology described in the draft UPL Approaches document through notice-and-comment rulemaking. A UPL process
implemented without notice-and-comment rules providing consistent and transparent guidelines to govern it would undermine
the ability of the Board to conduct its work in a manner that is “rational, principled, and fair, rather than ad hoc and arbitrary,” as
required under the Oregon Administrative Procedures Act (“APA”). Gordon v. Bd. of Parole & Post Prison Supervision, 343 Or. 618,
633 (2007). See also, e.g., Letter from PhRMA to Board 2 (Feb. 11, 2023) (providing a more detailed discussion of the Board’s
obligations under the APA).
> Meeting Materials at 21-23.
6 See, e.g., Letter from PhRMA to the Maryland Prescription Drug Affordability Board (Aug. 26, 2024).

                                                                   2
                                                              724 Columbia St. NW, Ste. 310 » Olympia, WA 98501            » PHRMA.ORG


RESEARCH   PROGRESS    »© HOPE




           “Net Cost”:’ The Board’s “Net Cost” approach describes setting a UPL “at or near the existing
           average net price of the drug after any rebates or discounts negotiated between the drug
           manufacturer and the PBM.”® However, it is unclear which “average existing net price” the UPL
           would reference, since the net price of a drug is unique to a specific payor, market, and group of
           patients. This approach    lacks sufficient detail for a meaningful        evaluation of risks or
           implementation challenges. Additional details are needed to provide more specific comments on
           the approach,           as the Board    has offered     only a vague         description   of how    it would   identify the
           average net price of a particular drug.


           “Reference            Pricing to Existing Benchmarks”:?            PhRMA      has serious concerns about the use of
           reference prices under this approach, as well as the specific reference benchmarks under the
           Board’s consideration. For example, one possible reference point included in the approach is the
           Maximum Fair Price under the Medicare Drug Price Negotiation Program.’° Consideration of the
           Maximum Fair Price is premature. The Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services only recently
           released the Maximum Fair Prices for the first set of qualifying drugs, and they do not go into effect
           until 2026. Further, the federal program has only just gotten off the ground and, as such, it will
           take years to understand its effect on patient affordability and access. Additionally, the federal
           program considers prices for the Medicare population, which is drastically different in key respects
           (e.g., demographics, age, and diversity) from the Oregon patient population for which the Board
           may    eventually consider setting a UPL.               PhRMA        encourages      the Board      to focus on data and
           benchmarks that are relevant to the Oregon                   patient population, which is the focus of the PDAB
           statute.”*

           The document also includes “the price of drugs negotiated by other countries” as another potential
           reference price benchmark.” This approach lacks specificity, but the use of international pricing
           data   to     determine       UPLs     is concerning.    The       Board’s    approach     does     not   acknowledge    the
           demonstrated            negative effect of international prices on patient access. The prices in many                   non-
           U.S. countries are the result of government price setting that have significantly limited patient
           access to new drugs. For instance, while 85 percent of all new medicines launched between 2012
           and    2021     are reimbursed         in the Medicare       and     Medicaid     programs,       only 61 percent of new
           medicines are reimbursed             in Germany, 48 percent in the United Kingdom, 43 percent in France,
           and 21 percent in Canada.*®

           Additionally, the international reference pricing approach                      does not include any discussion of the
           data that the Board will use to determine international reference prices. If the Board intends to
           rely on public or proprietary sources for such data, it should be aware that there are numerous
           issues with international pricing data, including that international pricing data is generally collected


7 Draft UPL Approaches at 4.
8 Id.
2 Draft UPL Approaches at 4-5.
10 Draft UPL Approaches at 4.
11 ORS § 646A.693(1).
12 Draft UPL Approaches at 4.
13 See PhRMA analysis of IQVIA MIDAS and country regulatory data, October 2022 (Note: New active substances approved by FDA,
EMA and/or PMDA and first launched in any country between January 1, 2012, and December 31, 2021). A medicine is considered
publicly reimbursed in Canada if 50 percent or more of the population lives in a province where the medicine is reimbursed by the
public plan. A medicine is considered publicly reimbursed in the United Kingdom if the medicine is recommended by England’s
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) for funding by England’s National Health Services (NHS).

                                                                    3
                                                              724 Columbia St. NW, Ste. 310 » Olympia, WA 98501        » PHRMA.ORG


RESEARCH    PROGRESS   »© HOPE




           at different levels in each country. For example, in some countries data is collected at the hospital
           level, while in other countries it is collected only at a higher level, such as the wholesale level.
           International         pricing data   aggregators   often then     use proprietary      methods     to estimate     whole-
           country sales volumes and prices. As such, the data represents proprietary and non-transparent
           estimates of drug sales and volume and is not reflective of actual transaction or volume
           information. These proprietary estimates would not be appropriate to use as a method to establish
           a UPL. Further, many sources of international pricing data are licensed on a confidential basis to
           subscribers for their internal use, and it is unclear how the Board’s approach would plan to use the
           data to establish a UPL, given such restrictions on use.


           “Reference Pricing to Therapeutic Alternatives”:"* Consistent with PhRMA’s previous comments
           on the Board’s definition of therapeutic alternatives, PhRMA is concerned that this approach would
           lead to invalid comparisons being used for purposes of determining UPL amounts, as well as
           products being erroneously designated as therapeutic alternatives, even where such products are
           not appropriate options for all patients.*? PhRMA urges the Board to consider how it would define
           therapeutic alternatives to avoid misleading comparisons                   between     distinct products and setting
           prices based on those flawed comparisons.’© Additional details are needed to provide more specific
           comments on the approach, as the Board has offered only a vague description of how it would
           identify a UPL based on whether other drugs are identified as “therapeutic alternatives.”*”


           “Launch Price Indexing”:"? With only minimal detail, the Board describes a “launch price indexing”
           UPL as one potential approach.‘? PhRMA requests the Board provide additional clarification
           regarding this approach, including how it intends to adjust launch prices for inflation and
           specifically, which inflation measures it intends to use for this purpose. Inflation measures are not
           necessarily aligned with what is happening in health care, as medical inflation typically is higher
           than general inflation. Rather than setting UPLs based on pricing decisions made years ago, the
           Board should focus on patient-centric drug pricing reforms that lower patient out-of-pocket costs
           for medicines today.


           “Percentage off of WAC”’:?° The document’s “percentage off of WAC” approach describes
           establishing “a UPL that is a fixed percentage off of” a drug’s Wholesale Acquisition Cost (“WAC”).77
           However, WAC is an inappropriate metric by which to set a UPL for a drug, as it does not account
           for the rebates, discounts, and other price concessions provided to the government, pharmacy
           benefit managers, and health insurers by drug manufacturers. Policymakers should be cautious
           about proposals that attempt to set prices for drugs based only on list, or WAC, price without
           taking into consideration what patients are likely to actually pay for their medications. Policies like

14 Draft UPL Approaches at 5-6.
15 See Letter from PhRMA to Board regarding Oregon Prescription Drug Affordability Review: Meeting Materials Related to
Affordability Review Rule 925-200-0010 at 2 (Oct. 15, 2023).
16 Specifically, PHRMA asks that the Board establish a process through regulation for each drug to determine whether it can be
appropriately considered to be a “therapeutic alternative.” The process should include meaningful engagement with the
manufacturer and local medical professionals on potential therapeutic alternatives; review of clinician guidance, including
physician-driven evidence-based clinical guidelines, as a resource; and review of other widely recognized, scientifically rigorous,
evidence-driven resources to identify therapeutic alternatives.
17 Draft UPL Approaches at 5-6.
18 Draft UPL Approaches at 6.
19 Id.
20 Id.
21 Id.
                                                              724 Columbia St. NW, Ste. 310 » Olympia, WA 98501         » PHRMA.ORG


RESEARCH       PROGRESS   »© HOPE




               this ignore the role played by health insurers and PBMs, which dictate the terms of coverage for
               medicines and the amount a patient ultimately pays. Because WAC does not account for these
               factors, PhRMA is concerned that this approach would lead to UPLs that are arbitrarily established
               and could result in serious repercussions for patient access.


               “Payer Return on Investment (ROI)”:22 PhRMA is concerned that the Payer Return on Investment
               (ROI) approach described by the Board would rely on “pharmacoeconomic research on value/cost
               savings” for determining a UPL, which would incorporate Cost Effectiveness Analyses (“CEA”) into
               the process of establishing a UPL.2? While this approach does not specify the types of CEAs that the
               Board would rely on, PhRRMA emphasizes that the PDAB Statute prohibits using certain types of
               CEA, including CEAs that use Quality Adjusted Life Years (“QALYs”) “or similar formulas that take
               into account a patient's age or severity of illness or disability” as part of its affordability reviews.”4
               QALYs and other metrics like “equal value of life year gained” (“evLYG”) raise significant equity
               concerns, as these metrics have been shown to discriminate against people with disabilities, the
               elderly, and communities of color by placing lower value on their lives and the preservation of
               life.2° For this reason, PhRMA believes that the use of QALYs is inappropriate in setting a potential
               UPL.

               More broadly, policies that are based on cost-effectiveness determinations can prevent patients
               from accessing the treatments that best meet their personal needs and preferences, and override
               physician judgment in making individualized treatment decisions. By combining average study
               results into a single numeric judgment of value, CEAs overlook the significant differences in the
               needs of individual patients, many of whom do not fit the average. As one patient group has noted,
               “Tilt is widely acknowledged that       a summary      measure such as [those used in CEAs] will never be
               able to adequately capture the vast differences in individual preferences and values.””° It has also
               been widely noted by stakeholders that CEAs discriminate against individuals with disabilities and
               chronic illnesses by undervaluing their lives.2” Experts in the field of CEA recently acknowledged
               that “the problem of whether CEA unjustly discriminates against the disabled remains a deep and
               unresolved difficulty for the use of CEA.”7°

               Cost-effectiveness analysis can also contribute to perpetuating                longstanding inequities in health
               care and health outcomes. The assumptions used in CEAs disadvantage marginalized populations
               through use of QALYs, health care costs, as well as assumptions around lost productivity.2? These
               assumptions undermine health interventions that may improve health for marginalized
               populations and favor interventions that will further the status quo of inequity. PHRMA urges the

22 Id,
23 Id.
24 ORS § 646A.694(4)(a).
25 National Council on Disability, Quality-Adjusted Life Years and the Devaluation of Life with Disability 3 (Nov. 2019), available at
https://ncd.gov/sites/default/files/NCD Quality Adjusted Life Report 508.pdf; Broder, M., Ortendahl, J., /s Cost-Effectiveness
Analysis Racist? Partnership for Health Analytic Research (2021), available at https://blogsite.healtheconomics.com/2021/08/is-
cost-effectiveness-analysis-racist/.
26 Partnership to Improve Patient Care, Measuring Value in Medicine: Uses and Misuses of QALYs (2017), available at
http://www.pipcpatients.org/uploads/1/2/9/0/12902828/pipc white paper - measuring value _in medicine -
  uses   and   misuses    of the    galy.pdf.
27 Id.
28 P, Neumann, G. Sanders, et al. Cost Effectiveness in Health and Medicine (2d. ed., 2017).
29 Sanjay Basu, Atheendar S. Venkataramani, & Dean Schillinger, The Risk Of Perpetuating Health Disparities Through Cost-
Effectiveness Analyses, 43 Health Affairs 1165-72 (2024).
                                                            724 Columbia St. NW, Ste. 310 » Olympia, WA 98501     » PHRMA.ORG


RESEARCH      PROGRESS   © HOPE




             Board to reconsider its potential use of CEAs, as these methods result in “systematic
             underestimation of cost-effectiveness for marginalized populations [and] can contribute to further
             entrenchment of health inequities.”°°

             “Budget Impact-Based”:*! The Board has only offered minimal detail on how this approach would
             be implemented, so it is difficult to provide meaningful comment on or evaluate the approach.*”
             Among other things, PhRRMA requests that the Board offer additional information on how the
             Board will determine the “given budget” that the UPL would be measured against, and how the
             Board would determine what percentage or threshold of the budget that the expenditure on a
             particular drug would be capped at. PhRMA notes that payers and other analysts have historically
             overestimated the potential costs of providing access to new medicines, and the speculative
             nature of such projections makes them inappropriate to use for UPL-setting.*?


             “340B Program-Specific’:**         The Board    is required    by SB 192 to provide the Oregon          Legislature
             with an analysis of the “potential savings from or costs of implementing the [UPL] plan with respect
             to: The state; Insurers, Hospitals, Pharmacies, and Consumers.”?° As the PDAB examines the impact
             of UPLs on 340B entity reimbursement as part of this analysis, PHRMA asks the Board to consider
             the breadth of research on the 340B program's impact on state spending, consumer and employer
             costs, and overall costs to the health care system. Studies have found that the federal 340B
             program can increase costs to patients, insurers, states, and employers.2° PhRMA asks that the
             Board account for the dynamics highlighted in these studies if the Board considers 340B program-
             specific elements as part of the UPL implementation approach in its SB 192-required savings
             analysis.

The draft UPL Approaches document also includes high-level bullets describing potential approaches to
implementing a UPL in the pharmaceutical supply chain. The assumptions that the Board appears to make
about various methods of implementing               a UPL demonstrate a lack of understanding of the complexity and
interconnected nature of the pharmaceutical supply chain. PHRMA encourages the board to seek input from
other      supply   chain     stakeholders,   including   wholesalers,     to better   understand    the   complexity     of the
pharmaceutical supply chain and the potential impact of any changes to business operations.

While the details provided           are minimal,   PhRMA     provides feedback on what the Board            has provided,     as
follows:


30 Id.
31 Draft UPL Approaches at 7.
32 Id,
33 See, for example, ICER, “ICER Releases Final Report on Use of PCSK9 Inhibitors for Treatment of High Cholesterol,” Nov. 24,
2015, available at: https://icer.org/news-insights/press-releases/icer-releases-final-report-on-use-of-pcsk9-inhibitors-for-
treatment-of-high-cholesterol-2/; Drug Discovery & Development, “Analysis Finds Actual Cost of New Drugs Is Far Less than
Predicted,” Apr. 25, 2017, available at: https://www.drugdiscoverytrends.com/analysis-finds-actual-cost-of-new-drugs-is-far-less-
than-predicted
34 Id.
35 2023 Or. Laws ch. 466 (Senate Bill 192), sec. 3(2)(b) (codified at ORS § 646A.685) (cleaned up).
36 See Martin R, Illich K. IQVIA, https://www.iqvia.com/-/media/iqvia/pdfs/us/white-paper/are-discounts-in-the-340b-drug-
discount-program-being-shared-with-patients-at-contract-pharmacies.pdf; Liu ITT, Wang J, Sarpatwari A, Kesselheim A, Feldman
WB. Commercial markups on pediatric oncology drugs at 340B pediatric hospitals. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2024; 71:e31158.
https://doi.org/10.1002/pbc.31158; N.C. State Health Plan for Teachers and State Employees, “State Treasurer Folwell Finds North
Carolina 340B Hospitals Overcharged State Employees for Cancer Drugs, Reaped Thousands of Dollars in Profits Per Claim,”
https://www.shpnc.org/what-the-health/north-carolina-340b-hospitals-overcharged-state-employees-cancer-drugs

                                                                 6
                                                           724 Columbia St. NW, Ste. 310 » Olympia, WA 98501       » PHRMA.ORG


RESEARCH    PROGRESS   »© HOPE




           “Supply Chain UPL”:*’ The Board’s discussion of this effectuation approach seems to imply that a
           “supply chain UPL” would be simpler to implement than other alternatives.°° It is unclear what the
           basis of such an assumption is, as a supply chain UPL could raise operational complexities, and the
           Board’s description of this option fails to address complex methodological issues that this method
           would inevitably create. For example, in the pharmaceutical supply chain, retail drugs typically move
           from manufacturers to wholesalers (and to dispensers) throughout the United States based on
           WAC. Utilizing a different metric (for instance, a UPL) solely for Oregon would present significant
           complexities that the Board has failed to address.*? The Board should not underweight the
           complexity of this approach and how it may not align with how the pharmaceutical supply chain
           functions.

           “Rebate UPL”:*° The discussion of this option notes that “[r]ebate UPLs may be more resource
           intensive than supply chain UPL for manufacturers and providers or health plans depending on how
           they are structured.”** It is unclear how the Board came to this conclusion. PRRMA requests
           additional information on how the Board would effectuate a UPL using post-sale (retrospective)
           rebates, including how the Board would ensure that only UPL-eligible patients receive the UPL price.
           As the Board continues to consider options for implementing the UPL, we strongly encourage the
           Board to continue to seek robust feedback from supply chain stakeholders, including those with
           first-hand experience with        post-sale    price   adjustments,     about    the   feasibility   of various    UPL
           implementation options.


           Best Price Impact: The Board states, as part of its discussion of potential UPL approaches, that
           “{ujnder current law, a Board should avoid creating a UPL that creates a new Best Price, as it would
           likely automatically be extended to every state Medicaid Program.”** PhRMA requests that the
           Board provide greater detail as to how the Board envisions establishing and implementing various
           UPLs ina manner that prevents impacting Best Price. As the Board is aware, a UPL might not impact
           Best Price at the time the UPL is put in place, but that may change, as a drug’s Best Price can
           fluctuate over time as it is reported on a quarterly basis. We encourage the Board to further detail
           how it intends to avoid setting a new lower Best Price, which as the Board acknowledges, could
           have nationwide effect. The Board should also allow for further stakeholder comment on this topic.

               Proposed Policy Recommendations

The Meeting Materials include a series of Proposed Policy Recommendations.                        Without specific legislative
language to reply to, PhRMA       offers high-level comments     on several                        of the proposed      policy
recommendations outlined in the Board’s Meeting Materials, as follows:


37 Draft UPL Approaches at 8-9.
38 fd. (characterizing the “Supply Chain UPL” approach as “the process used today for most drugs using WAC pricing,” while stating
that the “Rebate UPL” “may be more resource intensive” for stakeholders).
39 PhRMA highlights that, for both the Supply Chain and Rebate UPL approaches, the UPL Approach document has provided no
details on how it would limit the UPL to its intended scope. There is no mechanism described in the document to ensure that UPL
prices are limited to those that are statutorily authorized to be the recipients of that price. As the document notes that
“Ip]reventing/monitoring for diversion may be easier using rebate UPL” than for the Supply Chain UPL approach, this concern is
particularly acute with respect to the Supply Chain UPL approach.
40 Id.
41 fd.
42 Draft UPL Approaches at 7.
                                                            724 Columbia St. NW, Ste. 310 » Olympia, WA 98501         » PHRMA.ORG


RESEARCH    PROGRESS   »© HOPE




           “Nine Drugs Per Year” Requirement: The Board proposes to recommend that the legislature
           “revis[e] language in SB 844 to remove [the] requirement to review nine drugs and change the
           language to ‘review up to nine prescription drugs’”4? The Board indicates the reason for this
           recommendation is to “ensure that the board focuses on reviewing drugs that are known to cause
           affordability challenges, based solely on cost or criteria, rather than trying to identify drugs that may
           or may not cause challenges to the health system or out-of-pocket costs to meet legislative
           thresholds.”“ The PDAB Statute currently requires that the Board “identify nine drugs ... that [it]
           determines may create affordability challenges ... based on” its review of the criteria for those
           drugs.” In other words, the Board is tasked with conducting a review of those criteria, and compiling
           its list of drugs that may create affordability challenges only after it has conducted this review
           pursuant to its statutory and regulatory processes. PhRMA is concerned that the Board’s proposal
           refers to focusing its review on drugs “known to cause affordability challenges” before its review has
           even   been     conducted.   We    request that the     Board    revise its proposal     to avoid   presupposing       or
           biasing the outcome of its affordability review process before the review has been conducted.


           PBM and Insurer Reporting on Accumulators and Maximizers: The Board proposes to “[i]mplement
           mandatory reporting on copay accumulator and maximizers programs to ensure equitable access to
           essential medications and prioritize transparency.”*° As PhRMA has stated in prior comment letters,
           accumulator and maximizer programs, which are determined by plans and PBMss, contribute to the
           inability of people in Oregon to afford their health care and medications.*” Accumulator adjustment
           programs (“AAPs”) block manufacturer cost-sharing assistance from counting towards cost-sharing
           requirements, including deductibles and maximum out-of-pocket limits. This means patients could
           be paying more at the pharmacy than they should be. Maximizers involve inflating patients’ cost-
           sharing to fully deplete available cost-sharing assistance before insurance coverage kicks in. PARMA
           recommends that the Board also consider expanding this requirement to include Alternative
           Funding Programs (“AFPs”). AFPs utilize third-party vendors, sometimes in partnership with smaller
           PBMs, to convince employers to drop coverage of some or all specialty medicines, and assist patients
           in getting access to those medicines through patient assistance programs intended for uninsured or
           underinsured patients instead. AFPs are a type of cherry-picking strategy to avoid individuals with
           higher    health  risks,  such  as_ individuals   with  pre-existing conditions.  These    programs
           disproportionately affect individuals living with chronic and rare conditions who need life-saving
           specialty medications, which raises health equity concerns.”

           Patient     Assistance   Program    Reporting     Expansion:     The    Board    proposes     expansions     to   patient
           assistance program (“PAP”) requirements by “includ[ing] manufacturer coupons and any other
           payment that reduces a patient’s out-of-pocket cost to fill a prescription” and by requiring reporting



43 Proposed Policy Recommendations at 1.
44 Id.
45 ORS § 646A.694(1).
46 Proposed Policy Recommendations at 2.
47 See Letter from PhRMA to Board regarding Oregon Prescription Drug Affordability Board: April 17, 2024 Agenda and Meeting
Materials Related to Affordability Reviews (Apr. 13, 2024); Letter from PhRMA to Board regarding Oregon Prescription Drug Price
Affordability Review Regulations: Selecting Prescription Drugs for Affordability Reviews (925-200-0010) and Conducting an
Affordability Review (925-200-0020) (May 14, 2023).
48 see National Black Caucus of State Legislators, Resolution HHS-24-37, available at: https://nbcsl.org/wp-
content/uploads/2023/12/Resolution-HHS-24-37.pdf.
                                                            724 Columbia St. NW, Ste. 310 » Olympia, WA 98501       » PHRMA.ORG


RESEARCH     PROGRESS   © HOPE




           on all patient assistance programs that manufacturers maintain or fund.*? Requiring manufacturers
           to submit additional confidential and proprietary information, such as data on all patient assistance
           programs that a manufacturer has offered or funded for any drug, exacerbates existing legal
           concerns with the Oregon transparency law.°°

           While the Board       included   in its 2022   policy recommendations        the argument        commonly     made    by
           insurance carriers with respect to patient assistance programs, such arguments do not withstand
           scrutiny. Insurers have propagated the idea that manufacturer coupons (also referred to as “cost-
           sharing assistance”) pushes patients to brand medicines when generic medicines are available. But
           the data show that less than 1% of coupons are used on products for which a generic is available.**
           For this small percentage of the market,                a patient may use cost-sharing assistance for brand
           medicines rather than the generic version               because their doctor prescribed that brand medicine
           based on their specific needs. It is not clear how this additional reporting requirement, which will a
           create significant administrative       burden    for the state, would      provide    useable    information    to the
           Board.>?

                                                               *   OK OX


On behalf of PhRMA and our member companies, thank you for consideration of our comments. Although
PhRMA has concerns about the information provided in the Meeting Materials, we stand ready to be a
constructive partner in this dialogue. Please contact dmcgrew@phrma.org with any questions.
Sincerely,




 Pn             |                                           Th             fifa
Dharia McGrew,          PhD                                 Merlin Brittenham
Director, State Policy                                      Assistant General Counsel, Law
Sacramento, CA                                              Washington, DC




49 Proposed Policy Recommendations at 2.
50 See PhRMA v. Stolfi, --- F. Supp. 3d ----, 2024 WL 1177999 (D. Ore. Mar. 19, 2024), appeal pending, No. 24-1570 (9th Cir. filed
Mar. 15, 2024).
SL IQVIA. “Evaluation of Co-Pay Card Utilization. Patient savings programs, in particular co-pay card programs, continue to bear
scrutiny across the industry.” https://www.iqvia.com/locations/united-states/library/fact-sheets/evaluation-of-co-pay-card-
utilization.
52 PhRMA also notes that manufacturer support for charitable foundations typically is not directed to supporting a specific drug,
given that federal guidance from the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Office of Inspector General limits such direct
support. Rather, donations are made by a manufacturer to a charitable foundation, and the foundation retains the authority and
discretion to apply such support as they see fit (which may include providing cost-sharing assistance for multiple drugs from
different manufacturers or providing financial support to patients for other, non-pharmaceutical products or services).
Manufacturers retain no influence or control over how the charity administers its assistance program.

                                                                   9
=   Global Coalition on Aging




Policy Brief: [he Risks of
Prescription Drug
Affordability Boards and
the Importance of
Innovation for Healthy
Aging and Health Equity
september 2024
Policy Brief: The Risks of Prescription Drug Affordability Boards and the Importance of Innovation for Healthy Aging and Health Equity




                                    Preface
                                    Roundtable Overview

                                    On June 6, 2024, The Global Coalition on Aging (GCOA)'
                                    hosted an expert roundtable discussion entitled “The Risks of
                                    PDABs and Importance of Innovation for Healthy Aging and
                                    Health Equity.” The roundtable brought together cross-
                                    sectoral experts who represent patients, caregivers,
                                    academia, biopharmaceutical innovators, and business
                                    communities to discuss PDABs, UPLs, and the risk they pose
                                    to the innovation that is needed to safeguard healthy aging
                                    and improve health equity.

                                    This brief builds on two previous GCOA Alliance for Health
                                    Innovation policy briefs—the first from June 2023 on healthy
                                    aging and innovation and the second from September 2023
                                    on the intersection of healthy aging, innovation, and
                                    oncology.

                                    This policy brief was generated by the Global Coalition on
                                    Aging and highlights participant insights from the roundtable
                                    discussion. The brief is intended to raise awareness of the
                                    unintended consequences of PDABs and provide policy
                                    recommendations to ensure healthy aging for all. The
                                    comments and quotes made by participants contained
                                    throughout this brief may not represent the views of the
                                    entire group.
               Policy Brief: The Risks of Prescription Drug Affordability Boards and the Importance of Innovation for Healthy Aging and Health Equity




Roundtable Participants

Tiffany Westrich-Robertson                                     Melissa Mitchell

Chief Executive Officer & Co-Founder,                          Executive Director, Global Coalition on
International Foundation for                                   Aging (GCOA)
Autoimmune & Autoinflammatory
Arthritis (AiArthritis)
                                                               Scott Bertani

Brian DuVal                                                    Director of Public Policy, HealthHIV

Patient Advocacy Manager, AiArthritis

                                                               Desmond        Banks

Adina Lasser                                                   Policy Director, National Black Caucus
                                                               of State Legislators (NBCSL)
Public Policy Manager, Alliance for
Aging Research

                                                               Gretchen C. Wartman
Laura Bonnell                                                  Vice President for Policy and Program,
                                                               National Minority Quality Forum (NMQF)
President, The Bonnell Foundation



                                                               Candace DeMatteis
Meredith Marden
                                                               Policy Director, Partnership to Fight
Analyst, Community Health Programs
                                                               Chronic Disease (PFCD)
and Public Policy, The Boomer Esiason
Foundation (BEF)

                                                               Sara Traigle van Geertruyden
Maxine Miller
                                                               Executive Director, Partnership to
Coordinator of Policy & Advocacy,                              Improve Patient Care (PIPC)
Cancer Support Community (CSC)

                                                               Maisha Standifer
Amy Goodman
                                                               Director, Health Policy, Satcher Health
Vice President and Counsel for Policy +                        Leadership Institute, Morehouse
Advocacy, Colorado BioScience                                  School of Medicine
Association

                                                               Maimah Karmo
Carl Schmid
                                                               Chief Executive Officer & Survivor,
Executive Director, HIV+Hepatitis                              Tigerlily Foundation
Policy Institute


                                                               Derek Flowers
India Peterson Valentine
                                                               Executive Director, Value of Care
Vice President of State Government                             Coalition
Affairs, Gilead Sciences
Policy Brief: The Risks of Prescription Drug Affordability Boards and the Importance of Innovation for Healthy Aging and Health Equity




                                     Table of Contents

                                      Preface



                                      Introduction



                                      Analysis & Impact of UPLs



                                      The Case Against PDABs & UPLs                                                                      14



                                      A Framework for Patient, Caregiver &                                                               20
                                      Provider Engagement



                                      Conclusion                                                                                         25


                                      Endnotes                                                                                           2/
         Policy Brief: The Risks of Prescription Drug Affordability Boards and the Importance of Innovation for Healthy Aging and Health Equity




Across the United States, many patients and policymakers are increasingly concerned about
rising healthcare costs. While much of the focus has centered recently around price-setting
provisions in the Inflation Reduction Act (IRA), a growing number of states have advanced or
proposed policies to review the cost of prescription medicines within their state lines. Many
of these policies have taken the form of Prescription Drug Affordability Boards, commonly
known as PDABs.




PDABs are often described to legislators and constituents as a way to lower costs for patients
in their state, often taking the shape of a third-party board of appointed members who
periodically assess the “affordability” of specific drugs.’ While PDABs are often positioned as
a solution to lower costs for patients, in practice there are significant flaws in the current
approach. It’s critical that boards focus on methods to directly reduce out-of-pocket costs
for patients, informed by meaningful engagement from impacted communities throughout
the affordability review and decision-making processes. In doing so, boards must ensure they
safeguard patient access to medicines and do not threaten to institute barriers to care that
could ultimately lead to higher patient costs. Despite patients voicing concerns around
potential consequences of PDAB efforts, the implementation and review processes to
advance these boards in the first few states to do so have failed to address these critical
considerations.
          Policy Brief: The Risks of Prescription Drug Affordability Boards and the Importance of Innovation for Healthy Aging and Health Equity




This brief will highlight key concerns raised by patients surrounding PDABs and their ability to
set prices for prescription medicines, and explore perspectives, findings, and resources that
highlight their impact on access, equity, and healthy aging.




                                                                A UPL is aceiling amount
           that a healthcare payer, such as Medicaid or a commercial insurer, can reimburse
           a provider or clinic for the purchase of a medication that                                a PDAB deems to be
           unaffordable. UPLs are more aligned with cost containment strategies for states
           rather than lowering patient costs at the pharmacy counter. Five years after the
           establishment of the first PDAB, patients are still waiting for the board to deliver
           on their promise to lower patient out-of-pocket costs for prescription drugs. This
           is also the case in other states that have established a PDAB since then.




                        States such as Colorado and Maryland have selected drugs to undergo
           “affordability reviews,” which disproportionately impact patients who are
           managing hard-to-treat conditions and aging populations. As a result of PDAB
           efforts in these states, the very medications developed and brought to market,
           which are currently demonstrating efficacy to enable us to lead healthy and
           productive lives, are subject to arbitrary cost review processes with unproven
           benefits to patients.
          Policy Brief: The Risks of Prescription Drug Affordability Boards and the Importance of Innovation for Healthy Aging and Health Equity




                                                                                According to the 2020 Census, the U.S.
           population aged 65 and over grew nearly five times faster than the total population
           over the 100 years from 1920 to 2020. Our country’s rapidly growing aging
           population signals a need for solutions that promote innovation that can keep
           individuals working and contributing for longer, rather than policies that threaten
           patient outcomes and increase the burden on our healthcare system.




                                                         For patients, affordability differs
           depending on an individual's health status and numerous other factors in their lives.
           Despite access to life-saving and life-extending medications hinging upon PDABs’
           definition of affordability under the current model, boards have largely been unable
           to strictly define this criteria. In June 2024, the Oregon PDAB opted to halt all drug
           affordability reviews for the remainder of the year and regroup in 2025, so that,
           among other things, the Board could determine what affordability means. Prior to
           this, the Board was undertaking drug reviews without a clear definition of the very
           variable they were seeking to assess.


PDABs are a short-sighted, often politically-driven, policy primarily focused on cost containment
for the state rather than meaningful benefits for patient communities. All too often, PDABs are
implemented in a way that ignores the long-term implications of drug price setting, such as
through the use of a UPL, in favor of more immediate savings in a state's budget.


Good health policy must result in improved health outcomes for underserved and vulnerable
populations, and to date PDABs have not met that objective. The current landscape, including
input from patients, providers, and other impacted stakeholders, makes clear that these boards
must do more to engage trusted partners and impacted populations to ensure patients benefit.
                Policy Brief: The Risks of Prescription Drug Affordability Boards and the Importance of Innovation for Healthy Aging and Health Equity




Table 1: PDABs across the United States*

                                   Eight states have enacted PDAB legislation.
                                     e   Four states(CO, MD, MN, WA) have PDABs that have or have the power
                                         to request authority to set a UPL.”
                                     e   Four states(ME, NH, NJ, OR) have PDABs that review the affordability
                                         of prescription drugs but do not have the authority to set a UPL."
                                         Oregon's legislature is set to vote on this issue in 2025."


                                   During the 2024 state legislative sessions, at least seventeen states were
                                   considering PDAB legislation.®


                                   Colorado and Maryland, the two states furthest along in PDAB
                                   implementation, had start-up costs over $700,000.16”


                                  Just three drugs have been deemed “unaffordable” following                                       a PDAB
                                  review.

                                  To date, there have been zero dollars worth of patient savings as a result of
                                   PDABs.

*As of September 2024
'For this metric, states with “enacted PDAB legislation” includes only those states with PDABs or councils currently in
place which review drugs purchased by both public and private insurers. This excludes New York and Massachussetts,
both of which are engaged in affordability review initiatives focusing solely on drugs purchased by their corresponding
Medicaid Agencies, and Vermont, which currently has a Board that is directed to study existing PDABs and develop a
similar initiative in the state.
             Policy Brief: The Risks of Prescription Drug Affordability Boards and the Importance of Innovation for Healthy Aging and Health Equity




Analysis & Impact of UPLs

The only tool many established PDABs have to lower the costs of medications is a UPL, which
may harm the very patients PDABs were created to protect.



     When used by                   UPLs lead to lower
                                                                            Providers may be                         Patients may be
PDABs, UPLs seta
                                     reimbursement
                                                                               forced to not                       forced to switch to
maximum amount
                                      rates after the
                                                                            purchase the drug                        aless effective
 that a payer can                      provider has                             for financial                      treatment plan or
     reimburse                      already purchased                        reasons, leaving                        even abandona
     providers fora
                                    and dispensed the                        patients without                           provider-
       drug they                          medication.
                                                                             access to critical                       recommended
       purchase.                                                               medications.                          treatment plan.



66         UPLs do not ultimately impact the bottom line at the
           pharmacy for patients.”
                                                                                          Desmond       Banks,     Policy    Director,    National
                                                                                          Black Caucus of State Legislators (NBCSL)


UPLs do not impact the purchase price of a medicine; instead, they set a limit on the amount that
a provider responsible for stocking, storing, and administering the medicine can reimburse for
that treatment.” When providers, such as pharmacists, are faced with these lower
reimbursement rates, they are forced to make difficult decisions - either prescribe a treatment
that may not be their first-line recommendation for a patient to ensure reimbursement at the
adequate rate or take a financial loss on a treatment that they know is preferred for their patient.”




The National Alliance of State Pharmacy Associations (NASPA) identified five key risks incurred
through     the    establishment           of   PDABs        and     UPLs      in   states,      particularly        as     they   relate      to
pharmacy reimbursement2° NASPA concerns include:


 e    Reduced reimbursement rates
 e    Impacts on pharmacy cash flow
 e    Increased administrative burden
 e    Impacts on patient care
 e    Incentives for generic substitutions
10              Policy Brief: The Risks of Prescription Drug Affordability Boards and the Importance of Innovation for Healthy Aging and Health Equity




     With local and independent pharmacies serving as essential community hubs for healthcare
     resources and information, and frequently operating with thin profit margins, negative
     consequences as aresult of UPLs threaten these institutions’ continued ability to keep their
     doors open and provide care to the patients they serve.


     These impacts extend to independent providers, such as clinical oncologists, dermatologists,
     and rheumatologists, who have expressed concerns about the potential consequences of UPLs.
     Such consequences, including lower reimbursement rates, stand to negatively impact providers’
     ability to pay staff, stock and administer critical treatments, and keep their doors open to
     provide care to their patients.”!


     A draft resolution introduced by the Association for Clinical Oncology, American Academy of
     Dermatology Association, American College of Mohs Surgery, American Contact Dermatitis
     Society, and the American College of Rheumatology in April 2024 calls for the American Medical
     Association (AMA)to conduct a study to determine how PDAB-enacted UPLs impact
     reimbursement for physician-administered drugs and patient access.


                          “State PDAB legislation that includes UPL authority often lacks language
                          that would allow physcians to seek reimbursement for storage and handling of
                          a physician-administered drug subject to a UPL.” ”

                                                                                                American Medical Association House of Delegates




     UPLs also fail to address one of the significant drivers of healthcare costs - pharmacy benefit
     manager (PBM) practices. PBM profits are unaffected by UPLs. By placing caps on medication
     reimbursement rates, not only are patients not saving money at the pharmacy counter, but
     providers are forced to stop prescribing recommended treatments, and research and
     development efforts are negatively impacted.
         11                     Policy Brief: The Risks of Prescription Drug Affordability Boards and the Importance of Innovation for Healthy Aging and Health Equity




              What is a Pharmacy Benefit Manager (PBM)?*


              PBMs are third-party, for-profit entities that act as middlemen between pharmaceutical
              companies, payers (both public and private), and pharmacies. They have a direct impact on
              both drug prices and patient access because they both create and update formularies of
              preferred drugs, and negotiate the prices, rebates, and discounts from manufacturers while
              also determining the prices that insurers pay and reimbursement rates for pharmacies.


              PBMs generate profit in three primary ways: through administrative fees paid by insurers for
              their services, by capturing some of the savings from the rebates they negotiate from drug
              manufacturers, and through spread pricing, where PBMs charge a higher payment from
              insurers for a drug than PBMs pay to pharmacies for the same drug. In the latter two cases,
              PBMs keep these differences as profit, driving up prices for patients at the pharmacy counter.




  Figure 1: PBM Mechanisms”


   100
                                                                          PBM Profits Remain the Same

   80                                                                                                           The “cap” = Amount              eons
                                                                                                                the pharmacies,
                       Pharmacies                                                                               doctors & sao
   60                                                                                                           can charge.                      _, Stop prescribing the lifesaving
              Wholesalers & Distributors                                                                        Reimbursement                                     drug
                                                                                                                decreases & BIB)           SS
   40                                                                                                           cannot make much
                                                                    Pharmacies                                  (if an    )    rofit            Allocate other funds to cover
                   D rug   M Manutacturer
                                 fact                                                                                    YIP           ,            treatment expenses
                                                            Wholesalers & Distributors
   20
                                                                 Drug Manufacturer                              Profits Lost Impacting R&D
                       Patient Cost                                 Patient Cost                                Patients Pay the Same Out-of-Pocket Cost


                      Before UPL                                    After UPL


Source: The National Black Caucus of State Legislators
12              Policy Brief: The Risks of Prescription Drug Affordability Boards and the Importance of Innovation for Healthy Aging and Health Equity




     The pharmaceutical supply chain—responsible for bringing treatments from the lab to patients
     —is acomplex ecosystem that relies on alignment and cooperation between all players within
     it. If just one link in the healthcare supply chain is impacted, patients will bear the brunt of
     those changes as the end users.


     Both the model legislation that many states have enacted and new PDAB legislation under
     consideration empower the governor-appointed board members with the ultimate authority to
     determine access to treatments that patients rely on to stay healthy and alive. In several
     cases, patient advocates have voiced concerns about a lack of knowledge from boards about a
     specific treatment or therapeutic area. As these state boards make decisions that significantly
     impact patient lives and health outcomes, board members must be equipped with tools and
     knowledge informed by stakeholders across the supply chain to mitigate broader, system-wide
     impacts.


     With zero evidence to suggest that implementing a UPL through a PDAB can lead to
     meaningful cost savings for patients—and research pointing to the contrary—states must
     consider additional methods to meaningfully lower patient costs.
13   Policy Brief: The Risks of Prescription Drug Affordability Boards and the Importance of Innovation for Healthy Aging and Health Equity
14   Policy Brief: The Risks of Prescription Drug Affordability Boards and the Importance of Innovation for Healthy Aging and Health Equity




                                         Patients, advocates, providers, industry members, and other
                                         stakeholders have come forward to share their perspectives
                                         and voice their concerns about the impact PDABs and UPLs
                                         could have on patients’ ability to access and afford
                                         prescription medications. While on the surface PDABs may
                                         sound promising for patients, they are often implemented in
                                         the name of politics under the guise of patient access.




                                         There is an inequitable approach to addressing cost, given
                                         that affordability parameters vary by patient, region, disease
                                         state, and circumstance. Many PDABs do not define
                                         affordability or make clear the criteria they will use to
                                         determine whether or not a drug is affordable. This lack of
                                         clarity introduces significant risks to health equity, furthering
                                         the risk that where someone lives will determine their health
                                         status and access to medicines by creating greater variance
                                         state by state.
15   Policy Brief: The Risks of Prescription Drug Affordability Boards and the Importance of Innovation for Healthy Aging and Health Equity




                                         Many patients have felt excluded by the PDAB process.
                                         PDABs largely lack patient representation and tend to be
                                         monolithic in other ways.”’ Further, opportunities for patient
                                         input are few and far between and are often communicated
                                         at the last minute - in some cases, only a few hours before a
                                         meeting. For many, participation is not feasible on such short
                                         notice, especially when the time allotted to a speaker can be
                                         as little as a couple of minutes.




                                         PDABs further threaten patient access through the threat of
                                         increased utilization management protocols and other
                                         practices implemented by PBMs and insurers. With these
                                         practices, like step therapy, a patient's provider-
                                         recommended course of treatment can be delayed. In
                                         contrast, the patient must first attempt cheaper therapies
                                         that must fail before a new regimen can be tried. Further,
                                         many metrics utilized in these practices and PDAB guidelines
                                         are discriminatory or misleading by design - such as value
                                         assement frameworks (e.g., quality-adjusted life years
                                         (QALYs))
                                                and international reference pricing.
16   Policy Brief: The Risks of Prescription Drug Affordability Boards and the Importance of Innovation for Healthy Aging and Health Equity




                                         Beyond the more immediate impacts on patients, PDABs and
                                         UPLs threaten to create negative consequences for medical
                                         innovation, which will have a downstream negative impact on
                                         patients looking to manage symptoms and live longer and
                                         healthier lives.


                                         If pharmaceutical companies cannot recoup the cost of their
                                         research and development, economics dictates that they will
                                         not be able to continue producing that drug and others. A
                                         successful drug that comes to market for a company does
                                         not only provide for the investment in its own development-—it
                                         also provides for the many drugs that never make it to market
                                         and in which billions have been invested. This externality is
                                         not considered in most measures of a drug's profitability, and
                                         if it were included, this metric would likely lower
                                         substantially.
17             Policy Brief: The Risks of Prescription Drug Affordability Boards and the Importance of Innovation for Healthy Aging and Health Equity




     Recently, the CEQs of three large pharmaceutical companies testified in front of the United
     States Congress regarding drug pricing, where they spoke to the enormous costs of
     bringing a drug to market, the average being more than 82 billion.2° Additionally, while
     Americans may face higher drug prices than those in other countries, they enjoy faster and
     greater access to life-saving therapies.




     The positive contributions that biotech and pharmaceutical companies have on local, state,
     and national economies is also often overlooked. Smaller biotechnology companies do a
     significant amount of drug development for rare diseases, facing high start-up costs that
     must be financed privately, such as by venture capital.*' It is only after a drug delivers
     promising results that a small company can attract more stable financing, meaning that this
     critical research area is highly risky for potential investors. This has a huge impact on
     smaller communities that are often buoyed by biotech start-ups - which bring jobs and
     positive economic contributions. If these companies cannot operate due to a risky financial
     environment, there will also be a disproportionate negative impact on rare disease research.
18   Policy Brief: The Risks of Prescription Drug Affordability Boards and the Importance of Innovation for Healthy Aging and Health Equity




                                         The impacts of PDABs and UPLs on access and incremental
                                         innovation threaten to directly impact patients’ ability to age
                                         healthily and live longer lives.

                                         The longevity we enjoy today is due in no small part to access
                                         to innovative treatments. Reduced access threatens healthy
                                         aging. By 2054, 84 million adults ages 65 and older will make
                                         up an estimated 25% of the U.S. population, many of whom
                                         will be living with at least one medical condition requiring
                                         intervention.”
           Policy Brief: The Risks of Prescription Drug Affordability Boards and the Importance of Innovation for Healthy Aging and Health Equity




Ca se             Stu            dy ., Implications of PDABs on Treatments for HIV &
                                           ~ Unique Patient Population Needs

To avoid instituting additional barriers to treatment                         and care, individual patient and caregiver
experiences     must     be taken       into account through              meaningful        engagement           tailored to specific
populations. The Colorado PDAB found that a reviewed treatment for HIV is not unaffordable, in
part due to the state, federal, and manufacturer-provided programs that make such treatments
accessible and affordable to those who need them.

A white paper from HealthHIV highlights the need for PDABs to meaningfully consider the unique
needs of specific patient populations while examining the role of patient assistance programs,
such as the 340B Drug Pricing Program, in linking patients with care - particularly as it relates to
HIV.

           “PDABs are meant to make prescription drugs cheaper, but their actual impact on what
           people pay in the real world can vary. This highlights the need to balance cost-cutting
           carefully, keeping healthcare choices open while supporting critical programs like 340B."


Community      Access       National      Network       (CANN)       developed        a resource        to highlight the          specific
impacts of PDABs and UPLs on efforts to end the HIV epidemic in the United States.


The 340B program was established by Congress in 1992 with the intention of enabling hospitals
and clinics to provide care to low-income and uninsured patients.

CANN shed light on the impact of UPLs on providers and patients as it relates to 340B:


       e   §40B’s value is found in the “spread” between                         the reimbursement             rates and a reduced
           acquisition cost by way of drug manufacturer 340B rebates
       e   Reducing reimbursement rates by way of an “upper payment limit” will reduce the value
           realized by 540B rebates
       e   Providers end up with less money, which means they can afford to fund less services


If PDABs and UPLs lead to lower reimbursement                           rates for clinics that provide lower-cost care,
they threaten access to critical HIV treatments for patients and the ability of these providers to
keep their doors open. PDABs                must ensure that their efforts do not negatively impact ongoing
policies and programs that are making treatments,                            such as those for HIV, more accessible to
those who rely on them to stay healthy and live longer.
20            Policy Brief: The Risks of Prescription Drug Affordability Boards and the Importance of Innovation for Healthy Aging and Health Equity




     In the states furthest along in implementing their PXDAB—Colorado and Maryland—advocates and
     stakeholders have voiced concerns about a lack of transparency within the PDAB process and a
     lack of engagement from those who stand to be most impacted by such policies and decisions.
21   Policy Brief: The Risks of Prescription Drug Affordability Boards and the Importance of Innovation for Healthy Aging and Health Equity




                                        Across states, patients and other concerned stakeholders
                                        have demonstrated that the onus is put on them to engage
                                        with the PDAB, with boards failing to recognize the time,
                                        administrative, and financial barriers that may hinder
                                        patients’ ability to attend a meeting or develop remarks to
                                        submit to the board. PDABs and staff must empower
                                        patients and caregivers to bring forward their stories and
                                        voice any concerns or questions while also proactively and
                                        meaningfully engaging key stakeholder communities
                                        throughout each stage of the process to mitigate
                                        unintended consequences on treatment access.
22   Policy Brief: The Risks of Prescription Drug Affordability Boards and the Importance of Innovation for Healthy Aging and Health Equity




                                         Meaningful patient engagement with policies that impact
                                         their health outcomes and treatment access cannot be
                                         limited to a 90-second public comment period from a limited
                                         and homogenous group of patients. PDABs must ensure
                                         broader and more accessible engagement with the patient
                                         communities their policies and price limits stand to impact
                                         most to mitigate severe consequences on efforts to advance
                                         health equity and healthy aging.

                                         In some cases, PDABs consult with an advisory council made
                                         up of representatives from various stakeholder communities,
                                         sometimes including patients. However, these councils have
                                         little to no authority over the PDAB and in many cases, their
                                         recommendations to the board have been disregarded and
                                         rejected. There is missed opportunity to provide a more
                                         meaningful consultation to all stakeholders, including
                                         patients, families, and caregivers.
     Policy Brief: The Risks of Prescription Drug Affordability Boards and the Importance of Innovation for Healthy Aging and Health Equity




Best Practices for Meaningful PDAB Engagement


     Patients must be considered the experts on the treatments being considered and
     reviewed by PDABs to address affordability challenges while avoiding negative
     impacts on access. Patients can serve a critical role in educating PDABs and advisory
     boards once meaningfully engaged and recognized throughout the process.




     PDABs must carefully consider the short- and long-term impacts of setting price
     limits on medicines to mitigate unintended consequences on patient health
     outcomes, healthy aging, and health equity.




     The impact on treatments for rare diseases must be taken into account by PDABs
     during affordability reviews, given the small size of the patient population that
     treatments for rare or orphan conditions serve and the unique structure of patient
     assistance programs for those medicines.




     PDABs cannot treat engagement surrounding each drug considered or selected for
     affordability review as a one-size-fits-all process. For certain conditions, such as
     HIV, there continue to be intersectional impacts and stigma surrounding a diagnosis
     or treatment, which may create further barriers to engagement with the PDAB
     process.




     Every patient and caregiver has a unique perception of the value of any given
     treatment. Considering what patients value in relation to their prescription medicine
     will be critical as PDABs conduct affordability reviews and determine whether
     treatments are ultimately unaffordable.
           ©    Examples of factors that influence this include the cost of treatment compared
                to the financial, administrative, and time burden of increased hospital visits,
                decreased ability to work, etc., due to a lack of access to treatment.
24   Policy Brief: The Risks of Prescription Drug Affordability Boards and the Importance of Innovation for Healthy Aging and Health Equity




                           PDABs can engage patients in the data collection by developing
     surveys to accurately and effectively capture patient perspectives and input and
     proactively empower patients to participate in the survey.




                              By engaging patients in meaningful and ongoing ways,
     PDABs can work to reduce the risk of adverse consequences on access in the long
     term.
Policy Brief: The Risks of Prescription Drug Affordability Boards and the Importance of Innovation for Healthy Aging and Health Equity




                                    Conclusion

                                    Existing PDABs and states across the country that
                                    are considering the establishment of such boards
                                    must consider the broader consequences of
                                    implementing UPLs on patient access, innovation,
                                    and healthy aging before advancing any such efforts.
                                    Further, existing PDABs must provide transparency
                                    into the affordability review process, methodologies
                                    used, and any implementation of UPLs to ensure
                                    patient and other stakeholder concerns about
                                    access and innovation are carefully considered and
                                    addressed.


                                    By meaningfully engaging patients and other
                                    impacted stakeholders - and heeding their concerns
                                    - around board decision-making processes and the
                                    use of UPLs, PDABs can mitigate widespread short-
                                    and long-term negative consequences on access
                                    and affordability in their state and beyond for
                                    prescription drugs that are proven to support the
                                    health and well-being of vulnerable communities and
                                    healthy aging.


                                    The growing body of evidence on PDABs, alarms
                                    from diverse patient communities, and processes
                                    that have played out in states with such boards
                                    demonstrates the significant risk that PDABs pose
                                    and why the patient voice must always be front and
                                    center in decisions that impact treatment access
                                    and health equity.
26   Policy Brief: The Risks of Prescription Drug Affordability Boards and the Importance of Innovation for Healthy Aging and Health Equity




       Key Resources


       HealthHIV: Prescription Drug Affordability                               Boards (PDABs) and Upper
      Payment Limits (UPLs) Impact on Patients, Drug Pricing, and Innovation




       Community Access National                         Network (CANN): PDABs Action Center,
       PDABS: A Threat to Ending the HIV Epidemic?




      AiArthritis: Ensuring Access through Collaborative Health (EACH)& the
      Patient Inclusion Council (PIC)




       NBCSL: NBCSL Region X Meeting PDABs Panel Presentation
    27                   Policy Brief: The Risks of Prescription Drug Affordability Boards and the Importance of Innovation for Healthy Aging and Health Equity




                                                                        Endnotes

1. The Global Coalition on Aging (GCOA)                   6. Dawson, L. Kates, J., et. al. (2023, March             13. Small, L. (2024, April 4). Pharma Takes
Alliance for Health Innovation aims to                    27). Medicaid and People with HIV. KFF.                   Aim at New Legal Foe: State Drug
establish awareness of the importance of                  https://www.kff.org/hivaids/issue-                        Affordability Boards. AlS Health.
innovation in achieving healthy aging                     brief/medicaid-and-people-with-hiv/                       https://www.mmitnetwork.com/aishealth/
through investments, policy reforms, and                                                                            spotlight-on-market-access/pharma-
strategic partnerships - both for the value                                                                         takes-aim-at-new-legal-foe-state-drug-
to patients and for health system                                                                                   affordability-boards-2/
sustainability. GCOA’s Alliance for Health               7. KFF. Health Insurance Coverage of
Innovation is made possible through                       Children 0-18. KFF. Health Insurance

support from Gilead Sciences.                             Coverage of Children 0-18 | KFF
                                                                                                                    14. Thomas, J. (2024, March 31).
                                                                                                                     Drugmakers step up attacks on Oregon
                                                                                                                    board eyeing price caps. OPB.
2. The National Black Caucus of State                    8. KFF. Health Insurance Coverage of                       https://www.opb.org/article/2024/03/31/dr
Legislators. (2024, April5). NBSCL Region X              Children Living in Poverty (Under 100%
                                                                                                                    ugmakers-step-up-attacks-oregon-
Meeting PDABs Panel Presentation.                         FPL). KFF. Health Insurance Coverage of
                                                                                                                    prescription-drug-affordability-board-
NBCSL. httos://nbcsl.org/region-x-pdabs-                  Children 0-18 Living in    Poverty (under 100%
                                                                                                                    price-caps/
session/                                                  FPL)|KFF


3. Clark, B., Puthiyath, M. S.(2022, October
                                                                                                                    15. Kolber, M.S.(2024, May 06).
                                                         9. KFF. Health Insurance Coverage of
                                                                                                                    Understanding State Prescription Drug
11). Can State Prescription Drug Afordability            Adults 19-64. KFF. Health Insurance
                                                                                                                    Affordability Board Landscape in Three
Boards Address High-Cost Drug Prices?.                    Coverage of Adults 19-64 | KFF
                                                                                                                    Infographics. Manatt Health Highlights.
Common Wealth Fund.
                                                                                                                    https://www.manatt.com/insights/newslet
httos://www.commonwealthfund.org/blog/
                                                                                                                    ters/health-highlights/understanding-
2022/can-state-prescription-drug-
                                                         10. KFF. Health Insurance Coverage of                      state-prescription-drug-affordabilit
affordability-boards-address-high-cost-
drug-prices                                              Adults 19-64 Living in Poverty (Under 100%
                                                         FPL). KFF. Health Insurance Coverage of
                                                         Adults 19-64 Living in Poverty (under 100%
                                                                                                                    16. Colorado General Assembly. (2021).
                                                          FPL)L   KEE
4. National Academy for State Health                                                                                 Prescription Drug Affordability Review
Policy. (2022, March 3). Comparison of                                                                               Board. Colorado General Assembly.
State Prescription Drug Affordability                                                                                https://leg.colorado.gov/bills/sb21-175
Review Initiatives. National Academy for                  11. Joszt, L. (2017, November 28).
State Health Policy.                                      Identifying the Most Prevalent and Costly
https://nashp.org/comparison-of-state-                    Chronic Conditions in Medicaid. AUMC.
prescription-drug-affordability-review-                                                                             17. National Academy for State Health
                                                          https://www.ajmc.com/view/identifying-
initiatives/                                                                                                        Policy. (2022, March 3). States Take Diverse
                                                         the-most-prevalent-and-costly-chronic-
                                                                                                                    Approaches to Drug Affordability Boards.
                                                          conditions-in-medicaid
                                                                                                                    National Academy for State Health Policy.
                                                                                                                    https://nashp.org/states-take-diverse-
5. Hill, L., Artiga, S. (2024, January 11).                                                                         approaches-to-drug-affordability-boards/
Health Coverage by Race and Ethnicity,
                                                          12. Patterson, J.A., Motyka, J., Campbell,
2010-2022. KFF.
                                                         J.D., O'Brien, U.M. (2024, June 05).
https://www.kff.org/racial-equity-and-
                                                          Unanswered Questions and Unintended
health-policy/issue-brief/health-coverage-                                                                          18. Laws, J. (2024, April 2). Prescription
                                                          Consequences of State Prescription Drug
by-race-and-ethnicity/                                                                                              drug affordability boards do more harm
                                                         Affordability Boards. Health Affairs
                                                                                                                    than good. The Chicago Sun-Times.
                                                         Forefront. DOI:
                                                                                                                    https://chicago.suntimes.com/other-
                                                          10.1377/forefront.20240603.353747
                                                                                                                    views/2024/04/01/prescription-drug-
                                                                                                                    affordability-boards-do-more-harm-than-
                                                                                                                    good-illinois-legislation-jen-laws
  28                  Policy Brief: The Risks of Prescription Drug Affordability Boards and the Importance of Innovation for Healthy Aging and Health Equity




19. Zadvorny, E. (2021, April 21). Opinion: A         25. PFCD. (2024, April 2). New Insurer                    31. Yates, N., & Hinkel, J. (2022). The
state Prescription Drug Affordability board            Perspectives Highlight Considerable                      economics of moonshots: Value in rare
puts pharmacies, access to medication at               Patient Challenges Anticipated from                      disease drug development. Clinical and
risk. The Denver Post.                                 Prescription Drug Affordability Boards.                  translational science, 15(4), 809-812.
https://www.denverpost.com/2021/04/13/                 PFCD.                                                    https://doi.org/10.1111/cts.13270
prescription-drug-affordability-colorado/              https://www.fightchronicdisease.org/lates
                                                      t-news/new-insurer-perspectives-
                                                      highlight-considerable-patient-challenges-
                                                                                                                32. Schaeffer, K.(2024, January 9). U.S.
20. National Association of State Pharmacy
                                                      anticipated
                                                                                                                Centenarian Population is Projected to
Associations (2024, June 1). Prescription                                                                       Quadruple Over the Next 30 Years. Pew
Drug Affordability Boards: Risks to                                                                             Research Center.
Pharmacy Reimbursement. NASPA.                        26. Puckrein, G. (2023, November 15). State               https://www.pewresearch.org/short-
https://naspa.us/blog/resource/pdab/                  Drug Board Could Backfire for Underserved                 reads/2024/01/09/us-centenarian-
                                                       Patients. The Detroit News.                              population-is-projected-to-quadruple-
                                                                                                                over-the-next-30-years/

21. Community Oncology Alliance. (2023,
May 25). Community Oncology Alliance
                                                      27. Gong Mitchell, M. & Karmo,       M. (Summer
Releases Formal Position Statement on                                                                           33. HealthHIV Advocacy. (2024, April).
                                                      2024). State Drug Boards Threaten to
Prescription Drug Affordability Boards.                                                                         Considerations and Implications of PDABs
                                                       Compound Patient Access Challenges.
Community Oncology Alliance.                                                                                    and Their Impact on 340Bs. HealthHIV.
                                                       National Black Caucus of State Legislators
https://www.einnews.com/pr_news/63570                                                                           https://healthhiv.org/wp-
                                                      ‘The Legislator’ Magazine.
8446/community-oncology-alliance-                                                                               content/uploads/2024/04/PDAB-
                                                      https://nbcsl.org/wp-
releases-formal-position-statement-on-                                                                          Considerations-and-Implications.pdf
                                                      content/uploads/dim_uploads/2024/07/NB
prescription-drug-affordability-boards
                                                       CSL_TheLegislatorSummer2024.pdf


                                                                                                                34. Community Access National Network.
22. American Medical Association House of                                                                       (2024, June 18). Prescription Drug Advisory
                                                      28. Harrington, E., Campbell, J. (2019,
Delegates. (2024, April 24). American                                                                           Boards (PDABs): Response Project for
                                                      March 12). Key Highlights from National
Medical Association. State Prescription                                                                         People Living with HIV.
                                                      Surveys of Cancer Patients/Caregivers and
Drug Affordability Boards - Study.                                                                              https://www.tiicann.org/pdf-
                                                       Physicians Who Treat Cancer Patients.
https://www.ama-                                                                                                docs/2024_CANN_PDAB_Project_Infograp
                                                       Fight Cancer.
assn.org/system/files/a24-234.pdf                                                                               hic_1_06-18-24.
                                                                                                                             pdf
                                                       https://www.fightcancer.org/sites/default/
                                                      files/National%20Documents/ACS%20CAN
                                                       ALZOUMK20Survey%20Key%20Findings%
23. Rapfogel, N.(2024, March 13). 5 Things            203.28.19%20FINAL.pdf
                                                                                                                35. Brown, D.(2024, February 1). Drug
to Know About Pharmacy Benefit
                                                                                                                affordability board receives list of Rx’s to
Managers. The Center for American
                                                                                                                begin cost review selection process.
Progress.
                                                      29. Mohs, R. C., & Greig, N. H. (2017). Drug              Maryland Matters.
https://www.americanprogress.org/article
                                                      discovery and development: Role of basic                  https://marylandmatters.org/2024/02/01/d
/5-things-to-know-about-pharmacy-
                                                       biological research. Alzheimer's & dementia              rug-affordability-board-receives-list-of-
benefit-managers/
                                                      (New York, N. Y.), 3(4), 651-657.                         rxs-to-begin-cost-review-selection-
                                                       https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trci.2017.10.005               process/


24. The National Black Caucus of State
Legislators. (2024, April 5). NBSCL Region X
                                                      30. Goodwin, K. (2024, February 9). BMS,                  36. Aimed Alliance (2024, July 1). Oregon
Meeting PDABs Panel Presentation.
                                                                                                                PDAB Postpones Drug Reviews Until 2025.
NBCSL. https://nbcsl.org/region-x-pdabs-              J&J and Merck CEOs Push Back in Senate
                                                                                                                Aimed Alliance.
session/                                               Hearing on High Drug Prices. BioSpace.
                                                                                                                https://aimedalliance.org/oregon-pdab-
                                                       https://www.biospace.com/bms-j-and-j-
                                                                                                                postpones-drug-reviews-until-2025/
                                                      and-merck-ceos-push-back-in-senate-
                                                      hearing-on-high-drug-prices
