                                                                                                         Elizabeth Comfort
                                                                                                           Finance Director


  CLACKAMAS                                                                                                       :
          COUNTY                                                                          Department of Finance
                                                                                                   Public Services Building
                                                                       2051 Kaen Road, Suite 490   | Oregon City, OR 97045




July 27, 2023                                                            BCC Agenda Date/Item:


Board of County Commissioners
Clackamas County

      Approval of Personal Services Contracts for As Needed Interpreter Services with Corporate
   Translation Services dba Language Link. Contract has an annual not to exceed of $250,000 with a
contract total of $1,250,000 for 5 years. County General funds could be involved as these contracts are
                                 for “on call” or “as-needed basis” work.

    Previous Board           Briefed at Issues — July 25, 2023
    Action/Review
    Performance              Build public trust through good government by providing budget responsibility
    Clackamas                and transparency
    Counsel Review           Yes                         Procurement Review | Yes
     Contact Person          Ryan Rice                    Contact Phone              503-742-5446

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY: The intent of these contracts is to expand the current pool of licensed, qualified firms
or individuals to provide a full range of interpreter and translator services. Work will be on an as-needed basis to
assist the County with various interpreter needs including but not limited to in person, telephonic, transcription
and video platforms. Interpreter services will include a variety of languages and communication needs.

Typical service requests may include but not limited to:
    e   Interpreter services in clinics, education classes working directly with adults, children, for jurors, classes
        for parents youth, general County business including but not limited to meetings, events, translation of
        documents as well as public communication material.


RECOMMENDATION:           Staff recommends approval of these contracts for as needed interpreter services.

Respectfully submitted,

CCegabeth Comggort

Elizabeth Comfort
Finance    Director




                                                                                For Filing Use Only




                                         p.503.742.5400 | www.clackamas.us
                                        CLACKAMAS COUNTY
                                   PERSONAL SERVICES CONTRACT
                                            Contract #8146

This Personal Services Contract (this “Contract”) is entered into between Corporate Translation
Services, LLC dba Language Link (“Contractor”), and Clackamas County, a political subdivision of the
State of Oregon (“County”).

ARTICLE I.
1. Effective Date and Duration. This Contract shall become effective upon signature of both parties.
   Unless earlier terminated or extended, this Contract shall expire on June 30, 2028

2.   Scope of Work. Contractor shall provide the following personal services: interpreter services on an
     on-call basis (“Work”), further described in County’s RFP 2023-39, attached hereto as Exhibit A and
     incorporated by this reference herein, and Contractor’s Response, attached hereto as Exhibit B and
     incorporated by this reference herein.
     Contractor agrees to perform the Work on behalf of the County and the following entities: Water
     Environment Services, North Clackamas Parks and Recreation District, the Development Agency of
     Clackamas County, the Housing Authority of Clackamas County, and any special district or urban
     renewal agency that follows the County’s Local Contract Review Board rules and is approved by the
     County, in writing, to receive the Work under this Contract.
     This Contract is on an “on-call” or “as-needed basis” for Work. When the County wishes Contractor
     to perform the Work, the County will submit an official County Task Order form (found at:
     https://www.clackamas.us/finance/terms.html) detailing the scope of Work, the entity on whose
     behalf the Work will be performed, and the total compensation, pursuant to the fee schedule set forth
     in this Contract. Contractor may not perform Work until the County Task Order form has been
     executed by the parties. In the event a project authorized under the County Task Order extends
     beyond the expiration of this Contract, the County Task Order shall remain in effect under the terms
     of this Contract until the completion or expiration of the authorized task.
     No task order shall modify or amend the terms and conditions of this Contract.
     The County Contract administrator for this Contract is the County Procurement and Contract Services
     Division. For each authorized Task Order, a project specific department representative shall be
     identified for coordination of the work.


3.   Consideration. The maximum annual amount County may pay Contractor, from available and
     authorized funds, for performing the Work required by this Contract shall not exceed two hundred and
     fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00). The maximum amount County may pay Contractor, from
     available and authorized funds, for performing the Work during the entire five (5) year term of the
     Contract shall not exceed One Million Two Hundred Fifty Thousand dollars ($1,250,000.00). Because
     this is an on-call or as-needed contract, and the exact amount of Work needed, if any, is unknown,
     nothing herein shall be construed as a promise to pay Contractor the full $1,250,000.00 authorized
     herein. Consideration rates are on a time and materials basis in accordance with the rates and costs
     specified in Exhibit B. If any interim payments to Contractor are made, such payments shall be made
     only in accordance with the schedule and requirements in Exhibit B.

4.   Invoices and Payments. Unless otherwise specified, Contractor shall submit monthly invoices for
     Work performed. Invoices shall describe all Work performed with particularity, by whom it was
     performed, and shall itemize and explain all expenses for which reimbursement is claimed. The
     invoices shall include the total amount billed to date by Contractor prior to the current invoice. If
     Contractor fails to present invoices in proper form within sixty (60) calendar days after the end of the
     month in which the services were rendered, Contractor waives any rights to present such invoice

Rev 2/2023                                          Page   1
     thereafter and to receive payment therefor. Payments shall be made in accordance with ORS 293 462
     to Contractor following the County’s review and approval of invoices submitted by Contractor.
     Contractor shall not submit invoices for, and the County will not be obligated to pay, any amount in
     excess of the maximum compensation amount set forth above. If this maximum compensation
     amount is increased by amendment of this Contract, the amendment must be fully effective before
     Contractor performs Work subject to the amendment.

     Invoices shall reference the above Contract Number and be submitted to each department that
     requested services under this Contract.

     Travel and Other Expense. Authorized: [_] Yes             [xX] No
     If travel expense reimbursement is authorized in this Contract, such expense shall only be reimbursed
     at the rates in the County Contractor Travel Reimbursement Policy, hereby incorporated by reference
     and found at: https://www.clackamas.us/finance/terms.html.Travel expense reimbursement is not in
     excess of the not to exceed consideration.

     Contract Documents. This Contract consists of the following documents, which are listed in
     descending order of precedence and are attached and incorporated by reference, this Contract, Exhibit
     A and Exhibit B.

7. Contractor and County Contacts.
Contractor Administrator: Dan Nelson                       County Administrator: TBD
  Phone: 888-266-2066                                      Phone:
  Email: rfp@language.link                                 Email:




Payment information will be reported to the Internal Revenue Service (“IRS”) under the name and
taxpayer ID number submitted. (See I.R.S. 1099 for additional instructions regarding taxpayer ID
numbers.) Information not matching IRS records will subject Contractor payments to backup
withholding.

ARTICLE IL.
1.   ACCESS TO RECORDS. Contractor shall maintain books, records, documents, and other evidence,
     in accordance with generally accepted accounting procedures and practices, sufficient to reflect
     properly all costs of whatever nature claimed to have been incurred and anticipated to be incurred in
     the performance of this Contract. County and their duly authorized representatives shall have access
     to the books, documents, papers, and records of Contractor, which are directly pertinent to this
     Contract for the purpose of making audit, examination, excerpts, and transcripts. Contractor shall
     maintain such books and records for a minimum of six (6) years, or such longer period as may be
     required by applicable law, following final payment and termination of this Contract, or until the
     conclusion of any audit, controversy or litigation arising out of or related to this Contract, whichever
     date is later.

     AVAILABILITY OF FUTURE FUNDS. Any continuation or extension of this Contract after the
     end of the fiscal period in which it is written is contingent on a new appropriation for each succeeding
     fiscal period sufficient to continue to make payments under this Contract, as determined by the
     County in its sole administrative discretion.

     CAPTIONS. The captions or headings in this Contract are for convenience only and in no way
     define, limit, or describe the scope or intent of any provisions of this Contract.

     COMPLIANCE WITH APPLICABLE LAW. Contractor shall comply with all applicable federal,
     state and local laws, regulations, executive orders, and ordinances, as such may be amended from time
     to time.


Rev 2/2023                                          Page   2
5.   COUNTERPARTS. This Contract may be executed in several counterparts (electronic or otherwise),
     each of which shall be an original, all of which shall constitute the same instrument.

6.   GOVERNING LAW. This Contract, and all rights, obligations, and disputes arising out of it, shall
     be governed and construed in accordance with the laws of the State of Oregon and the ordinances of
     Clackamas County without regard to principles of conflicts of law. Any claim, action, or suit
     between County and Contractor that arises out of or relates to the performance of this Contract shall
     be brought and conducted solely and exclusively within the Circuit Court for Clackamas County, for
     the State of Oregon. Provided, however, that if any such claim, action, or suit may be brought in a
     federal forum, it shall be brought and conducted solely and exclusively within the United States
     District Court for the District of Oregon. In no event shall this section be construed as a waiver by the
     County of any form of defense or immunity, whether sovereign immunity, governmental immunity,
     immunity based on the Eleventh Amendment to the Constitution of the United States or otherwise,
     from any claim or from the jurisdiction of any court. Contractor, by execution of this Contract, hereby
     consents to the personal jurisdiction of the courts referenced in this section.

7.   INDEMNITY, RESPONSIBILITY FOR DAMAGES. Contractor shall be responsible for all
     damage to property, injury to persons, and loss, expense, inconvenience, and delay which may be
     caused by, or result from, any act, omission, or neglect of Contractor, its subcontractors, agents, or
     employees. The Contractor agrees to indemnify and defend the County, and its officers, elected
     officials, agents, and employees, from and against all claims, actions, losses, liabilities, including
     reasonable attorney and accounting fees, and all expenses incidental to the investigation and defense
     thereof, arising out of or based upon Contractor’s acts or omissions in performing under this Contract.

     However, neither Contractor nor any attorney engaged by Contractor shall defend the claim in the
     name of County, purport to act as legal representative of County, or settle any claim on behalf of
     County, without the approval of the Clackamas County Counsel’s Office. County may assume its
     own defense and settlement at its election and expense.

8.   INDEPENDENT CONTRACTOR STATUS. The service(s) to be rendered under this Contract are
     those of an independent contractor. Although the County reserves the right to determine (and
     modify) the delivery schedule for the Work to be performed and to evaluate the quality of the
     completed performance, County cannot and will not control the means or manner of Contractor’s
     performance. Contractor is responsible for determining the appropriate means and manner of
     performing the Work. Contractor is not to be considered an agent or employee of County for any
     purpose, including, but not limited to: (A) The Contractor will be solely responsible for payment of
     any Federal or State taxes required as a result of this Contract; and (B) This Contract is not intended
     to entitle the Contractor to any benefits generally granted to County employees, including, but not
     limited to, vacation, holiday and sick leave, other leaves with pay, tenure, medical and dental
     coverage, life and disability insurance, overtime, Social Security, Workers' Compensation,
     unemployment compensation, or retirement benefits.

9.   INSURANCE. Contractor shall secure at its own expense and keep in effect during the term of the
     performance under this Contract the insurance required and minimum coverage indicated below. The
     insurance requirement outlined below do not in any way limit the amount of scope of liability of
     Contractor under this Contract. Contractor shall provide proof of said insurance and name the County
     as an additional insured on all required liability policies. Proof of insurance and notice of any material
     change should be submitted to the following address: Clackamas County Procurement Division, 2051
     Kaen Road, Oregon City, OR 97045 or emailed to the County Contract Analyst.

             [x] Required — Commercial General Liability: combined single limit, or the equivalent, of not
             less than $1,000,000 per occurrence, with an annual aggregate limit of $2,000,000 for Bodily
             Injury and Property Damage.
             [x] Required — Professional Liability: combined single limit, or the equivalent, of not less than
             $1,000,000 per claim, with an annual aggregate limit of $2,000,000 for damages caused by
             error, omission or negligent acts.

Rev 2/2023                                             Page   3
              [x] Required — Automobile Liability: combined single limit, or the equivalent, of not less than
              $1,000,000 per accident for Bodily Injury and Property Damage.

             The policy(s) shall be primary insurance as respects to the County. Any insurance or self-
             insurance maintained by the County shall be excess and shall not contribute to it. Any obligation
             that County agree to a waiver of subrogation is hereby stricken.

10. LIMITATION OF LIABILITIES. This Contract is expressly subject to the debt limitation of
    Oregon counties set forth in Article XI, Section 10, of the Oregon Constitution, and is contingent
    upon funds being appropriated therefore. Any provisions herein which would conflict with law are
    deemed inoperative to that extent. Except for liability arising under or related to Article II, Section 13
    or Section 20 neither party shall be liable for (i) any indirect, incidental, consequential or special
    damages under this Contract or (ii) any damages of any sort arising solely from the termination of this
    Contact in accordance with its terms.

11. NOTICES. Except as otherwise provided in this Contract, any required notices between the parties
    shall be given in writing by personal delivery, email, or mailing the same, to the Contract
    Administrators identified in Article 1, Section 6. If notice is sent to County, a copy shall also be sent
    to: Clackamas County Procurement, 2051 Kaen Road, Oregon City, OR 97045. Any communication
    or notice so addressed and mailed shall be deemed to be given five (5) days after mailing, and
    immediately upon personal delivery, or within 2 hours after the email is sent during County’s normal
    business hours (Monday — Thursday, 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.) (as recorded on the device from which
    the sender sent the email), unless the sender receives an automated message or other indication that
    the email has not been delivered.

12. OWNERSHIP OF WORK PRODUCT. All work product of Contractor that results from this
    Contract (the “Work Product”) is the exclusive property of County. County and Contractor intend
    that such Work Product be deemed “work made for hire” of which County shall be deemed the
    author. If for any reason the Work Product is not deemed “work made for hire,’ Contractor hereby
    irrevocably assigns to County all of its right, title, and interest in and to any and all of the Work
    Product, whether arising from copyright, patent, trademark or trade secret, or any other state or
    federal intellectual property law or doctrine. Contractor shall execute such further documents and
    instruments as County may reasonably request in order to fully vest such rights in County.
    Contractor forever waives any and all rights relating to the Work Product, including without
    limitation, any and all rights arising under 17 USC § 106A or any other rights of identification of
    authorship or rights of approval, restriction or limitation on use or subsequent modifications.
    Notwithstanding the above, County shall have no rights in any pre-existing Contractor intellectual
    property provided to County by Contractor in the performance of this Contract except to copy, use
    and re-use any such Contractor intellectual property for County use only.

13. REPRESENTATIONS AND WARRANTIES. Contractor represents and warrants to County that
    (A) Contractor has the power and authority to enter into and perform this Contract; (B) this Contract,
    when executed and delivered, shall be a valid and binding obligation of Contractor enforceable in
    accordance with its terms; (C) Contractor shall at all times during the term of this Contract, be
    qualified, professionally competent, and duly licensed to perform the Work; (D) Contractor is an
    independent contractor as defined in ORS 670.600; and (E) the Work under this Contract shall be
    performed in a good and workmanlike manner and in accordance with the highest professional
    standards. The warranties set forth in this section are in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other
    warranties provided.

14. SURVIVAL. All rights and obligations shall cease upon termination or expiration of this Contract,
    except for the rights and obligations set forth in Article II, Sections 1, 6, 7, 10, 12, 13, 14, 15, 17, 20,
    21, 25, 27, 28, and 34, and all other rights and obligations which by their context are intended to
    survive. However, such expiration shall not extinguish or prejudice the County’s right to enforce this
    Contract with respect to: (a) any breach of a Contractor warranty; or (b) any default or defect in
    Contractor performance that has not been cured.

Rev 2/2023                                             Page   4
15. SEVERABILITY. If any term or provision of this Contract is declared by a court of competent
    jurisdiction to be illegal or in conflict with any law, the validity of the remaining terms and
    provisions shall not be affected, and the rights and obligations of the parties shall be construed and
    enforced as if the Contract did not contain the particular term or provision held to be invalid.

16. SUBCONTRACTS AND ASSIGNMENTS. Contractor shall not enter into any subcontracts for any
    of the Work required by this Contract, or assign or transfer any of its interest in this Contract by
    operation of law or otherwise, without obtaining prior written approval from the County, which shall
    be granted or denied in the County’s sole discretion. In addition to any provisions the County may
    require, Contractor shall include in any permitted subcontract under this Contract a requirement that
    the subcontractor be bound by this Article II, Sections 1, 7, 8, 13, 16 and 27 as if the subcontractor
    were the Contractor. County’s consent to any subcontract shall not relieve Contractor of any of its
    duties or obligations under this Contract. County understands and agrees that Contractor may use
    independent contractors as translators and interpreters provided, however, that use of an independent
    contractor does not relieve Contractor of any of its obligations under this Contract.

17. SUCCESSORS IN INTEREST. The provisions of this Contract shall be binding upon and shall
    inure to the benefit of the parties hereto, and their respective authorized successors and assigns.

18. TAX COMPLIANCE CERTIFICATION. The Contractor shall comply with all federal, state and
    local laws, regulation, executive orders and ordinances applicable to this Contract. Contractor
    represents and warrants that it has complied, and will continue to comply throughout the duration of
    this Contract and any extensions, with all tax laws of this state or any political subdivision of this
    state, including but not limited to ORS 305.620 and ORS chapters 316, 317, and 318. Any violation of
    this section shall constitute a material breach of this Contract and shall entitle County to terminate
    this Contract, to pursue and recover any and all damages that arise from the breach and the
    termination of this Contract, and to pursue any or all of the remedies available under this Contract or
    applicable law.

19. TERMINATIONS. This Contract may be terminated for the following reasons: (A) by mutual
    agreement of the parties or by the County (i) for convenience upon thirty (30) days written notice to
    Contractor, or (ii) at any time the County fails to receive funding, appropriations, or other expenditure
    authority as solely determined by the County; or (B) if contractor breaches any Contract provision or
    is declared insolvent, County may terminate after thirty (30) days written notice with an opportunity
     to cure.
     Upon receipt of written notice of termination from the County, Contractor shall immediately stop
     performance of the Work. Upon termination of this Contract, Contractor shall deliver to County all
     documents, Work Product, information, works-in-progress and other property that are or would be
     deliverables had the Contract Work been completed. Upon County’s request, Contractor shall
     surrender to anyone County designates, all documents, research, objects or other tangible things
     needed to complete the Work.

20. REMEDIES. If terminated by the County due to a breach by the Contractor, then the County shall
    have any remedy available to it in law or equity. If this Contract is terminated for any other reason,
    Contractor’s sole remedy is payment for the goods and services delivered and accepted by the County
    as of the date of the notice of termination, less any setoff to which the County is entitled.

21. NO THIRD PARTY BENEFICIARIES. County and Contractor are the only parties to this Contract
    and are the only parties entitled to enforce its terms. Nothing in this Contract gives, is intended to
    give, or shall be construed to give or provide any benefit or right, whether directly, indirectly or
    otherwise, to third persons unless such third persons are individually identified by name herein and
    expressly described as intended beneficiaries of the terms of this Contract.



Rev 2/2023                                         Page   5
22. TIME IS OF THE ESSENCE. Contractor agrees that time is of the essence in the performance of
    this Contract.

23. FOREIGN CONTRACTOR. If the Contractor is not domiciled in or registered to do business in the
    State of Oregon, Contractor shall promptly provide to the Oregon Department of Revenue and the
    Secretary of State, Corporate Division, all information required by those agencies relative to this
    Contract. The Contractor shall demonstrate its legal capacity to perform these services in the State of
    Oregon prior to entering into this Contract.

24. FORCE MAJEURE. Neither County nor Contractor shall be held responsible for delay or default
    caused by events outside the County or Contractor’s reasonable control including, but not limited to,
    fire, terrorism, riot, acts of God, or war. However, Contractor shall make all reasonable efforts to
    remove or eliminate such a cause of delay or default and shall upon the cessation of the cause,
    diligently pursue performance of its obligations under this Contract.

25. WAIVER. The failure of County to enforce any provision of this Contract shall not constitute a
    waiver by County of that or any other provision.

26. PUBLIC CONTRACTING REQUIREMENTS. Pursuant to the public contracting requirements
    contained in Oregon Revised Statutes (“ORS”) Chapter 279B 220 through 279B.235, Contractor
    shall:
            a. Make payments promptly, as due, to all persons supplying to Contractor labor or
                materials for the prosecution of the work provided for in the Contract.
            b. Pay all contributions or amounts due the Industrial Accident Fund from such Contractor
                or subcontractor incurred in the performance of the Contract.
            c. Not permit any lien or claim to be filed or prosecuted against County on account of any
                 labor or material furnished.
            d. Pay the Department of Revenue all sums withheld from employees pursuant to ORS
                  316.167.
             e.   As applicable, the Contractor shall pay employees for work in accordance with ORS
                  279B.235, which is incorporated herein by this reference. The Contractor shall comply
                  with the prohibitions set forth in ORS 652.220, compliance of which is a material
                  element of this Contract, and failure to comply is a breach entitling County to terminate
                  this Contract for cause.
             f.   Ifthe Work involves lawn and landscape maintenance, Contractor shall salvage, recycle,
                  compost, or mulch yard waste material at an approved site, if feasible and cost effective.

27. NO ATTORNEY FEES. In the event any arbitration, action or proceeding, including any
    bankruptcy proceeding, is instituted to enforce any term of this Contract, each party shall be
    responsible for its own attorneys’ fees and expenses.

28. CONFIDENTIALITY. Contractor acknowledges that it and its employees and agents may, in the
    course of performing their obligations under this Contract, be exposed to or acquire information that
    the County desires or is required to maintain as confidential, including information that is protected
    under applicable law, including Personal Information (as “Personal Information” is defined in ORS
     646A 602(11)).
     Contractor agrees to hold any and all information that it is required by law or that the County marks as
     “Confidential” to be held in confidence (“Confidential Information”), using at least the same degree of
     care that Contractor uses in maintaining the confidentiality of its own confidential information, and
     will use the Confidential Information for no purpose other than in the performance of this Contract, and
     to advise each of its employees and agents of their obligations to keep Confidential Information
     confidential.

     Contractor agrees that, except as directed by the County, Contractor will not at any time during or
     after the term of this Contract, disclose, directly or indirectly, any Confidential Information to any

Rev 2/2023                                           Page 6
      person, and that upon termination or expiration of this Contract or the County’s request, Contractor
      will turn over to the County all documents, papers, records and other materials in Contractor's
      possession which embody Confidential Information.

      Contractor acknowledges that breach of this Contract, including disclosure of any Confidential
      Information, or disclosure of other information that, at law or in good conscience or equity, ought to
      remain confidential, will give rise to irreparable injury to the County that cannot adequately be
      compensated in damages. Accordingly, the County may seek and obtain injunctive relief against the
      breach or threatened breach of the foregoing undertakings, in addition to any other legal remedies that
      may be available. Contractor acknowledges and agrees that the covenants contained herein are
      necessary for the protection of the legitimate business interests of the County and are reasonable in
      scope and content.

      Contractor agrees to comply with all reasonable requests by the County to ensure the confidentiality
      and nondisclosure of the Confidential Information, including if requested and without limitation: (a)
      obtaining nondisclosure agreements, in a form approved by the County, from each of Contractor’s
      employees and agents who are performing services, and providing copies of such agreements to the
      County; and (b) performing criminal background checks on each of Contractor’s employees and
      agents who are performing services, and providing a copy of the results to the County.

      Contractor shall report, either orally or in writing, to the County any use or disclosure of Confidential
      Information not authorized by this Contract or in writing by the County, including any reasonable
      belief that an unauthorized individual has accessed Confidential Information. Contractor shall make
      the report to the County immediately upon discovery of the unauthorized disclosure, but in no event
      more than two (2) business days after Contractor reasonably believes there has been such
      unauthorized use or disclosure. Contractor’s report shall identify: (i) the nature of the unauthorized
      use or disclosure, (ii) the Confidential Information used or disclosed, (iii) who made the unauthorized
      use or received the unauthorized disclosure, (iv) what Contractor has done or shall do to mitigate any
      deleterious effect of the unauthorized use or disclosure, and (v) what corrective action Contractor has
      taken or shall take to prevent future similar unauthorized use or disclosure. Contractor shall provide
      such other information, including a written report, as reasonably requested by the County.

      Notwithstanding any other provision in this Contract, Contractor will be responsible for all damages,
      fines and corrective action (including credit monitoring services) arising from disclosure of such
      Confidential Information caused by a breach of its data security or the confidentiality provisions
      hereunder.

      The provisions in this Section shall operate in addition to, and not as limitation of, the confidentiality
      and similar requirements set forth in the rest of the Contract, as it may otherwise be amended.
      Contractor’s obligations under this Contract shall survive the expiration or termination of the
      Contract, as amended, and shall be perpetual.

29. CRIMINAL BACKGROUND CHECK REQUIREMENTS. Contractor shall be required to have
    criminal background checks (and in certain instances fingerprint background checks) performed on
    all employees, agents, or subcontractors that perform services under this Contract. Only those
    employees, agents, or subcontractors that have met the acceptability standards of the County may
    perform services under this Contract or be given access to Personal Information, Confidential
    Information or access to County facilities.

30.   [RESERVED]
31.   [RESERVED]
32.   [RESERVED]
33.   [RESERVED]
Rev 2/2023                                            Page   7
34. MERGER. THIS CONTRACT CONSTITUTES THE ENTIRE AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE
    PARTIES WITH RESPECT TO THE SUBJECT MATTER REFERENCED THEREIN. THERE
    ARE NO UNDERSTANDINGS, AGREEMENTS, OR REPRESENTATIONS, ORAL OR
    WRITTEN, NOT SPECIFIED HEREIN REGARDING THIS CONTRACT. NO AMENDMENT,
    CONSENT, OR WAIVER OF TERMS OF THIS CONTRACT SHALL BIND EITHER PARTY
    UNLESS IN WRITING AND SIGNED BY ALL PARTIES. ANY SUCH AMENDMENT,
    CONSENT, OR WAIVER SHALL BE EFFECTIVE ONLY IN THE SPECIFIC INSTANCE AND
    FOR THE SPECIFIC PURPOSE GIVEN. CONTRACTOR, BY THE SIGNATURE HERETO OF
    ITS AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE, IS AN INDEPENDENT CONTRACTOR,
    ACKNOWLEDGES HAVING READ AND UNDERSTOOD THIS CONTRACT, AND
    CONTRACTOR AGREES TO BE BOUND BY ITS TERMS AND CONDITIONS.

By their signatures below, the parties to this Contract agree to the terms, conditions, and content
expressed herein.

 Corporate Translation Services, LLC                              Clackamas County
 Dba Language Link
 1417 SE Rasmussen Blvd
 Battle Ground, WA 98604

                                                                  Chair
 Dan   A/ebeon                           July 11, 2023

 Authorized Signature                      Date

  Dan Nelson, President
                                                                  Recording Secretary
 Name / Title (Printed)

 1889070-92                                                       Date
 Oregon Business Registry #
                                                                  Approved as to Form:
 FLLC/DELEWARE
                                                                           / Ay                07/12/2023
 Entity Type / State of Formation                                         LI   7
                                                                  County Counsel                      Date




Rev 2/2023                                               Page 8
                               EXHIBIT A
             RFQ 2023-39 ON-CALL INTERPRETER SERVICES
                        PUBLISHED APRIL 27, 2023




Rev 2/2023                     Page   9
            CLACKAMAS
                  coOouNT        ¥



      REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS #2023-39

                       FOR

                Interpreter Services

     BOARD OF COUNTY COMMISSIONERS
            TOOTIE SMITH, Chair
          PAUL SAVAS, Commissioner
          MARK SHULL, Commissioner
       MARTHA SCHRADER, Commissioner
           BEN WEST, Commissioner




                   Gary Schmidt
               County Administrator


                    Mike Faris
                 Contract Analyst

PROPOSAL    CLOSING DATE, TIME AND LOCATION

   DATE:       May 25, 2023

   TIME:       2:00 PM, Pacific Time

   PLACE:      https://bidlocker.us/a/clackamascounty/BidLocker
                                                      SCHEDULE


Request for Proposals Issued............:ccccscceesseeceseeeeees April 27, 2023

Protest of Specifications Deadline..............ccceeseeeeeees May 4, 2023, 5:00 PM, Pacific Time

Deadline to Submit Clarifying Questions.................. May 18, 2023, 5:00 PM, Pacific Time

Request for Proposals Closing Date and Time.........May 25, 2023, 2:00 PM, Pacific Time

Deadline to Submit Protest of Award................... Seven (7) days from the Intent to Award




                                             TABLE OF CONTENTS


                                Section 1 — Notice of Request for Proposals

                                Section 2 — Instructions to Proposers

                                Section 3 — Scope of Work

                                Section 4 — Evaluation and Selection Criteria

                                Section 5 — Proposal Content (Including Proposal Certification)




RFP #2023-39 Interpreter Services                          Page ti
                                   SECTION 1
                       NOTICE OF REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS

Notice is hereby given that Clackamas County through its Board of County Commissioners will receive
sealed Proposals per specifications until 2:00 PM, May 25, 2023 (“Closing”), to provide Interpreter
Services. No Proposals will be received or considered after that time.

Location of RFP documents: OregonBuys
RFP Documents can be downloaded from the state of Oregon procurement website (““OregonBuys’”) at
the following address https://oregonbuys.gov/bso/view/login/login.xhtml, Document No. S-
C01010-00006733.

Prospective Proposers will need to sign in to download the information and that information will be
accumulated for a Plan Holder's List. Prospective Proposers are responsible for obtaining any Addenda,
clarifying questions, and Notices of Award from OregonBuys.

Submitting Proposals: Bid Locker
Proposals will only be accepted electronically thru a secure online bid submission service, Bid Locker.
Email submissions to Clackamas County email addresses will no longer be acce pted.
    A. Completed proposal documents must arrive electronically via Bid Locker located at
        https://bidlocker.us/a/clackamascounty/BidLocker.
    B. Bid Locker will electronically document the date and time of all submissions. Completed
         documents must arrive by the deadline indicated in Section 1 or as modified by Addendum.
         LATE PROPOSALS WILL NOT BE ACCEPTED.
    C.   Proposers must register and create a profile for their business with Bid Locker in order to submit
         for this project. It is free to register for Bid Locker.
    D.   Proposers with further questions concerning Bid Locker may review the Vendor’s Guide located
         at https://www.clackamas.us/how-to-bid-on-county-projects .

Contact Information
Procurement Process and Technical Questions: Michael Faris , MFaris@clackamas.us

The Board of County Commissioners reserves the right to reject any and all Proposals not in compliance
with all prescribed public bidding procedures and requirements, and may reject for good cause any and all
Proposals upon the finding that it is in the public interest to do so and to waive any and all informalities in
the public interest. In the award of the contract, the Board of County Commissioners will consider the
element of time, will accept the Proposal or Proposals which in their estimation will best serve the
interests of Clackamas County and will reserve the right to award the contract to the contractor whose
Proposal shall be best for the public good.

Clackamas County encourages proposals from Minority, Women, Veteran and Emerging Small
Businesses.




                                                    Page 1
                                             SECTION 2
                                    INSTRUCTIONS TO PROPOSERS

Clackamas County (“County”) reserves the right to reject any and all Proposals received as a result of this
RFP. County Local Contract Review Board Rules (“LCRB”) govern the procurement process for the County.

2.1       Modification or Withdrawal of Proposal: Any Proposal may be modified or withdrawn at any time
prior to the Closing deadline, provided that a written request is received by the County Procurement Division
Director, prior to the Closing. The withdrawal of a Proposal will not prejudice the right of a Proposer to submit
anew Proposal.

2.2      Requests for Clarification and Requests for Change: Proposers may submit questions regarding
the specifications of the RFP. Questions must be received in writing on or before 5:00 p.m. (Pacific Time), on
the date indicated in the Schedule, at the Procurement Division address as listed in Section         1 of this RFP.
Requests for changes must include the reason for the change and any proposed changes to the requirements.
The purpose of this requirement is to permit County to correct, prior to the opening of Proposals, RFP terms
or technical requirements that may be unlawful, improvident or which unjustifiably restrict competition.
County will consider all requested changes and, if appropriate, amend the RFP. No oral or written instructions
or information concerning this RFP from County managers, employees or agents to prospective Proposers shall
bind County unless included in an Addendum to the RFP.

2.3      Protests of the RFP/Specifications: Protests must be in accordance with LCRB C-047-0730.
Protests of Specifications must be received in writing on or before 5:00 p.m. (Pacific Time), on the date
indicated in the Schedule, or within three (3) business days of issuance of any addendum, at the Procurement
Division address listed in Section 1 of this RFP. Protests may not be faxed. Protests of the RFP specifications
must include the reason for the protest and any proposed changes to the requirements.

2.4      Addenda: If any part of this RFP is changed, an addendum will be provided to Proposers that have
provided an address to the Procurement Division for this procurement. It shall be Proposers responsibility to
regularly check OregonBuys for any notices, published addenda, or response to clarifying questions.

2.5       Submission of Proposals: Proposals must be submitted in accordance with Section 5. All Proposals
shall be legibly written in ink or typed and comply in all regards with the requirements of this RFP. Proposals
that include orders or qualifications may be rejected as irregular. All Proposals must include a signature that
affirms the Proposer’s intent to be bound by the Proposal (may be on cover letter, on the Proposal, or the
Proposal Certification Form) shall be signed. If a Proposal is submitted by a firm or partnership, the name and
address of the firm or partnership shall be shown, together with the names and addresses of the members. If
the Proposal is submitted by a corporation, it shall be signed in the name of such corporation by an official
who is authorized to bind the contractor. The Proposals will be considered by the County to be submitted in
confidence and are not subject to public disclosure until the notice of intent to award has been issued.

No late Proposals will be accepted. Proposals submitted after the Closing will be considered late and will be
returned unopened. Proposals may not be submitted by telephone or fax.

2.6      Post-Selection Review and Protest of Award: County will name the apparent successful Proposer in
a Notice of Intent to Award published on OregonBuys. Identification of the apparent successful Proposer is
procedural only and creates no right of the named Proposer to award of the contract. Competing Proposers shall
be given seven (7) calendar days from the date on the Notice of Intent to Award to review the file at the
Procurement Division office and file a written protest of award, pursuant to LCRB C-047-0740. Any award
protest must be in writing and must be delivered by email, hand-delivery or mail to the address for the
Procurement Division as listed in Section 1 of this RFP.

Only actual Proposers may protest if they believe they have been adversely affected because the Proposer would
be eligible to be awarded the contract in the event the protest is successful. The basis of the written protest must
be in accordance with ORS 279B.410 and shall specify the grounds upon which the protest is based. In order to
be an adversely affected Proposer with a right to submit a written protest, a Proposer must be next in line for


RFP #2023-39 Interpreter Services                      Page 2
award, i.e. the protester must claim that all higher rated Proposers are ineligible for award because they are
non-responsive or non-responsible.

County will consider any protests received and:
        a. reject all protests and proceed with final evaluation of, and any allowed contract language
            negotiation with, the apparent successful Proposer and, pending the satisfactory outcome of this
            final evaluation and negotiation, enter into a contract with the named Proposer; OR
        b. sustain a meritorious protest(s) and reject the apparent successful Proposer as nonresponsive, if
            such Proposer is unable to demonstrate that its Proposal complied with all material requirements
            of the solicitation and Oregon public procurement law; thereafter, County may name a new
            apparent successful Proposer; OR
        c. reject all Proposals and cancel the procurement.

2.7      Acceptance of Contractual Requirements: Failure of the selected Proposer to execute a contract and
deliver required insurance certificates within ten (10) calendar days after notification of an award may result in
cancellation of the award. This time period may be extended at the option of County.

2.8       Public Records: Proposals are deemed confidential until the “Notice of Intent to Award” letter is issued.
This RFP and one copy of each original Proposal received in response to it, together with copies of all documents
pertaining to the award of a contract, will be kept and made a part of a file or record which will be open to public
inspection. If a Proposal contains any information that is considered a TRADE SECRET under ORS 192.345(2),
SUCH INFORMATION MUST BE LISTED ON A SEPARATE SHEET CAPABLE OF SEPARATION
FROM THE REMAINING PROPOSAL AND MUST BE CLEARLY MARKED                                                WITH THE
FOLLOWING LEGEND:

“This information constitutes a trade secret under ORS 192.345(2), and shall not be disclosed except in
accordance with the Oregon Public Records Law, ORS Chapter 192.”

The Oregon Public Records Law exempts from disclosure only bona fide trade secrets, and the exemption from
disclosure applies only “unless the public interest requires disclosure in the particular instance” (ORS 192.345).
Therefore, non-disclosure of documents, or any portion of a document submitted as part of a Proposal, may
depend upon official or judicial determinations made pursuant to the Public Records Law.

2.9       Investigation of References: County reserves the right to investigate all references in addition to those
supplied references and investigate past performance of any Proposer with respect to its successful performance
of similar services, its compliance with specifications and contractual obligations, its completion or delivery of
a project on schedule, its lawful payment of subcontractors and workers, and any other factor relevant to this
RFP. County may postpone the award or the execution of the contract after the announcement of the apparent
successful Proposer in order to complete its investigation.

2.10     RFP Proposal Preparation Costs and Other Costs: Proposer costs of developing the Proposal, cost
of attendance at an interview (if requested by County), or any other costs are entirely the responsibility of the
Proposer, and will not be reimbursed in any manner by County.

2.11     Clarification and Clarity: County reserves the right to seek clarification of each Proposal, or to make
an award without further discussion of Proposals received. Therefore, it is important that each Proposal be
submitted initially in the most complete, clear, and favorable manner possible.

2.12     Right to Reject Proposals: County reserves the right to reject any or all Proposals or to withdraw any
item from the award, if such rejection or withdrawal would be in the public interest, as determined by County.

2.13        Cancellation: County reserves the right to cancel or postpone this RFP at any time or to award no
contract.

2.14     Proposal Terms: All Proposals, including any price quotations, will be valid and firm through a
period of one hundred and eighty (180) calendar days following the Closing date. County may require an


RFP #2023-39 Interpreter Services                      Page 3
extension of this firm offer period. Proposers will be required to agree to the longer time frame in order to be
further considered in the procurement process.

2.15     Oral Presentations: At County’s sole option, Proposers may be required to give an oral presentation of
their Proposals to County, a process which would provide an opportunity for the Proposer to clarify or elaborate
on the Proposal but will in no material way change Proposer’s original Proposal. If the evaluating committee
requests presentations, the Procurement Division will schedule the time and location for said presentation. Any
costs of participating in such presentations will be borne solely by Proposer and will not be reimbursed by
County. Note: Oral presentations are at the discretion of the evaluating committee and may not be conducted;
therefore, written Proposals should be complete.

2.16     Usage: It is the intention of County to utilize the services of the successful Proposer(s) to provide
services as outlined in the below Scope of Work.

2.17     Review for Responsiveness: Upon receipt of all Proposals, the Procurement Division or designee
will determine the responsiveness of all Proposals before submitting them to the evaluation committee. If a
Proposal is incomplete or non-responsive in significant part or in whole, it will be rejected and will not be
submitted to the evaluation committee. County reserves the right to determine if an inadvertent error is solely
clerical or is a minor informality which may be waived, and then to determine if an error is grounds for
disqualifying a Proposal. The Proposer’s contact person identified on the Proposal will be notified, identifying
the reason(s) the Proposal is non-responsive. One copy of the Proposal will be archived and all others
discarded.

2.18      RFP Incorporated into Contract: This RFP will become part of the Contract between County and
the selected contractor(s). The contractor(s) will be bound to perform according to the terms of this RFP, their
Proposal(s), and the terms of the Sample Contract.

2.19     Communication Blackout Period: Except as called for in this RFP, Proposers may not communicate
with members of the Evaluation Committee or other County employees or representatives about the RFP during
the procurement process until the apparent successful Proposer is selected, and all protests, if any, have been
resolved. Communication in violation of this restriction may result in rejection of a Proposer.

2.20      Prohibition on Commissions          and Subcontractors: County will contract directly with
persons/entities capable of performing the requirements of this RFP. Contractors must be represented directly.
Participation by brokers or commissioned agents will not be allowed during the Proposal process. Contractor
shall not use subcontractors to perform the Work unless specifically pre-authorized in writing to do so by the
County.     Contractor represents that any employees assigned to perform the Work, and any authorized
subcontractors performing the Work, are fully qualified to perform the tasks assigned to them, and shall
perform the Work in a competent and professional manner. Contractor shall not be permitted to add on any fee
or charge for subcontractor Work.        Contractor shall provide, if requested, any documents relating to
subcontractor’s qualifications to perform required Work.

2.21      Ownership of Proposals: All Proposals in response to this RFP are the sole property of County, and
subject to the provisions of ORS 192.410-192.505 (Public Records Act).

2.22      Clerical Errors in Awards: County reserves the right to correct inaccurate awards resulting from its
clerical errors.

2.23     Rejection of Qualified Proposals: Proposals may be rejected in whole or in part if they attempt to
limit or modify any of the terms, conditions, or specifications of the RFP or the Sample Contract.

2.24      Collusion: By responding, the Proposer states that the Proposal is not made in connection with any
competing Proposer submitting a separate response to the RFP, and is in all aspects fair and without collusion
or fraud. Proposer also certifies that no officer, agent, elected official, or employee of County has a pecuniary
interest in this Proposal.



RFP #2023-39 Interpreter Services                     Page 4
2.25    Evaluation Committee: Proposals will be evaluated by a committee consisting of representatives
from County and potentially external representatives. County reserves the right to modify the Evaluation
Committee make-up in its sole discretion.

2.26     Commencement of Work: The contractor shall commence no work until all insurance requirements
have been met, the Protest of Awards deadline has been passed, any protest have been decided, a contract has
been fully executed, and a Notice to Proceed has been issued by County.

2.27 _ Best and Final Offer: County may request best and final offers from those Proposers determined by
County to be reasonably viable for contract award. However, County reserves the right to award a contract on
the basis of initial Proposal received. Therefore, each Proposal should contain the Proposer’s best terms from
a price and technical standpoint. Following evaluation of the best and final offers, County may select for final
contract negotiations/execution the offers that are most advantageous to County, considering cost and the
evaluation criteria in this RFP.

2.28   Nondiscrimination: The successful Proposer agrees that, in performing the work called for by this
RFP and in securing and supplying materials, contractor will not discriminate against any person on the basis
of race, color, religious creed, political ideas, sex, age, marital status, sexual orientation, gender identity,
veteran status, physical or mental handicap, national origin or ancestry, or any other class protected by
applicable law.

2.29      Intergovernmental Cooperative Procurement Statement: Pursuant to ORS 279A and LCRB, other
public agencies shall have the ability to purchase the awarded goods and services from the awarded
contractor(s) under terms and conditions of the resultant contract. Any such purchases shall be between the
contractor and the participating public agency and shall not impact the contactor’s obligation to the County.
Any estimated purchase volumes listed herein do not include other public agencies and County makes no
guarantee as to their participation. Any Proposer, by written notification included with their Proposal, may
decline to extend the prices and terms of this solicitation to any and/or all other public agencies. County grants
to any and all public serving governmental agencies, authorization to purchase equivalent services or products
described herein at the same submitted unit bid price, but only with the consent of the contractor awarded the
contract by the County.




RFP #2023-39 Interpreter Services                      Page 5
                                              SECTION 3
                                           SCOPE OF WORK

3.1.     INTRODUCTION

The County, on behalf of its Departments and special Districts (collectively referred to as “Department”),
is seeking proposals for on-call contractors to provide interpreter services including but not limited to in
person, telephonic, transcription and video platforms. The County wishes to contract with qualified firms
for interpreter services to and from one or more languages to and from the English language on an on-call
basis. The County intends to award multiple contracts as a result of this solicitation.

Please direct all Technical/Specifications or Procurement Process Questions to the indicated
representative referenced in the Notice of Request for Proposals and note the communication
restriction outlined in Section 2.19.

3.2      BACKGROUND

Clackamas County seeks to contract with qualified vendors to provide interpreter services to be utilized
throughout the County by in-person, telephonic, video conferencing, and written translation platforms.
These services are for all Clackamas County entities including but not limited to Sheriff's Department,
District Attorney’s Office, Clackamas County Service District 1, North Clackamas Parks and Recreation
District, Transportation and Development, Resolution Services, Library District, Water Environment
Services, Health, Housing and Human Services and other County component units.

3.3.     SCOPE OF WORK

3.3.1.   Scope:

The purpose of this Request for Proposals (“RFP”) is to contract with qualified individuals or firms
(hereafter “Contractor’’) to provide on-call services including but not limited to in-person, telephonic,
video conferencing, and written translation services for various languages to and from the English
language. The resulting contract will be an on-call contract for services needed over the contract term.
The compensation for each task will be a time and material basis at the rates provided in proposal
submitted with no guarantee of compensation during the contract term. The annual not to exceed for each
contract will be $250,000, with a total contract value of not-to-exceed $1,250,000.000, for a five year
contract term expiring June 30, 2028. It is the intent of the County to issue multiple contracts under this
RFP.

Contractors may need to agree to additional terms and conditions as mandated by State, Federal or
County requirements per each engagement such as HIPPA or other State mandated regulations. This
includes but is not limited to additional agreements such as Business Associate Agreement and Qualified
Service Organization Business Associate Agreement. Samples of these agreements can be found at:
https://www.clackamas.us/finance/terms.html

Services will be coordinated with a Departmental representative (“County Requestor”) for each
engagement Service scheduling will be by telephone or email correspondence and all confirmations must
be received to the County Requestor within 24 hours of request. The request confirmation should include
the name of the County Requestor, service(s) time(s) and location requested, confirmation of services and
any other pertinent information necessary. Minimum hours for billing and service requested for in-person
interpreter services is one (1) hour per request, regardless of actual service time, which includes client no
show. The County has the right to utilize services within the time frame specified regardless of original
scope of work as long as there is no change of location unless mutually agreed upon in writing. County
Requestor and Contractor must cancel a minimum of 48 hours in advance of requested services time.


RFP #2023-39 Interpreter Services                   Page 6
County reserves the right to charge an hour for hour billing fee at their specified rates for failure to appear
after a written confirmation is received.

Additional hours for in-person interpreter services or longer term engagements may be required as needed
and mutually agreed upon in writing by both the County and Contractor.

Contractor to provide all labor, material, equipment and supplies necessary to provide interpreter services
in-person, telephonically, video conferencing, and written translation services. The County will not accept
additional ad hoc fees such as location fees, travel fees, etc. in addition to the hourly rate.

Contractor will invoice Departments directly on a monthly basis with detailed information per transaction
that will include date, time, location address, language services used, platform utilized (in-person,
telephonic, video, transcriber) and any other pertinent notes. If providing written translation, Contractor
shall submit in writing, the original request by the Department including documents requesting
translation. County Requestor may require Contractor to bill third party entities directly.

Telephonic interpretation must utilize a land line phone to maintain integrity of the connection. If
mutually agreed upon, cellular devices may be utilized to perform the interpreter services either via video
or telephonic interpreter services.

Contractors must have the ability to provide high-quality Video Remote Interpreting and Video Relay
Service (“VRI/VRS”) available from multiple platforms — utilizing current (PC/MAC/Android/iOS)
technology for the provision of on-site interpreting services and video remote “mobile” interpreting,
delivering a wide array of options to meet the varied communication needs of the Sheriff's Office, clients
and Departments.

Contractor duties may include but are not limited to interpreter services, which may consist of either
VRI/VRS interpretive services or on-site interpretation as the need dictates, for Departments including but
not limited to the County Jail, County Courthouse (Civil Services), Community Corrections (Parole and
Probation Services), and Law Enforcement Operations (Patrol Services and Criminal Investigations).

Certifications:

Contractors must be certified in American Sign Language (ASL) through the National Association of the
Deaf (https://www.nad.org/).

Contractors who are Medically Certified must be registered and certified as a medical Interpreter as
deemed by the Oregon Health Authority (http://www.oregon.gov/oha/oei/pages/hci-certification.aspx).

Contractors who are Legally Certified must be registered and certified as a Court Interpreter as deemed by
the Oregon Judicial Department (http://www.courts.oregon.gov/programs/interpreters/Pages/roster.aspx).

Contractors who perform General interpreter services must be fluent in language(s) in which they provide
services by oral communication and or in writing.

Firms or individuals may be required to supply certifications at the time of services being rendered at the
request of the County Requestor.

Typical service requests may include but not limited to:
    e   Interpreter services in clinics, education classes working directly with adults, children, for jurors,
        classes for parents youth, general County business including but not limited to meetings, events,
        translation of documents as well as public communication material.




RFP #2023-39 Interpreter Services                   Page 7
Contractor may or may not be required to meet additional guidelines as specified by both finding source
and departmental needs. These may include but are not limited to:

         BAA
         QSOBAA
         Ability to record interactions (interpretations) of all parties
         Consent form all parties to recordings- Conversations may be recorded for law enforcement
         purposes (Oregon Law) and possibility of being subject to answering subpoenas (County
         Counsel/District Attorney).

3.3.2.   Work Schedule:

Services will be performed on an as needed schedule with little to no notice. The schedule of services will
be mutually agreed upon scope of work on a twenty four hour basis, seven days a week, and three
hundred and sixty five days a year (24/7/365). Work performed will either be in-person, utilization of
video or telephonic interpreter services.

Most services to be performed between the hours of 7:00 AM and 6:00 PM, Monday through Friday.

Location of Work:
All Clackamas County and component unit locations are intended to be covered under the resulting
contract. The majority of service locations are in the Clackamas County Metro areas of Oregon City,
Milwaukie, Gladstone, Clackamas, West Linn, Canby area. There are some service locations in outlying
areas such as Sandy and Welches, however the volume is minor compared to the Metro area.

3.3.3.   Term of Contract:
The term of the contract shall be from the effective date through June 30, 2028. Prices during the term of
the contract will be fixed.

3.3.4    Sample Contract: Submission of a Proposal in response to this RFP indicates Proposer’s
willingness to enter into a contract containing substantially the same terms (including insurance
requirements) of the sample contract identified below. No action or response to the sample contract is
required under this RFP. Any objections to the sample contract terms should be raised in accordance with
Paragraphs 2.2 or 2.3 of this RFP, pertaining to requests for clarification or change or protest of the
RFP/specifications, and as otherwise provided for in this RFP. This RFP and all supplemental information
in response to this RFP will be a binding part of the final contract.

The applicable Sample Personal Services Contract for this RFP can be found at
https://www.clackamas.us/finance/terms.html.


Professional Services Contract (unless checked, item does not apply)
    The following paragraphs of the Professional Services Contract will be applicable:
    L_] Article I, Paragraph 5 — Travel and Other Expense is Authorized
    [xX] Article II, Paragraph 28 — Confidentiality
    [Xx] Article II, Paragraph 29 — Criminal Background Check Requirements
    L_] Article II, Paragraph 30 — Key Persons
    [Xx] Article II, Paragraph 31 — Cooperative Contracting
    L_] Article II, Paragraph 32 — Federal Contracting Requirements
     [_] Exhibit   A — On-Call Provision

Background Checks
Contractors are responsible for performing and paying for Criminal Background Checks as required,
Article II, Paragraph 29 on the Professional Services Standardized Contract Terms and Conditions.

RFP #2023-39 Interpreter Services                 Page 8
Contractors shall perform criminal background checks on all employees, agents or subcontractors that
perform services before any services are rendered under established Contracts with Clackamas County
from this RFP. All criminal background check requirement documentation shall be made available at the
request of the County. Failure to provide or adhere to this standard will result in termination of your
contract. This is applicable to all Contractors who Clackamas County establishes a contract with.


    The following insurance requirements will be applicable:
    ><] Commercial General Liability: combined single limit, or the equivalent, of not less than
        $1,000,000 per occurrence, with an annual aggregate limit of $2,000,000 for Bodily Injury and
        Property Damage.
    [x] Professional Liability: combined single limit, or the equivalent, of not less than $1,000,000 per
        occurrence, with an annual aggregate limit of $2,000,000 for damages caused by error, omission
        or negligent acts.
    [x] Automobile Liability: combined single limit, or the equivalent, of not less than $1,000,000 per
        occurrence for Bodily Injury and Property Damage.




RFP #2023-39 Interpreter Services                 Page 9
                                             SECTION 4
                                      EVALUATION PROCEDURE

4.1     An evaluation committee will review all Proposals that are initially deemed responsive and they shall
        rank the Proposals in accordance with the below criteria. The evaluation committee may recommend an
        award based solely on the written responses or may request Proposal interviews/presentations.
        Interviews/presentations, if deemed beneficial by the evaluation committee, will consist of the highest
        scoring Proposers. The invited Proposers will be notified of the time, place, and format of the
        interview/presentation. Based on the interview/presentation, the evaluation committee may revise their
        scoring.

        Written Proposals must be complete and no additions, deletions, or substitutions will be permitted
        during the interview/presentation (if any). The evaluation committee will recommend award of a
        contract to the final County decision maker based on the highest scoring Proposal. The County decision
        maker reserves the right to accept the recommendation, award to a different Proposer, or reject all
        Proposals and cancel the RFP.

        Proposers are not permitted to directly communicate with any member of the evaluation committee
        during the evaluation process. All communication will be facilitated through the Procurement
        representative.

42      Evaluation Criteria

        Category                                                           Points available:

        Proposer’s General Background and Qualifications                   0-30
        Scope of Work                                                      0-45
        Fees                                                               0-25
        Available points                                                   0-100

4.3     Once a selection has been made, the County will enter into contract negotiations. During negotiation,
        the County may require any additional information it deems necessary to clarify the approach and
        understanding of the requested services. Any changes agreed upon during contract negotiations will
        become part of the final contract. The negotiations will identify a level of work and associated fee that
        best represents the efforts required. If the County is unable to come to terms with the highest scoring
        Proposer, discussions shall be terminated and negotiations will begin with the next highest scoring
        Proposer. If the resulting contract contemplates multiple phases and the County deems it is in its
        interest to not authorize any particular phase, it reserves the right to return to this solicitation and
        commence negotiations with the next highest ranked Proposer to complete the remaining phases.




RFP #2023-39 Interpreter Services                 Page 10
                                                  SECTION 5
                                             PROPOSAL CONTENTS

5.1.       Vendors must observe submission instructions and be advised as follows:

5.1.1.  Proposals will only be accepted electronically thru Equity Hub’s Bid Locker. Email submissions to
Clackamas County email addresses will no longer be accepted.

5.1.2. Completed proposal documents must arrive electronically via Equity Hub’s Bid Locker located at
https://bidlocker.us/a/clackamascounty/BidLocker.

5.1.3.  County reserves the right to solicit additional information or Proposal clarification from the vendors, or
any one vendor, should the County deem such information necessary.

5.1.4.  Proposal may not exceed a total of 20 pages (single-sided), inclusive of all exhibits, attachments, title
pages, pages separations, table of contents, or other information. The Proposal Certification Page will NOT
count towards the final page count.

                    Provide the following information in the order in which it appears below:

5.2.       Proposer’s General Background and Qualifications:
       e   Description of the firm.
       e    Provide Credentials (Medical and/or Legal Certifications by the State of Oregon) and experience of key
           individuals that would be assigned to this project.
       e   Description of providing similar services to public entities of similar size within the past five (5) years.
       e   Description of the firm’s ability to meet the requirements in Section 3.
       e   Description of what distinguishes the firm from other firms performing a similar service.

5.3.       Scope of Work
       e   Proposers are required to attach Section 6 (see below), spreadsheet of languages spoken and written and
           in which mode of delivery they are able to provide whether that is in person, telephonically or written
           translation services.
       e   Provide detailed project approach to execute these services.
       e   Provide a timeline for your services

5.4.    Fees
The quoted fees must be a time and material hourly rate for each type of service provided. The County will not
accept additional ad hoc fees such as location fees, travel fees, etc. in addition to the hourly rate. Vendors may
propose on a per hour (in-person), per minute (telephonic or video), or per word basis (transcription).

5.5.     References
Provide three (3) references from clients your firm has served similar to the County in the past three (3) years,
including one client that has newly engaged the firm in the past thirty-six (36) months and one (1) long-term client.
Provide the name, address, email, and phone number of the references. Points awarded for this criteria are based
on both the providing of references as well as information gleaned from the provided contacts. Evaluation
Committee members may contact references at their sole discretion.

5.6.       Completed Proposal Certification (see the below form)




RFP #2023-39 Interpreter Services                     Page 11
                                          PROPOSAL CERTIFICATION
                                               RFP #2023-39
Submitted by:     Corporate Translation Services, LLC dba Language Link; incorporated in Delaware
                   (Must be entity’s full legal name, and State of Formation)

Each Proposer must read, complete and submit a copy of this Proposal Certification with their Proposal. Failure to do
so may result in rejection of the Proposal. By signature on this Proposal Certification, the undersigned certifies that
they are authorized to act on behalf of the Proposer and that under penalty of perjury, the undersigned will comply
with the following:

SECTION I. OREGON TAX LAWS: As required in ORS 279B.110(2)(e), the undersigned hereby certifies that, to
the best of the undersigned’s knowledge, the Proposer is not in violation of any Oregon Tax Laws. For purposes of
this certification, “Oregon Tax Laws” means the tax laws of the state or a political subdivision of the state, including
ORS 305.620 and ORS chapters 316, 317 and 318. Ifa contract is executed, this information will be reported to the
Internal Revenue Service. Information not matching IRS records could subject Proposer to 24% backup withholding.

SECTION II. NON-DISCRIMINATION: That the Proposer has not and will not discriminate in its employment
practices with regard to race, creed, age, religious affiliation, sex, disability, sexual orientation, gender identity,
national origin, or any other protected class. Nor has Proposer or will Proposer discriminate against a subcontractor in
the awarding of a subcontract because the subcontractor is a disadvantaged business enterprise, a minority-owned
business, a woman-owned business, a business that a service-disabled veteran owns or an emerging small business
that is certified under ORS 200.055.

SECTION       III. CONFLICT     OF INTEREST:       The undersigned hereby certifies that no elected official, officer,
agent or employee of Clackamas County is personally interested, directly or indirectly, in any resulting contract from
this RFP, or the compensation to be paid under such contract, and that no representation, statements (oral or in
writing), ofthe County, its elected officials, officers, agents, or employees had induced Proposer to submit this
Proposal. In addition, the undersigned hereby certifies that this proposal is made without connection with any person,
firm, or corporation submitting a proposal for the same material, and is in all respects fair and without collusion or
fraud.

SECTION IV. COMPLIANCE WITH SOLICITATION: The undersigned further agrees and certifies that they:
   1. Have read, understand and agree to be bound by and comply with all requirements, instructions,
      specifications, terms and conditions of the RFP (including any attachments); and
   2. Are an authorized representative of the Proposer, that the information provided is true and accurate, and that
      providing incorrect or incomplete information may be cause for rejection of the Proposal or contract
           termination; and
           Will furnish the designated item(s) and/or service(s) in accordance with the RFP and Proposal; and
    1vS)




     4.    Will use recyclable products to the maximum extend economically feasible in the performance of the
           contract work set forth in this RFP.

 Name: Dan Nelson                                              Date: 5/24/2023
 Signature.     2°24    Nrbeon                                 Title:   President

 Email:    ‘fp@language.link                                   Telephone:    (888) 266-2066
 Oregon Business Registry Number:        _1889070-92           OR CCB # (if applicable):
Business Designation (check one):
[_] Corporation [_] Partnership      [_] Sole Proprietorship       [_] Non-Profit          Limited Liability Company

[_] Resident Quoter, as defined in ORS 279A.120
   Non-Resident Quote. Resident State:     incorporated in Delaware

RFP #2023-39 Interpreter Services                      Page 12
                                                     Section 6
                                                  Rate Schedule




Name of Firm/Individual:

Certification(s): LJ Medical        LJ Legal       LC) General        CL) American Sign Language

Days/Hours of availability:

Are you willing to accept long term assignments?

Are you willing to perform third party billing?    [1 Yes LD) No

Please attach all current certifications to your proposal if an individual. Firms may be required to provide
certifications for their staff at the time services are rendered.




                                                             In
 Language                                                    person      Telephonic   | Video      Transcription
 American Sign Language
 Acholi — Uganda, Sudan
 Afrikaans — South Africa, Namibia
 Akan — Ghana, Ivory Coast
 Akateko — Guatemala
 Albanian — Albania
 Algerian Arabic — Algeria
 Amharic — Ethiopia
 Arabic — Widely Distributed
 Armenian — Armenia
 Ashanti (Asante Twi) — Ghana
 Assyrian — Jragq
 Azerbaijani — Azerbaijan
 Azorean Portuguese — Azores Islands
 Bahnar — Vietnam
 Bahasa Indonesia (Indonesian) —/ndonesia
 Bambara — Mali
 Belarusan — Belarus
 Bengali — Bangladesh, India
 Bosnian — Bosnia & Herzegovina
 Brazilian Portuguese — Brazil
 Bulgarian — Bulgaria
 Burmese — Myanmar (former Burma)
 Cambodian (Khmer) — Cambodia

RFP #2023-39 Interpreter Services                  Page 13
 Cantonese — China
                                                                 In
 Language                                                       ‘person   Telephonic   Video   Transcription
 Cape Verdean (Portuguese Creole) —Cape Verde
 Catalan — Andorra, Spain
 Cebuano — Philippines
 Chaldean — /rag
 Chamorro — Guam
 Chaozhou (Teochew) — China
 Chin — Myanmar (former Burma)
 Chinese (var. languages/dialects) — China
 Chuukese (Trukese) — Micronesia
 Croatian — Croatia
 Czech — Czech Republic
 Danish — Denmark
 Dari (Afgan Farsi) — Afghanistan
 Dene — Canada
 Dewoin — Liberia
 Dinka — Sudan
 Duala — Cameroon
 Dutch — Netherlands
 Egyptian Arabic — Leypt
 Estonian — Estonia
 Filipino (Tagalog) — Philippines
 Finnish — Finland
 Flemish — Belgium
 French — Africa, Canada, France,    Tunisia,et al.
 French Creole — Caribbean
 Fukienese — China
 Fulani (Fulfulde, Fula) — Cameroon, Niger,
 Nigeria, Senegal
 Fuzhou — China
 Ga — Ghana
 Gen (Mina) — Jogo, Benin
 German — Germany
 Gokana (Khana) — Nigeria
 Greek — Greece
 Gujarati — Jndia
 Haitian Creole — Haiti
 Haka Burmese — Myanmar (former Burma)
 Hmong — China,      Vietnam, Laos
 Hungarian — Hungary

RFP #2023-39 Interpreter Services                     Page 14
 Hakka — China
                                                        In
 Language                                              person   | Telephonic   | Video   Transcription
 Hausa — Niger, Nigeria
 Ibo (Igbo) — Nigeria
 Ilocano — Philippines
 Hebrew — /srae/
 Hindi — India
 Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia) — /ndonesia
 Iraqi Arabic — /rag
 Italian — Jtaly
 Japanese — Japan
 Jarai — Vietnam
 Javanese — Indonesia
 Jordanian Arabic — Jordan
 Juba Arabic — Sudan
 Kan jobal (Q’anjob’al) — Guatemala
 Kannada — /ndia
 Kapampangan — Philippines
 Karen (Pa’o, S’gaw) — Myanmar (former Burma)
 Kayah — Myanmar (former Burma)
 Khmer (Cambodian) — Cambodia
 Kinyarwanda — Rwanda
 Kirundi — Burundi
 Koho — Vietnam
 Korean — Korea
 Kpele — Guinea, Liberia
 Kurmanji (Northern Kurdish) — Turkey
 Kuawaiti Arabic — Kuwait
 Lao — Laos
 Latvian — Latvia
 Lebanese Arabic — Lebanon
 Lingala — Congo, Republic of the
 Lithuanian — Lithuania
 Luganda — Uganda
 Luo — Kenya
 Maay (Af Maay, Rahanween, Bantu) —Somalia
 Macedonian — Macedonia
 Malay — Malaysia
 Malayalam — /ndia
 Malinke — Senegal
 Mam    — Guatemala


RFP #2023-39 Interpreter Services            Page 15
 Mandarin — China
                                                              In
 Language                                                     person   | Telephonic | Video   Transcription
 Mandinka (Mandingo) — Senegal
 Marathi — India
 Marshallese — Marshall Islands
 Mayan [Akateko, Kanjobal] — Guatemala, Mexico
 Mien — China, Laos, Thailand
 Mina (Gen) — Togo, Benin
 Minangkabau — [ndonesia
 Mixteco Alto — Mexico
 Mixteco Bajo — Mexico
 Mnong — Vietnam
 Mongolian — Mongolia
 Moroccan Arabic — Morocco
 Nahuatl — Mexico
 Navajo — U.S.A. (Southwest)
 Nepalese — Nepal, India
 Nuer — Sudan
 Oromo — Ethiopia
 Palestinian Arabic — /srael, Jordan
 Pangasinan — Philippines
 Papiamento — Netherlands Antilles
 Pashto (Pushto) — Pakistan, Afghanistan
 Portuguese Creole (Cape Verdean) — Cape Verde
 Persian (Farsi)    — Afghanistan, Iran, Iraq, Pakistan
 Russian — Russia
 Samoan — Samoa
 Polish — Poland
 Portuguese — Portugal, Brazil, et al.
 San Miguel — Mexico
 Santa Eulalia — Guatemala
 Saraiki — Pakistan, India
 Serbian — Serbia, Montenegro
 Serbo-Croatian — Balkans
 Shanghainese — China
 Sichuan (Szechuan) — China
 Sinhalese — S7i Lanka
 Slovak — Slovakia
 Somali — Somalia
 Soninke (Serahule) — Mali
 Sorani (Central Kurdish) — /raq

RFP #2023-39 Interpreter Services                   Page 16
 Spanish — Spain, Latin America, et al.
                                                    In
 Language                                           person   Telephonic   Video   Transcription
 Sudanese Arabic — Sudan
 Susu — Guinea
 Swahili— Kenya, Somalia, Tanzania,
 Swedish — Sweden
 Syrian Arabic — Syria
 Tagalog (Filippino) — Philippines
 Tai Dam — Vietnam
 Taiwanese — 7Zaiwan
 Tamil — /ndia
 Telugu — /ndia
 Teochew (Chaozhou) — China
 Thai — Thailand
 Tibetan — China
 Tigrigna (Tigrinya) — Ethiopia,
 Eritrea
 Toishanese — China
 Tongan — Jonga
 Trukese (Chuukese) — Micronesia
 Tunisian Arabic — 7unisia
 Turkish — Turkey
 Twi — Ghana
 Tzotzil — Mexico
 Ukrainian — Ukraine
 Urdu — Pakistan, India
 Vietnamese — Vietnam
 Wolof — Senegal
 Xhosa — South Africa
 Yemeni Arabic — Yemen




RFP #2023-39 Interpreter Services         Page 17
                  EXHIBIT B
             CONTRACTOR’S QUOTE




Rev 2/2023          Page   10
                                                                 Language Link
                                                           Response to RFP #2023-39
                                                          Written Translation Services



5.2. Proposer’s General Background and Qualifications

Description of the firm.

    Headquartered in Battle Ground, Washington and incorporated in 1991, Language Link has thirty years of
    experience as a full-service multilingual communication agency. Our Translation Division provides document
    translation, audio-visual, eLearning, and localization services in over 100 languages, including Spanish,
    Russian, Arabic, Chinese, and Vietnamese, as well as many other languages of lesser diffusion. Our teams are
    made up of skilled individuals with a passion for their work, and are experienced professionals ready to assist
    you with all of your communication needs.

    As a language services provider with a national presence and a reputation for excellence, we are proud of the
    relationships we have built with our valued customers. Many of these relationships began decades ago, and
    have continued to grow and flourish over time. Over the course of our history, we have had the opportunity
    to partner with a multitude of clients across the United States and Canada, including federal, state, and local
    government agencies, non-profits, healthcare organizations, financial institutions, corporate entities, and
    schools and school districts.

    We maintain a robust pool of translators who are ready to assist you with your needs. Many of our translators
    hold accreditations with organizations such as the American Translators Association (ATA), Washington
    Department of Social and Health Services (DSHS), International Association of Professional Translators and
    Interpreters (IAPTI), Institute of Translation and Interpreting (ITI), and Federal and State courts. Many of our
    translators also have advanced degrees in their areas of subject matter expertise, and all possess many years
    of experience in the field. Additionally, Language Link has also proudly held corporate membership with the
    American Translators Association (ATA) since 2006.

    Language Link aims to provide the highest quality of service to our customers. We are committed to exceeding
    our customers’ expectations the first time and every time, and to continually improving the effectiveness of
    our Business Management System. Our quality process is grounded in the requirements of our ISO 9001:2015
    certification and allows us multiple levels of quality control.

    Our current translation service profile is as follows:
          e      Over 1,850 active translation clients
          e      Approximately 13.4 million words translated per year



Provide       Credentials     (Medical      and/or      Legal Certifications         by the State of Oregon)               and     experience   of key
individuals that would be assigned to this project.

    Translator Qualifications

    Language Link takes great care in recruiting and retaining only the most qualified and professional translators.
    We provide quality services that are specific to our clients’ target audiences in terms of regional dialect,
    culture and demographics. We maintain an extensive network of professional talent, and the industry



                                                        ANGUAGE LINK
                                                               A BIG LANGUAGE COMPANY
                            1417 SE Rasmussen Blvd. ¢ Suite 101 ¢ Battle Ground « WA e 98604 « www. language.link ¢ 888.266.2066
expertise of our in-house resources allows us to provide our clients a full suite of translation and localization
solutions under one roof.


A significant factor in our ability to supply such high-quality services is through our screening processes. We
only hire translators who are already experienced professionals in their field. In addition to language-specific
certifications, many of our translators hold accreditations with professional associations and governmental
agencies, including:


         American Translator’s Association (ATA) membership and certification
         Washington Department of Social and Health Services (DSHS) certification
         Federal and State Court Interpreter certification
         International Association of Professional Translators and Interpreters (IAPTI) membership
         Institute of Translation and Interpreting (ITI) membership
         Society of Translators and Interpreters of British Columbia certification

Many of our translators also have advanced degrees in their areas of expertise and years of experience in their
respective field.

Every translator must meet the following minimum                     qualifications:


         Native speaker of the target language;
         Educated in both the source and target languages;
         Two complete years of verified professional translation experience;
         Engaged in continuous education and seminars for translators;
         Possess a valid translation certificate, where applicable;
         Cultural competency and ability to translate complex thoughts and concepts in a manner faithful to
         the source material.

Once potential translators pass a preliminary screening phase, our Vendor Management Office begins
gathering additional information from the linguist, including experience, areas of expertise, and software
proficiencies. We then move to the testing and evaluation phase of the screening process. Before being
accepted as a translator for Language Link, all potential translators must undergo trial translation testing. This
is typically a document of 500 words and, depending upon the translator’s stated area of expertise, may cover
a variety of different topics, including technical, medical, social services, insurance, finance, legal, and
education.

The potential translator is given a limited timeframe in which to complete the translation and is evaluated on
their ability to meet stated deadlines. Once the trial translation is completed and returned to Language Link,
it is reviewed and evaluated by one of our experienced senior linguists. The evaluation assesses spelling,
grammar, tone and style, word usage, and reading level, in addition to assuring that the meaning of the source
document is captured and maintained in the translation.

Translators whose trial translations are deemed acceptable are entered into our database as “active” and are
eligible to be selected for projects based on their qualifications and area of experience. Our network of
translators includes those with expertise in technical fields such as medical, social services, legal, and
education. The majority of our translators were raised in countries where the target language is the primary
language spoken. They are familiar with the customs and culture of their communities, and as language
professionals, are attuned to the cultural nuances between countries and cultures. They are engaged in



                                                ANGUAGE LINK
                                                       A BIG LANGUAGE COMPANY
                    1417 SE Rasmussen Blvd. ¢ Suite 101 ¢ Battle Ground « WA e 98604 « www. language.link ¢ 888.266.2066
    continuous education and are evaluated through our vigorous quality control processes and feedback from
    our clients.


    Language Link maintains a fully staffed Vendor Management Office that is wholly dedicated to recruiting and
    vetting qualified translators. We are continually adding to our pool of resources, and have the capacity and
    ability to recruit and test new qualified talent quickly according to the language needs of our clients and the
    communities they serve. We utilize a number of resources to recruit qualified linguists, including state
    interpreter lists, industry organizations, LinkedIn, and through our own website.


    As is industry standard, Language Link utilizes a mix of employee and independent contractors to provide
    24x7x365 access to over 300 languages and dialects. Interpreters who are independent contractors are
    thoroughly vetted and approved through our internal testing and appraisal process. They must also abide by
    all of our confidentiality standards and the Interpreter Code of Ethics and Conduct.



    Key Staff

    In addition to our robust pool of qualified translators, the following individuals will be involved in overseeing
    your account and the service provision process. They are critical to facilitating the translation process and
    overseeing all aspects of your project, providing high quality service, and maintaining a consistently high
    fulfillment rate.

    Dan Nelson, President — Dan is responsible for oversight of operations and technical execution tracking,
    monitoring, and control. He ensures operations meet contractual and internal quality requirements and
    standards. Dan joined Language Link in 2006 as the Director of Information Technology, and then added
    management of the Interpretation Division to his duties in 2013, and then the Translation Division in 2014.
    Dan has almost 20 years of IT experience and extensive experience in analyzing and streamlining business
    processes through management and technology.


    Justin Paukert, Translation Division Manager — Justin is responsible for our Account Services (Quotes) Team,
    Project Management Team, Quality Assurance, and Professional Services (Production) Group. His team takes
    translation projects to the next level by working directly with customers to help them navigate the translation
    process, and to address their needs in a holistic and comprehensive way. Justin has been with Language Link
    since 2010. He began as our Translation Division’s Quote Manager and quickly grew into a project
    management role. He was the lead Project Manager for the California Secretary of State Voter Information
    Guide in the November 2014 and 2016 general elections. Today, he manages the entire Translation Division
    and will oversee all aspects of your projects, in close collaboration with his team.

    Sarah Dretske, Project Management Office Manager — Sarah has been with Language Link since 2016 and
    manages our team of experienced project managers, our Quality Assurance team, and our Account Services
    Group. Sarah works closely with the Translation Division Manager, internal colleagues and stakeholders, our
    linguistic teams, and our customers to consistently deliver exceptional translations.



Description of providing similar services to public entities of similar size within the past five (5) years.

    Language Link has a long and successful history of serving county-level government and public sector agencies,
    including those in Oregon and the broader Pacific Northwest. Some Oregon and Washington-based public
    entities we have provided translation services to in the past five years include:



                                                    ANGUAGE LINK
                                                           A BIG LANGUAGE COMPANY
                        1417 SE Rasmussen Blvd. ¢ Suite 101 ¢ Battle Ground « WA e 98604 « www. language.link ¢ 888.266.2066
    e   Cowlitz County
    e   Grays Harbor County
    e   King County
                Department of Natural Resources and Parks
            0
            0    Department of Public Health
                 Equity and Social Justice
            0


                 Hazardous Waste Program
            Oo




            o    Medical Examiner’s Office
        Kittitas County DD Program
        Klickitat County Health Department
        Marion County Health Department
        Snohomish County
            o   Executive Office
            o    Prosecutor’s Office
    e   Washington County Office of Community Development
    e   Yakima County Courts

We have translated a variety of content for these clients, including (but not limited to) surveys, brochures, fliers,
letters, reports, notices, guides, handbooks, and other publications.

Additionally, we have previously provided transcription services to Clackamas County,                             and have more   recently
provided translation services to Clackamas Community College.



Description of the firm’s ability to meet the requirements in Section 3.

    Language Link agrees to the provisions pertaining to translation services set forth in Section 3 (Scope of Work).
    For details not included elsewhere in this proposal:


    e   Invoicing: Our dedicated Client Relations and Billing teams will work with you to set up your account
        precisely to your specifications, so we can get you the exact information you request on your invoices and
        reports. Language Link is able to set up parent-child relationships between accounts for billing and
        organizational purposes. Costs and usage by language are provided with our invoices, which are typically
        issued as each individual project is completed. Each invoice includes an itemized breakdown of each task
        and associated word count by language, along with any minimum fees and total charges. Customized
        reporting and billing is available by request. We consider this an important part of customer service and
        are accustomed to working with customer specifications once a contract is signed.
    e   Certifications: There are no state medical or legal certifications for companies; state-level medical and
        legal qualifications are provided at the linguist level. Language Link as a company is an ISO 9001:2015-
        certified provider and holds corporate membership with the American Translators Association (ATA).
    e   Work Schedule: Standard office hours are 8:00 am — 5:00 pm                           Pacific Time. After-hours and weekend
        services can be made available with advance notice.
    e   Location of Work: Translation services are to be completed remotely.
    e   Background Checks:       Language Link performs background checks on all employees and independent
        contractors that will be working with the company. We strictly adhere to this policy. Our standard
        background check includes the following, at minimum:
            o    SSN Verification and Address History



                                                ANGUAGE LINK
                                                       A BIG LANGUAGE COMPANY
                    1417 SE Rasmussen Blvd. ¢ Suite 101 ¢ Battle Ground « WA e 98604 « www. language.link ¢ 888.266.2066
                 National Criminal Database Search




            0
                 National Sex Offender Search




            0
                 Re-verification of criminal records



            Oo
            o    Alias names
    e   Insurance: These requirements are met.



Description of what distinguishes the firm from other firms performing a similar service.

    Language Link is unique in that we tailor our services to meet our customers’ needs, rather than providing a
    one size fits all solution. We will work closely with you to create processes and procedures that best serve you
    and your customers. Furthermore, we work with only the most qualified linguists, ensuring that your projects
    are translated with the utmost care and professionalism.

    Partnering with Language Link provides you with the following advantages:


        e   Access to an ISO 9001:2015-certified language service provider with decades of experience;
        e   Teams of translators who possess the skills, experience, and cultural competency to provide you with
            the highest quality of service;
        e   Turnaround times that meet your schedule and need for expedited requests;
        e   Prompt provision of quotes for your translation projects that contain detailed information, including
            agreed-upon timelines and final project deliverables;
        e   Experience working with a variety of source material, including Microsoft and Adobe products;
        e   Ability to accommodate both standard and expedited requests in a wide range of language pairs and
            across many subject areas, including technical and non-technical content;
        e   Along and successful history of partnering with county-level government agencies;
        e   Qualified teams that are deeply committed to our customers’ success, and who will make every effort
            to ensure you are satisfied with the services we provide.



Scope of Work

Proposers are required to attach Section 6 (see below), spreadsheet of languages spoken and written and in
which mode of delivery they are able to provide whether that is in person, telephonically or written translation
services.

    Please see the following page for a list of proposed translation rates.

    Expedited (rush) rates will be provided based on the nature of the project and desired turnaround. Expedited
    processing is available in most instances when required by the client. Rush pricing is added to projects where,
    because of the deadline requirements, we would generate additional costs to deliver the projects on time.
    Rush charges usually range between 25% and 50% of the cost for standard turnaround.


    Language Link provides translation services in well over a hundred languages. Additional languages can be
    quoted upon request, for those without rates provided as a part of this RFP.




                                                ANGUAGE LINK
                                                       A BIG LANGUAGE COMPANY
                    1417 SE Rasmussen Blvd. ¢ Suite 101 ¢ Battle Ground « WA e 98604 « www. language.link ¢ 888.266.2066
                                                     Section 6
                                                  Rate Schedule



Name of Firm/Individual:       Corporate Translation Services, LLC dba Language Link

Certification(s): K] Medical        x] Legal       ] General           LC) American Sign Language
Days/Hours of availability;     Standard Hours are 8:00 am - 5:00 pm Pacific Time.

Are you willing to accept long term assignments?       Yes
                                                                       *Up for discussion depending on what this entails. We can
Are you willing to perform third party billing?
                                                   L    Yes   Xl No    and will bill for individual County agencies for instance.

Please attach all current certifications to your proposal if an individual. Firms may be required to provide
certifications for their staff at the time services are rendered.



                                                              In                                            Translation

 Language                                                     person    | Telephonic | Video                “Prsttrettptte
 American Sign Language                                                                                            n/a
 Acholi — Uganda, Sudan
 Afrikaans — South Africa, Namibia                                                                            $0.20/word
 Akan — Ghana, Ivory Coast
 Akateko — Guatemala
 Albanian — Albania                                                                                           $0.20/word
 Algerian Arabic — Algeria                                                                                   $0.15/word
 Amharic — Ethiopia                                                                                           $0.18/word
 Arabic — Widely Distributed                                                                                  $0.15/word
 Armenian — Armenia                                                                                           $0.23/word
 Ashanti (Asante Twi) — Ghana
 Assyrian — l/raq
 Azerbaijani — Azerbaijan                                                                                     $0.15/word
 Azorean Portuguese — Azores Islands                                                                          $0.21/word
 Bahnar — Vietnam
 Bahasa Indonesia (Indonesian) —/ndonesia                                                                     $0.16/word
 Bambara — Mali
 Belarusan — Belarus                                                                                          $0.17/word
 Bengali — Bangladesh, India                                                                                  $0.15/word
 Bosnian — Bosnia & Herzegovina                                                                               $0.18/word
 Brazilian Portuguese — Brazil                                                                                $0.16/word
 Bulgarian — Bulgaria                                                                                         $0.16/word
 Burmese — Myanmar (former Burma)                                                                             $0.16/word
 Cambodian (Khmer) — Cambodia                                                                                 $0.20/word

RFP #2023-39 Interpreter Services                  Page 13
                                                            $0.20/word


 Cantonese — China                                                                                       see Chinese
                                                                In
 Language                                                       person   | Telephonic | Video          Transcription
 Cape Verdean (Portuguese Creole) —Cape Verde
 Catalan — Andorra, Spain                                                                                $0.20/word
 Cebuano — Philippines                                                                                   $0.16/word
 Chaldean — /rag
 Chamorro — Guam                                                                                         $0.50/word
 Chaozhou (Teochew) — China                                                                              see Chinese
 Chin — Myanmar (former Burma)
 Chinese (var. languages/dialects) — China                                                       $0.16 Simp. $0.20 Trad.
 Chuukese (Trukese) — Micronesia                                                                         $0.42/word
 Croatian — Croatia                                                                                      $0.20/word
 Czech — Czech Republic                                                                                  $0.15/word
 Danish — Denmark                                                                                        $0.20/word
 Dari (Afgan Farsi) — Afghanistan                                                                         $0.16/word
 Dene — Canada
 Dewoin — Liberia
 Dinka — Sudan
 Duala — Cameroon
 Dutch — Netherlands                                                                                     $0.18/word
 Egyptian Arabic — Egypt                                                                                 $0.15/word
 Estonian — Estonia                                                                                       $0.33/word
 Filipino (Tagalog) — Philippines                                                                        $0.21/word
 Finnish — Finland                                                                                       $0.32/word
 Flemish — Belgium                                                                                       $0.18/word
 French — Africa, Canada, France,    Tunisia,et al.                                             $0.18 Afr. $0.21 Can/IcLd
 French Creole — Caribbean
 Fukienese — China                                                                                       see Chinese
 Fulani (Fulfulde, Fula) — Cameroon, Niger,                                                               $0.20/word
 Nigeria, Senegal
 Fuzhou — China                                                                                         see Chinese
 Ga — Ghana
 Gen (Mina) — Jogo, Benin
 German — Germany                                                                                        $0.18/word
 Gokana (Khana) — Nigeria
 Greek — Greece                                                                                          $0.18/word
 Gujarati — [India                                                                                       $0.13/word
 Haitian Creole — Haiti                                                                                  $0.32/word
 Haka Burmese — Myanmar (former Burma)
 Hmong — China,      Vietnam, Laos                                                                       $0.26/word
 Hungarian — Hungary                                                                                     $0.16/word

RFP #2023-39 Interpreter Services                     Page 14
 Hakka — China                                                                           see Chinese
                                                       In
_Language                                              person   | Telephonic | Video   Transcription
 Hausa — Niger, Nigeria
 Ibo (Igbo) — Nigeria                                                                   $0.20/word
 Ilocano — Philippines                                                                  $0.25/word
 Hebrew — Jsrael                                                                        $0.16/word
 Hindi — Jndia                                                                           $0.15/word
 Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia) — /ndonesia                                               $0.16/word
 Iraqi Arabic — /raq                                                                    $0.15/word
 Italian — Jtaly                                                                         $0.20/word
 Japanese — Japan                                                                        $0.20/word
 Jarai— Vietnam
 Javanese — Indonesia
 Jordanian Arabic — Jordan                                                              $0.15/word
 Juba Arabic — Sudan
 Kan jobal (Q’anjob’al) — Guatemala
 Kannada — India
 Kapampangan — Philippines
 Karen (Pa’o, S’gaw) — Myanmar (former Burma)                                           $0.21/word
 Kayah — Myanmar (former Burma)
 Khmer (Cambodian) — Cambodia                                                           $0.20/word
 Kinyarwanda — Rwanda                                                                   $0.52/word
 Kirundi — Burundi                                                                      $0.34/word
 Koho — Vietnam
 Korean — Korea                                                                         $0.18/word
 Kpele — Guinea, Liberia
 Kurmanji (Northern Kurdish) — Turkey                                                    $0.18/word
 Kuawaiti Arabic — Kuwait                                                                $0.15/word
 Lao — Laos                                                                              $0.18/word
 Latvian — Latvia                                                                       $0.16/word
 Lebanese Arabic — Lebanon                                                              $0.15/word
 Lingala — Congo, Republic of the
 Lithuanian — Lithuania                                                                 $0.15/word
 Luganda — Uganda
 Luo — Kenya
 Maay (Af Maay, Rahanween, Bantu) —Somalia
 Macedonian — Macedonia                                                                 $0.15/word
 Malay — Malaysia                                                                       $0.16/word
 Malayalam — India                                                                      $0.15/word
 Malinke — Senegal
 Mam    — Guatemala


RFP #2023-39 Interpreter Services            Page 15
 Mandarin — China                                                                               see Chinese
                                                           In
 Language                                                  person   | Telephonic | Video       Transcription
 Mandinka (Mandingo) — Senegal
 Marathi — India
 Marshallese — Marshall Islands                                                                  $0.36/word
 Mayan [Akateko, Kanjobal] — Guatemala, Mexico
 Mien — China, Laos, Thailand                                                                    $0.25/word
 Mina (Gen) — Jogo, Benin
 Minangkabau — [ndonesia
 Mixteco Alto — Mexico
 Mixteco Bajo — Mexico
 Mnong — Vietnam
 Mongolian — Mongolia                                                                            $0.23/word
 Moroccan Arabic — Morocco                                                                       $0.15/word
 Nahuatl — Mexico
 Navajo — U.S.A. (Southwest)
 Nepalese — Nepal, India                                                                         $0.16/word
 Nuer — Sudan                                                                                    $0.27/word
 Oromo — Ethiopia                                                                                $0.35/word
 Palestinian Arabic — Israel, Jordan                                                             $0.15/word
 Pangasinan — Philippines
 Papiamento — Netherlands Antilles
 Pashto (Pushto) — Pakistan, Afghanistan                                                         $0.16/word
 Portuguese Creole (Cape Verdean) — Cape Verde
 Persian (Farsi) — Afghanistan, Iran, Iraq, Pakistan                                             $0.13/word
 Russian — Russia                                                                                $0.15/word
 Samoan — Samoa                                                                                  $0.24/word
 Polish — Poland                                                                                 $0.16/word
 Portuguese — Portugal, Brazil, et al.                                                     $0.16 Bra. $0.21 Port.
 San Miguel — Mexico
 Santa Eulalia — Guatemala
 Saraiki — Pakistan, India
 Serbian — Serbia, Montenegro                                                                    $0.16/word
 Serbo-Croatian — Balkans
 Shanghainese — China                                                                            see Chinese
 Sichuan (Szechuan) — China                                                                      see Chinese
 Sinhalese — S7i Lanka                                                                           $0.18/word
 Slovak — Slovakia                                                                               $0.26/word
 Somali — Somalia                                                                                $0.18/word
 Soninke (Serahule) — Mali                                                                       $0.58/word
 Sorani (Central Kurdish) — /rag                                                                 $0.18/word

RFP #2023-39 Interpreter Services                Page 16
 Spanish — Spain, Latin America, et al.                                             $0. 18 Eur.   $0.13 Lat.Am.
                                                    In
 Language                                           person   | Telephonic | Video        Transcription
 Sudanese Arabic — Sudan                                                                  $0.15/word
 Susu — Guinea
 Swahili — Kenya, Somalia, Tanzania,                                                      $0.37/word
 Swedish — Sweden                                                                         $0.23/word
 Syrian Arabic — Syria                                                                    $0.15/word
 Tagalog (Filippino) — Philippines                                                        $0.21/word
 Tai Dam — Vietnam
 Taiwanese — 7aiwan                                                                       see Chinese
 Tamil — India                                                                            $0.28/word      |
 Telugu — /ndia
 Teochew (Chaozhou) — China                                                               see Chinese
 Thai — Thailand                                                                          $0.27/word
 Tibetan — China                                                                          $0.16/word
 Tigrigna (Tigrinya) — Ethio pia,                                                         $0.42/word
 Eritrea
 Toishanese — China                                                                       see Chinese
 Tongan — Jonga                                                                           $0.33/word
 Trukese (Chuukese) — Micronesia                                                          $0.42/word
 Tunisian Arabic — Tunisia                                                                $0.15/word
 Turkish — Turkey                                                                         $0.23/word
 Twi — Ghana                                                                              $0.23/word
 Tzotzil — Mexico
 Ukrainian — Ukraine                                                                     $0.16/word
 Urdu — Pakistan, India                                                                  $0.23/word
 Vietnamese — Vietnam                                                                     $0.25/word
 Wolof — Senegal                                                                          $0.21/word
 Xhosa — South Africa
 Yemeni Arabic — Yemen                                                                    $0.15/word




RFP #2023-39 Interpreter Services         Page 17
Provide detailed project approach to execute these services.

   Initiating a new project with Language Link is quick and easy. Work orders are initiated by sending a request
   to quotes@language.link, which are processed by our Account Services Group (ASG) upon arrival. ASG will
   review the project files, assess client specifications, and establish a timeline for completion. If pricing has not
   been previously established with a client, a quote will be provided within 24 hours for the client’s approval.
   Weare able to accommodate expedited requests should the customer require delivery in a shorter timeframe.


   Our project managers       will begin each project by reaching out to you and ensuring that we have a clear
   understanding of the       meaning and intent of your original content before beginning translation. Each
   translation is completed by a fully-qualified linguist, and reviewed by an equally-qualified editor. After the
   translation is finalized, it will pass through our quality assurance team, who will use both their experience and
   specialized software to look for any anomalies or issues in the text. If any errors are found, or if the QA team
   has any questions, the file is returned to the translator to resolve. Our QA team then ensures that all required
   edits were made appropriately, and the translation is passed onto our desktop publishing department.

    Language   Link’s Professional Services Group              (PSG) operates         as a full-time,       in-house       desktop   publishing
   department. PSG formats each finalized translation to match its corresponding source file, while also being
   sensitive to the needs of target audiences. Our qualified team has extensive experience working with an array
   of file formats and applications, including Adobe                 and Microsoft products, and regularly produces forms,
   brochures, flyers, assessments, reports, articles, graphics, tables, and other content in a variety of languages.


   After the translation is formatted, our QA team completes a secondary review of the formatted file to confirm
   that the formatted translation is an exact match to the source English file. Should any additional issues or
   anomalies be found, they are corrected and then confirmed. Finally, the project manager will do a third round
   of review on your translated content before it is delivered to you, ensuring that all your specifications and
   preferences have been met and accounted for, including headers and footers, page sizes, and fonts.

   You and the success of your project are our top priority. We ensure that all translations are accurate and
   consistent by closely adhering to our established translation and quality process. We work only with linguists
   who have a proven track record of providing quality, accurate, timely translations. We also carefully adhere
   to your specifications and carefully review and re-review all files before they are delivered to you.

   Your lead project manager will be your main point of contact, and will be ready to assist you however and
   whenever needed. Our team is here to ensure that all aspects of your project run smoothly. Should you ever
   have questions about the translations you receive, your project manager will provide you with answers
   quickly. Our project managers partner closely with our linguists, working with them to ensure you receive the
   information you request and that all concerns are addressed and resolved to your satisfaction.

   Your account will be serviced by a team of professionals dedicated to your success. Our Account Services
   Group will ensure that your translation projects are quoted accurately, and our project management and
   production teams will complete and deliver your translations on time and per your requirements. Our
   Accounting team is always available to answer any invoicing or billing questions you may have.

    Our proprietary in-house translation software allows us to efficiently and effectively track thousands of
   accounts and all of their associated preferences and specifications, as well as all of our translators, their
   skillsets, and certifications. Producing quality translations is the most important part of what we do, and our
   project managers, translators, editors, formatters and quality assurance analysts are singularly focused on
   ensuring that we provide our customers with only the highest quality service possible.



                                                ANGUAGE LINK
                                                       A BIG LANGUAGE COMPANY
                    1417 SE Rasmussen Blvd. ¢ Suite 101 ¢ Battle Ground « WA e 98604 « www. language.link ¢ 888.266.2066
    We routinely employ various tools in our translation process, including glossaries and style guides. We
    encourage our clients to partner with us in the creation of their glossaries, which are then shared with all
    members of the project management, translation, and quality assurance teams. We strictly adhere to our
    client’s glossaries and style guides, and engage in conversation with our customers in any cases where
    predetermined glossary terms seem less than ideal for use in any particular translation.

    Each account is assigned a dedicated project manager who oversees the translation process, setting deadlines
    and facilitating file deliveries in accordance with the client’s specifications. The project manager will notify
    your agency by electronic mail of project completion. Any communications containing confidential
    information are relayed via encrypted electronic mail. Translated files are returned in the same format as the
    original unless specified.

    Language Link maintains a Customer Feedback Service Level Agreement, which includes 24-hour complaint
    response and 72-hour complaint resolution. Within the first 24 hours of receiving feedback, our teams are
    reviewing records and deliverables to gather information. They then contact all parties involved to gather
    additional information as needed. Once the relevant information has been gathered, we will decide on a
    course of action and follow up as quickly as possible with our customer. Our response is thorough and includes
    research, outcome, and a resolution for the future, reducing the possibility the complaint occurs again.



Provide a timeline for your services

   Turn-around times can vary on a project-by-project basis. We carefully set its turnaround times based on the
   scope of work involved with each project. Our clients frequently share that we exceed their expectations with
   regards to turnaround times—even under urgent and pressing business needs.

   To establish a turnaround time, we will first review materials carefully to understand the project details and
   business requirements. BIG's adherence to turnaround times is crucial for a project to be considered
   successful. As such, deadlines are treated as part of our service level agreement (SLA). The main drivers that
   influence turnaround times are word count, language pair, subject matter, and formatting. Projects with large
   word counts, rare language combinations, complex or research intensive content and specialized file formats
   would thus result in a longer turnaround time than would a smaller word count in a more common language
   combination on relatively simple file formats or subject matter.

    Language Link follows a strict process to ensure that all translations are delivered according to projected
    timelines, exactly to your specifications. The following is a summary of our quality assurance process and
    standard project workflow, from inception to completion.


    STEP 0: ASG Review
    Incoming work orders are processed by our Associate Sales Group (ASG) upon arrival. ASG will assess the work
    order, review project files, establish a timeline, and provide pricing for the client’s approval within 24 hours.
    Once approved, the project will be sent to its dedicated Project Manager. If pricing has been previously
    established with a client, the project may move to straight to project review before receiving a quote.

    STEP 1: Project Review
   The Project Manager (PM) scopes the entirety of the project including timeline, file inventory, glossaries (if
    applicable), and deliverables, and assesses each batch of new content as it becomes available. The PM will
    reach out to you with any questions or points of clarification as needed throughout the lifecycle of the project.



                                                ANGUAGE LINK
                                                       A BIG LANGUAGE COMPANY
                    1417 SE Rasmussen Blvd. ¢ Suite 101 ¢ Battle Ground « WA e 98604 « www. language.link ¢ 888.266.2066
STEP 2: Template Building/Preparation
We will build templates from the documents we receive from you that will allow us to flow translated content
directly into the files, while maintaining their formatting. This step saves both time and expense.

STEP 3: Glossary Development
We will work with you to ensure that we have your most up-to-date glossary and style guide for each language.
These will be shared with all staff, translators, editors and our Quality Assurance team to ensure consistency
throughout your content in all languages.

STEP 4: Translation
The PM places the source material for translation with an experienced                          linguist who      is qualified to work on
your content. Language Link only utilizes translators who are native speakers of the target                                 language.   If
requested by the client, linguists will also be selected according to dialect or regional variety.


STEP 5: Translation Editing
All initial translations are reviewed by a second, equally qualified native-speaking editor to ensure the quality
of the translation.

STEP 6: Translator Review
Once the editor has reviewed the initial translation, it is sent back to the original translator to be finalized.


STEP 7: Linguistic Quality Assurance
All translations then undergo an intensive round of quality assurance review, ensuring that:
    e    Appropriate glossary terms were used
    e    Consistent translations were used throughout the project
    e    Language-specific conventions have been followed
    e    There are no anomalies or apparent errors in the text

STEP 8: Formatting
Our Design and Development team precisely formats each finalized translation to match the source material,
while also being sensitive to the needs of your target audience and your format requirements.

STEP 9: Formatting Quality Assurance
The Quality Assurance team reviews all documents a second time to ensure that:
    e    The layout matches the source language document
         Correct fonts have been used
         Headers and footers are consistent with the source language document
         Proper names are spelled correctly
         Page fidelity has been maintained as requested, and that the text flows correctly
         Margins, graphics, and positioning of text are correct and appropriate

STEP 10: Final Check/Delivery
The PM will gather all final deliverables, verifying that they meet all of your original specifications. The Project
Manager will also ensure that the layout, page numbers, proper names and other details match the source
document as requested, and deliver them to you by the required deadline.




                                             ANGUAGE LINK
                                                    A BIG LANGUAGE COMPANY
                 1417 SE Rasmussen Blvd. ¢ Suite 101 ¢ Battle Ground « WA e 98604 « www. language.link ¢ 888.266.2066
Please see the previously-included           Section     6 form     for a list of translation          fees. Some       additional   notes   and
specifications regarding pricing:


           There is a $70.00 minimum for all languages.
           Chinese is quoted based on whether they use Traditional or Simplified characters for written translation.
           French rates are split between African ($0.18/word), Canadian ($0.21/word), and European ($0.21/word).
           Portuguese rates are split between Brazilian ($0.16/word) and Portugal/European ($0.21).
           Rates for additional languages are available upon request when the need arises. We have provided rates
           for the most popular languages as a part of this submission.
    e      Expedited rates will be provided based on the nature of the project and desired turnaround. Rush pricing
           is added to projects where, because of the deadline requirements, we would generate additional costs to
           deliver the project on time. Charges usually range between 25% - 50% of the cost for standard turnaround.




References



Feel free to contact any of the below contacts who have offered to be references for our organization.

Client:             King County Library Systems
Contact:           J. Tarner
Address:           960 Newport Way NW
                   Issaquah, WA 98027
Phone:             (425) 369-3272
Email:             jtarner@kcls.org
Dates:             2004 — present; regular long-term client.



Client:            Colorado Dept. of Labor and Employment
Contact:           Jessica Hudgins Smith
Address:           633 17th St
                   Denver, CO 80202
Phone:             (720) 830-6465
Email:             jessica.smith@state.co.us
Dates:             June 2021 — present; regular client within the past 36 months.



Client:            Midwest Transplant Network
Contact:           Jessica Cleary
Address:           1900 W 47th Pl
                   Suite 400
                   Westwood,     KS 66205
Phone:             (913) 261-7330
Email:             jcleary@mwtn.org
Dates:             2007 — present; regular long-term client.


                                                  ANGUAGE LINK
                                                         A BIG LANGUAGE COMPANY
                      1417 SE Rasmussen Blvd. ¢ Suite 101 ¢ Battle Ground « WA e 98604 « www. language.link ¢ 888.266.2066
