                   APPLICATION FOR APPROVAL AS A HOUSING COUNSELING AGENCY

U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development                                                                                          OMB Approval No.
Office of Housing                                                                                                                  2502-0573 (Exp. 7/31/2027)
Federal Housing Commissioner
                                                                                                              CERTIFICATIONS
Privacy Advisory:                                                                 By signing below, the applicant assures and certifies the following:
Authorities: The Department of Housing and Urban Development                      CERTIFICATIONS:
has the authority to collect social security numbers authorized by the
Housing Community Development Act of 1987 42 U.S.C 3543(g).                       I certify that this agency, and HUD program branches, sub-grantees
The Office of Housing Counseling is responsible for administration                and/or affiliates, if applicable, will:
of the Department’s Housing Counseling Program, authorized by                     1.  Administer the housing counseling in accordance with Title VI of the Civil Rights
Section 106 of the Housing and Urban Development Act of 1968                          Act of 1964, Title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, Executive Order 11063,
(12 U.S.C. 1701x), as amended. Housing Counseling Program                             Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, the Age Discrimination Act of
regulations at 24 CFR Part 214.                                                       1975; Title IX of the Education Amendment of 1972, and the Americans with
                                                                                      Disabilities Act.
Principal Purpose: The mission of the Office of Housing                           2. Provide housing counseling services without sub-agreement with other agencies
Counseling (OHC) is to provide individuals and families with the                      for the delivery of any or all parts of the services in our proposed housing
                                                                                      counseling plan as approved by HUD.
knowledge they need to obtain, sustain, and improve their housing.
Agencies that are eligible, meet program requirements, and provide                3. Represent our clients without any conflict of interest by our agency, paid and
                                                                                      volunteer staff, or board members which might compromise our ability to
the information requested on the form HUD-9900, and 9900a may                         represent fully in the best interests of the client in accordance with HUD 7610.1.
be approved to provide Comprehensive Housing Counseling Services                  4. Meet all local, State and Federal requirements necessary to provide our agency’s
that aid in the homeownership process.                                                housing counseling services, including, if applicable, the management and
                                                                                      liquidation services.
Disclosure: The information will not be disclosed outside HUD                     5. Comply with the fee guidelines set forth in HUD Handbook 7610.1 and 24 CFR
without your consent except to civil, criminal, or regulatory                         Part 214, if we plan to charge counseling fees.
investigations or prosecutions, or to a Member of Congress or                     6. Provide HUD with all required Housing Counseling Program data and
a congressional office in response to an inquiry or as otherwise                      information, in a timely manner, for use by HUD both internally and externally
required by law. All the information requested on the form HUD-                       on HUD’s web listing and other media.
9900 and form HUD-9900a is required in order to be considered as                  7. Act on our own behalf and are not under the influence, control, or direction of any
an approved HUD Housing Counseling Program. The information                           outside party such as a landowner, real estate broker, contractor, builder, lender, or
                                                                                      consultant seeking to derive a profit or gain from our housing counseling program
is required to evaluate new applicants against Housing Counseling                     clients.
Program eligibility requirements only. A social security number may               8. Meet the applicable accessibility requirements of Section 504 of the Rehabilitation
be requested to validate an individual's identity associated with this                Act of 1973 (29 U.S.C. 794), 24 CFR parts 8 and 9, and the Americans with
application if the information submitted cannot be confirmed by                       Disabilities Act (42 U.S.C. 12101 et seq). Our facilities provide accessibility
the minimum requirements. If the information is not provided, the                     features for persons with disabilities and senior persons, or we will arrange to
                                                                                      meet with each person at an alternative accessible location or format.
agency may not be considered for approval into HUD’s Housing
Counseling Program. This application is designed to be completed                  9. Taking reasonable steps to ensure meaningful access for persons with limited
                                                                                      English proficiency (LEP) pursuant to Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964
by applicants who are seeking approval to be a HUD-Approved                           and Executive Order 13166.
Housing Counseling Agency. Housing counseling required by or                      10. Ensure on an on-going basis that no employee, board member, or partner has been
provided in connection with HUD programs must only be provided                        suspended, debarred, or otherwise restricted under the Department’s or any other
by HUD certified housing counselors working for participating                         federal regulations (see 24 CFR Part 214).
agencies approved to provide such housing counseling by HUD’s                     11. Ensure on an on-going basis that employees, board members, or partners are
Office of Housing Counseling.                                                         not indicted for, or convicted of, a criminal offense that reflects upon the
                                                                                      responsibility, integrity, or ability of the agency to participate in housing
Public Reporting Burden for this collection of information                            counseling activities. Examples of such crimes include, but are not limited
                                                                                      to, fraud, bribery, corruption, embezzlement, identity theft, and money
is estimated to be 8 hours per response, including the time for                       laundering. These offenses include criminal offenses that can be prosecuted at a
reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources, gathering                    local, State, or Federal level. Before an individual is deemed ineligible because
and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing                         of their criminal history, they should be provided an opportunity to dispute the
the collection of information. This agency may not conduct or                         accuracy or relevance of the information relied upon by the participating agency
                                                                                      and an opportunity to provide evidence of mitigating factors including the time,
sponsor, and a person is not required to respond to a collection                      nature, and severity of the offense(s) and any evidence of rehabilitation. An arrest
of information unless that collection displays a valid OMB control                    alone does not constitute evidence of a criminal offense.
number.                                                                           12. Ensure that the agency is not subject to unresolved program approval requirements
                                                                                      outlined in HUD Handbook 7610.1 and 24 CFR Part 214.
This information is collected in connection with HUD’s Housing
                                                                                  13. Ensure that no Grantee nor its Branches and Sub-grantees employs an individual
Counseling Program and will be used to determine eligibility                          who has been, convicted of a violation under federal law relating to an election for
for Program participation under Section 106 of the Housing and                        Federal office (as defined in Pub. L. 111-203, 124 Stat. 1376 (July 21, 2010)).
Community Development Action of 1968.

Name and Title of Authorized Executive Approved to Legally Bind Agency:
                                                                                                     By signing this Application, I/We, the undersigned, certify
                                                                                                     under penalty of perjury that the information provided above
                                                                                                     is true and correct. I am aware that any false, fictitious, or
              Signature of person authorized to legally bind entity:                                 fraudulent information, or the omission of any material fact,
                                                                                                     may subject me to criminal, civil or administrative
                                                                                                     penalties for fraud, false statements, false claims or
                                                                                                     otherwise. (U.S. Code Title 18 Section 1001 and Title 31,
                                                                                                     Sections 3729 - 3730 and 3801 - 3812).
   Date Signed:

    WARNING: Anyone who knowingly submits a false claim or makes a false statement is subject to criminal and/or civil penalties, including confinement
           for up to 5 years, fines, and civil and administrative penalties. (18 U.S.C. §§ 287, 1001, 1010, 1012, 1014; 31 U.S.C. §3729, 3802).

Application for Approval as a                                           Page 1 of 10                                                                   Form HUD-9900
Housing Counseling Agency
                                                   APPLICANT INFORMATION

Official Name of Agency:                                                  Agency Website Address:


        Physical Address                                          City:                                   State:           Zip Code:
      of the Main Office:


        Mailing Address                                           City:                                                     Zip Code:
                                                                                                          State:
      of the Main Office:

                Executive Director
              (ED) Name and Title:


           ED Direct Phone Number:                                Ext:                ED E-mail:


    Counseling Program Manager
         (CPM) Name and Title:


      CPM Direct Phone Number:                                    Ext:               CPM E-mail:


Name of Agency’s Point of Contact
       (POC) for this Application:


       POC Direct Phone Number:                                   Ext:                POC E-mail:


Name and Title of Authorized Executive Approved to Legally Bind Agency:               List any Agency Acronyms, aka, or dba names, if applicable:




Agency Federal Taxpayer Identification Number (TIN):                 Unique Entity Identifier or UEI Number:




                                                      ELIGIBLE ENTITY TYPE
                                               Select one entity that best represents your entity type.

A housing counseling agency must function as a private or public nonprofit organization, or be a unit of local, county, or state government.
 Nonprofit Entities:                                                           Government Entities:
      1.     Nonprofit Agency                                                        7.    State Housing Finance Agency (SHFA)
      2.     Intermediary/Collaboration of Entities coming                                 or State Designated Agency
             in as an Intermediary                                                   8.    Public Housing Authority (PHA)
      3.     Multi-State Organization (MSO)                                          9.    State University
      4.     Community Development Corporation (CDC)                                 10.   City
      5.     Community Housing Development Organization (CHDO)                       11.   County
      6.     Nonprofit University (Public University)                                12.   State
                                                                                     13.   Lead Entity of HOME Consortium
                                                                                           (City & County)
                                                                                     14.   Other Government created Instrumentality
                                                                                           of Government

                                                                                     Please indicate other type:




Application for Approval as a                                        Page 2 of 10                                                 Form HUD-9900
Housing Counseling Agency
                                        TYPE OF HUD-APPROVED ORGANIZATIONS
                                   Using the list of Entity Types from page 1, please check one box designating
                                   the type of organization for which the agency is seeking approval to become.

    National Intermediary Organization (Entity Type 2 only) – Provides, in multiple regions of the United States:
    (i) housing counseling services through its branches, sub-grantees and/or affiliates, and (ii) provide training, technical assistance, oversight,
    and pass-through funding to its network of branches, sub-grantees and/or affiliates.
    Regional Intermediary Organization (Entity Type 2 only) – Provides, in a generally recognized region within the
    United States, such as the Southwest, Mid-Atlantic, New England: (i) housing counseling services through its branches, sub-grantees and/or
    affiliates, and (ii) provide training, technical assistance, oversight, and pass-through funding to its network of branches, sub-grantees and/or
    affiliates.
    Multi-State Organization (MSO) (Entity Type 3 only) – Provides housing counseling and education services through a main office and
    branches in two or more states. All branches operate and are identified under main office tax ID number, and (i) provide training, technical
    assistance, oversight, and pass-through funding to its branches.

    Local Housing Counseling Agency (LHCA) (Entity Type 1, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 13, 14, & 15 only) – Provides housing counseling and
    education services directly through one location or a main office with one or more branch offices, in no more than two contiguous states.
    An exception can be made for a local housing counseling agency that serves a single metropolitan area covering more than two contiguous states.

    State Housing Finance Agencies (SHFAs) (Entity Type 7 only) – Any public body, agency, or instrumentality created by a specific act of
    a state legislature empowered to finance activities designed to provide housing and related facilities through land acquisition, construction, or
    rehabilitation throughout the entire state. SHFAs are not required to submit an application for HUD approval. However, to participate in HUD's
    Housing Counseling Program, SHFA must either submit a housing counseling grant application through the HUD Notice of Funding Opportunity
    (NOFO) or submit a request and provide to HUD with a list of affiliates, if applicable, and assure that they meet all program requirements.
    SHFAs submitting a request must complete: Section A; Section B, Part 1, Section D, Part 3, Section B, E and Part 4 Section B. SHFA must
    also submit a copy of the relevant statutory authority to operate as a SHFA and provide housing services throughout the entire state.
    ____________________________________________________________________________________________

    List the State(s) and Cities in which your organization provides counseling services in the box below:




                                                                   DEFINITIONS

 HUD-approved housing counseling agency. Private and public nonprofit organizations that are exempt from taxation under section 501(a), pursuant
 to section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1996, 26 U.S.C. 501(a) and 501(c) and approved by HUD, in accordance with this part, to provide
 housing counseling services to clients directly, or through their branches, sub-grantees, and/or affiliates, and which meet the requirements set forth in
 this part.

 Unit of general local government. Any city, county, parish, town, township, borough, village, or any other general purpose political
 subdivision of a State.

 State. Each of the several States, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands,
 Guam, the Virgin Islands, American Samoa, or any other possession of the United States.


                                                  TYPE(S) OF SUPPORT PROVIDED
                                                   Check as many boxes that apply to your agency.


          Faith-Based Organization. (Faith-based organizations must recognize that their non-discrimination responsibilities
          are to not only serve anyone who is eligible for counseling, but also that they must affirmatively conduct outreach and
          marketing to those least likely to apply for the services, even if they are not members of the organization’s faith group.)

          Organization provides services to migrant farm workers.

          Organization provides services in Colonias. (Colonias are rural economically distressed communities located with
          150 miles of the US-Mexican border that lack basic infrastructure; running water, electricity, paved roads, etc.)

          Organization is designated as a legal service agency.

Application for Approval as a                                             Page 3 of 10                                                        Form HUD-9900
Housing Counseling Agency
                                     TYPE(S) OF HOUSING COUNSELING SERVICES
                        Applicant must employ trained staff with experience in the housing counseling services selected below.
                               Check all housing counseling services for which your agency is seeking HUD-approval.

One-on-One Counseling Types:                                 Group Education — Agencies providing group education must also provide
                                                             one-on-one counseling of the same service type.
    Homeless Assistance
                                                                   Financial literacy workshop, including home affordability, budgeting
                                                                   and understanding use of credit
    Rental Topics
                                                                   Predatory lending, loan scam, or other fraud prevention workshop
    Pre-Purchase/Homebuying
                                                                   Fair housing workshop
    Home Maintenance and Financial Management
    for Homeowners (Non-Delinquency Post-Purchase)                 Homelessness prevention workshop                 Rental workshop

    Reverse Mortgage                                               Pre-purchase homebuyer education workshop


    Resolving or Preventing Forward Mortgage                       Non-delinquency post-purchase workshop, including home maintenance
    Delinquency or Default                                         and/or financial management for homeowners

                                                                   Resolving or preventing mortgage delinquency workshop
    Resolving or Preventing Reverse Mortgage
    Delinquency or Default
                                                                   Disaster preparedness assistance workshop
    Disaster Preparedness Assistance
                                                                   Disaster recovery assistance workshop
    Disaster Recovery Assistance




                            PART 1: APPLICANT CHARACTERISTICS AND COMPLIANCE
                 The following is a list of requirements that applicant will Self-Certify to and/or be required to provide documentation.

    A. NONPROFIT AND TAX EXEMPT / UNIT OF GENERAL LOCAL GOVERNMENT


    Nonprofit Entities (Entity type 1-6) must provide all the following:

    1.   Provide a legible copy of the document that supports the agency's claim to be a non-profit organization (e.g., 501(c) letter issued by
         IRS). The document must include the organization’s official name, physical address, and telephone number of the legal authority that
         granted the non-profit status, and
    2.   Charter: Submit a copy of the recorded document (e.g., Charter, Articles of Incorporation, By-laws, governing body meeting
         minutes, etc.) that specifically authorizes your organization to provide housing counseling, and
    3.   The applicant must assure HUD that its branches, sub-grantees and/or affiliates are eligible entities. Provide copies of the documents
         that support their claim to be an eligible entity.


                                                                         OR

   Government Entities (Entity type 7-13) must provide all the following:
    1.   Provide the document giving authority to operate as a unit of general local government, and
    2.   Provide the document giving authority to specifically provide housing counseling services as proof of authorization, and if applicable
    3.   Other Gov’t Created Instrumentality of Gov’t (IOG) Entities ONLY (Entity Type 14): In addition to providing items 1 & 2, these
         entities must also

         •     ESTABLISHMENT — Must have been established by a governmental body or with governmental approval or under special law
               to serve a particular public purpose or designated as an instrumentality by law (statute or court opinion), and
                    •      a. ORGANIZATIONAL — Majority of governing board and/or principal CONTROL officers named or approved by
                           governmental body/officials, or
                    •      b. OPERATIONAL — Government body approves all major decisions CONTROL and/or expenditures, or
                    •      c. FINANCIAL — Government body provides funds through CONTROL direct appropriations/grants/loans,
                           with related controls applicable to all activities of entity.
Application for Approval as a                                         Page 4 of 10                                                   Form HUD-9900
Housing Counseling Agency
    B. CONFLICT OF INTEREST AND DISCLOSURE STATEMENT


    Nonprofit Entities and Government Entities (Entity type 1-14) must provide all the following:

    1.   Provide a document that identifies any other jobs or activities apart from the housing counseling agency,
         an employee, volunteer or board member of the agency performs that could result in a potential conflict of interest
         as identified in HUD Handbook 7610.1, and

    2.   Provide a list of additional housing programs or activities, other than housing counseling services, that your agency,
         branches, sub-grantees and/or affiliates offer including such programs as administering down payment assistance pro-
         grams, developing housing projects, managing apartment buildings, rehabilitating and reselling HUD homes and sell-
         ing real estate. Provide the office location for each additional program referenced, and

    3.   Provide a copy of the agency Conflict of Interest Policy and Procedures involving personnel and board members, and

    4.   Provide a copy of the Disclosure Statement(s) provided to clients that explicitly describes the various types of ser-
         vices or products provided by the agency and any financial relationships as identified in HUD Handbook 7610.1.
         Disclosure must clearly state that the “client is not obligated to receive, purchase or utilize any other services offered
         by the organization or its exclusive partners, in order to receive housing counseling services”.



    C. SCREENING FOR INELIGIBLE PARTICIPANTS


    Nonprofit Entities and Government Entities (Entity type 1-14) must provide all the following:

    1.   Complete form HUD-9900a, New Application-Board and Housing Counseling Program Staff List Attachment.
         List all counseling staff working in the housing counseling program, all current Board Members, supervisors and housing
         counselors, and
    2.   For each individual listed, provide the agency office, the agency physical address, state their position title, length of
         employment, the name of board member’s employer and title, their duties, if staff member is full-time or part-time,
         paid or a volunteer and provide their physical home addresses, a contact telephone number, and


            Self-Certification: Applicants unable or unwilling to self-certify will result in rejection of their application.
                 By checking this box, the Authorized Executive certifies that the agency has vetted all housing counseling
                 program related staff including, agency directors, board members, partners, officers, principals and employees
                 at all locations, including employees of branches, sub-grantees and/or affiliates listed in items #2 above and
                 confirm that they are not suspended, debarred, or otherwise restricted; Indicted for or convicted of a criminal
                 offense; Subject to unresolved findings as a result of HUD or other governmental audit or investigation,
                 including any state & federal tax liens without a repayment plan in place, as per described in 24 CFR 214.103
                 (c)(1)(2)(3). If needed, please refer to the “Learn More” section of the Housing Counseling Agency Eligibility
                 Tool for information on Ineligible Participants: https://www.hudexchange.info/programs/housing-counseling/
                 housing-counseling-agency-eligibility-tool
            Self-Certification: Applicants unable or unwilling to self-certify will result in rejection of their application.
                 By checking this box, the Authorized Executive certifies that this entity is in compliance with other HUD
                 program(s) for which the applicant is currently a participant.
                 a.    Provide a list of the other HUD program(s) in which you are currently participating, the name of the HUD
                       program Point of Contact (POC) and contact information.

                       OR
                 Check this box if the Applicant does not participate in any Other HUD programs.



Application for Approval as a                                    Page 5 of 10                                              Form HUD-9900
Housing Counseling Agency
    D. HOUSING COUNSELING WORK PLAN

    Nonprofit Entities and Government Entities:

    1.   All Entity types must provide a Housing Counseling Work Plan that includes the components listed in
         HUD Handbook 7610.1 for approval.

    2.   National/Regional Intermediaries, MSO and SHFA (Entity type 2, 3, & 7)
         Agencies that provide direct housing counseling services must address all items below in their work plan.
         Intermediaries/MSO and State Housing Finance Agencies (SHFA) may provide a brief summary for items a-l
         and attach individual work plans of their branches, sub-grantees and/or affiliates.

         a.   Target Community
         b.   Housing Needs and Problems
         c.   Affirmatively Furthering Fair Housing
         d.   Description of Services, for each service checked within the “Type of Housing Counseling Services”
              section and include a list of zip codes where the agency, branches, sub-grantees and/or affiliates
              provide these services
         e.   Homeownership Counseling and Home Inspection
         f.   Impact and Scope of One-on-One Counseling Services
         g.   Formats for Delivery of Services
         h.   Client Follow-up
         i.   Fee Structure
         j.   Non-English or Limited English Proficiency
         k.   Marketing and Outreach
         l.   Supervisory Monitoring/Quality Control Plan


    Agency Oversight Activities:

    National/Regional Intermediaries, MSO and SHFA Oversight Activities (Entity type 2, 3, & 7)
    All applicants seeking approval as an Intermediary Organization (National Intermediary or Regional Intermediary),
    MSO or SHFA, as indicated within the Type of HUD-Approved Organization on page 2, must provide the following:

    1.   Provide the agency’s policy and procedures on oversight activities pertaining to their branches, sub-grantees
         and/or affiliates.

    2.   Provide a Quality Control Plan for network management that addresses the following policy and procedures:

         a.    Providing training and technical assistance,
         b.    Performing oversight and monitoring,
         c.    Monitoring financial performance, including issuing or administering the use of pass-through funding,
         d.    Performing accounting of administrative costs,
         e.    Ensuring compliance with federal regulations, including 24 CFR 214, the HUD Handbook 7610.1, applicable grant
               agreement, OMB Circulars A-110 and A-133, and other federal guidelines.


               https://www.hudexchange.info/resource/5189/oversight-agency-toolkit-quality-control/


    3.   Intermediaries/MSO/SHFA with branches, sub-grantees and/or affiliates must include each office HUD ID Number(s)
         (if applicable), branch telephone numbers, physical addresses and housing counseling program staff names and positions.

    4.   Information on Developing a Housing Counseling Agency Work Plan and a sample copy is available at:
         https://www.hudexchange.info/resources/documents/Developing-Housing-Counseling-Work-Plan-HUD-Approval.pdf


Application for Approval as a                                   Page 6 of 10                                             Form HUD-9900
Housing Counseling Agency
                                                     PART 2: EXPERIENCE


    A. COMMUNITY BASE


    Nonprofit Entities (Entity type 1-6) must provide all the following:

    1.   Self-Certify to the following:


            Self-Certification: Applicants unable or unwilling to self-certify will result in rejection of their application.

                 By checking this box, the Authorized Executive certifies that this entity has one year experience administering
                 a housing counseling program AND that the agency, branches, sub-grantees and/or affiliates have functioned
                 for at least one year in the geographical area(s) as described within the agency work plan, and


    2.   Provide a HUD-9902 that quantifies the households the agency provided counseling and education services to during
         the past 12-month period, and

    3.   Nonprofit entities that oversee any branches, sub-grantees and/or affiliates must provide written
         agreements which delineate the responsibilities of the main office, branches, sub-grantees and/or affiliates.
         If applicable, provide a copy of these written agreements.


    Government Entities (Entity type 8-14) must provide all the following:

    1.   Self-Certify to the following:


            Self-Certification: Applicants unable or unwilling to self-certify will result in rejection of their application.

                 By checking this box, the Authorized Executive certifies that this entity has one year experience administering
                 a housing counseling program AND that the agency, branches, sub-grantees and/or affiliates have functioned
                 for at least one year in the geographical area(s) as described within the agency work plan, and


    2.   Provide a HUD-9902 that quantifies the households the agency provide counseling and education services to during
         the past 12-month period, and

    3.   Government Entities overseeing branches, sub-grantees and/or affiliates must provide written agreements
         which delineate the responsibilities of the main office, branches, sub-grantees and/or affiliates .
         If applicable, provide a copy of these written agreements.



    B. KNOWLEDGE OF HUD PROGRAMS AND LOCAL HOUSING MARKET



    Nonprofit Entities and Government Entities (Entities 1-14) must provide all the following:

    1.   Self-certify to the following:


            Self-Certification: Applicants unable or unwilling to self-certify will result in rejection of their application.

                 By checking this box, the Authorized Executive certifies that the housing counseling staff possesses knowledge
                 of HUD and other state and local housing counseling programs available to the community, consolidated plans,
                 and the local housing market.



Application for Approval as a                                    Page 7 of 10                                              Form HUD-9900
Housing Counseling Agency
                                                      PART 3: RESOURCES

    A. FUNDING EVIDENCE

    All Nonprofit Entities, SHFA, PHA, & State Universities (Entity type 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, & 9) must provide
    all the following:

    1.   Provide a copy of their independent audited financial statement completed within the last two years and letters of
         funding showing written commitment from sources for the initial 12 month period as a HUD approved housing
         counseling agency.

    2.   Submit a copy of your current annual housing counseling budget. Include income and expenses associated with your
         housing counseling program.

    Cities, Counties, State, Lead Entity of a Consortium, Other Gov’t IOG (Entity type 10, 11, 12, 13, & 14) ONLY
    must provide all the following:
    1.   Self-certify to the following:

             Self-Certification: Applicants unable or unwilling to self-certify will result in rejection of their application.

                  By checking this box, the Authorized Executive certifies that they have sufficient funds to cover the costs
                  of operating the housing counseling program during the initial 12 months of approval.


    B. STAFF

    Nonprofit Entities and Government Entities (Entity type 1-14) must provide all the following Self-Certification:
    1.   Self-certify to the following:

             Self-Certification: Applicants unable or unwilling to self-certify will result in rejection of their application.

                  By checking this box, the Authorized Executive certifies that the agency employs individuals who will
                  provide one-on-one housing counseling and/or oversee group education at its main office, branches,
                  sub-grantees and/or affiliates that have passed the HUD Housing Counselor Certification Examination
                  and are trained in the services that they will provide in the agency’s housing counseling program, and

             The agency must submit a list of the housing counselor(s) and their evidence of passing HUD Housing Counselor
             Certification Examination. (For example, submit a copy of email from hudhousingcounselors.com that the
             counselor passed the certification examination.)
    2.   Self-certify to the following:

             Self-Certification: Applicants unable or unwilling to self-certify will result in rejection of their application.

                  By checking this box, the Authorized Executive certifies that the agency employs staff trained in housing
                  counseling AND at least half the counselors have at least 6 months of experience in the job they will
                  perform in the agency’s housing counseling program.

    C. LANGUAGE SKILLS
    Nonprofit Entities and Government Entities (Entity type 1-14) must provide all the following:
    1.   Self-certify to the following:

             Self-Certification: Applicants unable or unwilling to self-certify will result in rejection of their application.

                  By checking this box, the Authorized Executive certifies that the agency has housing counselors who are fluent
                  in the language of the clients they serve, or the housing counseling agency uses the services of an interpreter,
                  or the agency refers the client to another agency that can meet the client’s needs.


Application for Approval as a                                    Page 8 of 10                                              Form HUD-9900
Housing Counseling Agency
    D. COMMUNITY RESOURCES

    Nonprofit Entities and Government Entities (Entity type 1-14) must provide all the following:
    1.   Self-certify to the following:
              Self-Certification: Applicants unable or unwilling to self-certify will result in rejection of their application.

                  By checking this box, the Authorized Executive certifies that the housing counseling agency has established
                  working relationships with private and public community resources to which it can refer clients who may need
                  help the agency cannot offer.

    E. FACILITIES
   Nonprofit Entities and Government Entities (Entity type 1-14) must provide all the following:
    1.   Self-certify to the following:

              Self-Certification: Applicants unable or unwilling to self-certify will result in rejection of their application.

                  By checking this box, the Authorized Executive certifies that the housing counseling facilities of the agency
                  main office, its branches, sub-grantees and/or affiliates meet all the following criteria:
                   a. Have a clearly identified office with space available for housing counseling services and operate
                       during normal business hours and offer extended hours when necessary;
                   b. Provide privacy for in-person counseling and confidentiality of client records;
                   c. Provide accessibility features or make alternative accommodations for persons with disabilities, and

    2.   In addition to the Self-Certification, applicants must provide the following:

         a.    List of the agency offices including the official name, physical addresses and zip codes of the agency main office,
               and the offices of all branches, sub-grantees and/or affiliates.

         b.    Mailing address for each location, if different from the physical address.

         c.    Telephone number(s) for each location including toll-free if available.

         d.    Name, title, and telephone number of the person in charge of the housing counseling program at each location.

         e.    Indicate for each location if the agency owns or rents the facility. If owned, provide proof of ownership.
               If the facility is rented, provide a copy of your signed lease agreement, MOU, or in-kind letter.

         f.    Indicate for each location whether your agency shares any part of its facility with any other organizations and if so,
               identify the organizations and explain the relationship that exists between your agency and those organizations.

         g.    List accessibility features for each location and/or alternate accommodations to serve disabled and senior client that
               have special needs, and

    3.   Provide color digital photos from each location documenting the following. Label each photo for each location:

         a.    Front of building.

         b.    Agency signage (on building and/or agency entrance).

         c.    Hours of operation sign.

         d.    Internal and external accessibility features for handicapped or senior clients.

         e.    Private one-on-one counseling and group meeting space.

         f.    Lobby & receptionist area.

         g.    Each counselor office.

         h.    Secure file cabinets and storage areas for active and closed files.

         i.    Fair Housing Sign visibly located in the office.

         j.    Fee structure sign, if applicable.
Application for Approval as a                                       Page 9 of 10                                                Form HUD-9900
Housing Counseling Agency
                                                             PART 4: SYSTEMS
    A. RECORD KEEPING AND REPORTING
    Nonprofit Entities and Government Entities (Entity type 1-14) must provide all the following:

    1.   Self-certify to the following:


             Self-Certification: Applicants unable or unwilling to self-certify will result in rejection of their application.

                  By checking this box, the Authorized Executive certifies that the agency has an established system of recordkeeping
                  that is in compliance with HUD Handbook 7610.1, 24 CFR 214, and applicable grant agreements.




    B. CLIENT MANAGEMENT SYSTEM (CMS)

    Nonprofit Entities and Government Entities (Entity type 1-14) must:
    Select one of the Options and Self-Certify to the option that applies to your organization:

    OPTION 1:

    1.   Self-certify to the following:


             Self-Certification: Applicants unable or unwilling to self-certify will result in rejection of their application.

                  By checking this box, the Authorized Executive certifies that the agency has a compliant Client Management System
                  in use that satisfies HUD’s requirements and interfaces with HUD’s database to download required information into
                  HUD’s Housing Counseling System (HCS), and


    2.   Provide the name of your CMS:


                                                                           OR

   OPTION 2:
   1.    Self-certify to the following:
            Self-Certification: Applicants unable or unwilling to self-certify will result in rejection of their application.

                  By checking this box, the Authorized Executive certifies that the agency has a CMS in use but that it does not interface
                  with HUD’s databases for downloading required information into HUD’s Housing Counseling System (HCS).
                  To fundamentally comply with 24 CFR 214.103(f): CMS, the agency agrees to and certifies that they will input
                  data manually into the Housing Counseling System (HCS), and


    2.   Self-certify to the following:


             Self-Certification: Applicants unable or unwilling to self-certify will result in rejection of their application.

                  By checking this box, the Authorized Executive certifies that the agency agrees that until a compliant CMS is in place,
                  the agency will utilize a system for the collection and reporting of client level information, including but not limited to,
                  financial and demographic data, counseling services provided, and outcomes data. The system must also provide the
                  counseling agency with the tools necessary to track and manage all counseling and educational activities associated
                  with each client, and


    3.   Self-certify to the following:

             Self-Certification: Applicants unable or unwilling to self-certify will result in rejection of their application.

                  By checking this box, the Authorized Executive certifies that within their initial one year of approval, the agency agrees
                  to modify their current CMS to be HUD compliant, or acquire a compliant CMS from the list of approved CMS Vendors.


Application for Approval as a                                         Page 10 of 10                                                    Form HUD-9900
Housing Counseling Agency
