                eiMe NOR
      oy
           Q

                lal                   Respondent Obligations In

                           ae
     oa)



               il:
     S



               lll.”                  Fair Housing Investigations
                           “he NT *
     z
     %
           &,




Notification of a Filed Complaint
                                            EQUAL TREATMENT                         UNDER          THE LAW
                                            We all want to be treated equally. The Fair Housing Act was enacted to ensure equal
                                            treatment in housing, including rental, sale, lending, and other residential real estate-
                                            related transactions. The Fair Housing Act was enacted to ensure equal treatment in
                                            a wide range of instances, including rental, sale, loan, and insurance-related housing
                                            transactions and to establish an impartial system in which HUD receives and investigates
     The Complaint          Process
                                            discrimination claims.

                                            Fair housing is good business. Though the best landlords, real estate agents, loan officers,
                                            and insurance agents may create policies and make efforts to carefully adhere to fair
                                            housing laws, there is always a potential for complaints.

                                            HUD’s Office of Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity CFHEO) enforces the Fair Housing
                 Conciliation               Act by investigating complaints of housing discrimination. Let’s walk through HUD’s
                                            process for investigating housing discrimination complaints. Click on each section to the
                                            left for more information. Click on the HUD logo and the title at the top to return to
                                            this page.




     Resolution of the Case




           Tips and Resources
                               : Respondent Obligations in
                Ce
               es
                          oA
           Q
      7
     oa)



               liiil’’ Fair Housing Investigations
     S
     z
     *,,




                                         Notification of a Filed Complaint
Notification of a Filed Complaint
                                         Receiving a formal letter from HUD is often the first indication that a claim of discrimination
                                         has been made against you or your business. The initial notification letter will include a copy
                                         of the signed complaint filed with HUD. The signed complaint will contain the allegations of
                                         housing discrimination made against you. The person who filed the complaint is referred to as
                                         the “complainant” and you are the “respondent.”

                                         In this initial notification   letter you will be informed     of:
     The Complaint             Process
                                            1. the rights and obligations you have in responding              to the complaint;

                                            2. the rights and obligations each complainant            has;

                                            3. the steps HUD will take to determine whether there is reasonable                   cause to believe
                                               discrimination may have occurred.

                                         The notification letter also explains that you may file a written answer, or “response,” to the
                    Conciliation         complaint within ten days of receipt. Your formal response to the allegations must be truthful
                                         and signed. Your response is essential for HUD to determine what evidence is needed to fully
                                         investigate the complaint and for you to benefit from your due process rights.

                                         If you forgot to include information       in your initial response, you      may amend       your answers   later.




     Resolution of the Case




           Tips and Resources
                               : Respondent Obligations in
                Ce        oA
               es
           Q
      _
     oa)



               liiil’’ Fair Housing Investigations
     S
     z
     *,,




                                         The Complaint             Process
Notification of a Filed Complaint
                                         HUD’s Office of Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity (FHEO) employs Equal Opportunity
                                         Specialists across the country to investigate housing discrimination allegations. Investigative
                                         staff remain neutral and impartial throughout the process. This means they carefully consider
                                         the positions of all parties and all relevant evidence in each case.

                                         During the investigation, you may be asked to provide written responses to requests for
                                         information. This could include copies of records or documents related to your responses.
     The Complaint             Process   HUD’s requests for information will also be based on the complainant’s allegations and address
                                         information and evidence necessary to complete the investigation.

                                         It is HUD’s policy to attempt to secure the voluntary cooperation of all persons in the
                                         collection of information during the investigation, but the law also authorizes HUD to issue
                                         subpoenas in the aid of the investigation. It’s very important that you respond to HUD’s
                                         requests and cooperate fully with the investigation.

                                         The investigator, who will review the evidence from both parties, conducts interviews, gathers
                    Conciliation
                                         additional information to support or refute the discrimination claim, and carefully coordinates
                                         with both parties. The investigator will keep in touch with you about the status of the
                                         investigation process and any additional information that may be needed or will be helpful.

                                         We understand that you want any grievance to be addressed quickly. HUD’s careful and
                                         impartial investigative process does take time. The law requires HUD to complete its
                                         investigation within 100 days of the date of the official filing of the complaint, unless its
                                         impracticable to do so. If HUD is unable to complete the investigation within the 10O-day
     Resolution of the Case              period, HUD will notify you and the complaint, by mail, of the reasons for the delay.

                                         You   have the right to be represented   by an advocate   or attorney at any time.




           Tips and Resources
                   ) mesponeent Obligations In

                     ion NT re”
                   * Fair Housing Investigations

                                    Conciliation
Notification of a Filed Complaint
                                    HUD’s fair housing complaint process   may   result in conciliation or a determination   of
                                    reasonable cause and charge.

                                    HUD is required by law to provide the parties an opportunity to conciliate the complaint. In
                                    this situation, investigators work with both parties through an interactive process to settle the
                                    case. Though this process can be helpful in finding a solution to the discrimination complaint,
                                    participation in conciliation is completely voluntary during the investigation.
     The Complaint     Process                                                                               ;    ;
                                    During the process, the investigator will talk to you about the complainant’s request
                                    for relief to settle the complaint. This may include discussing the complainant’s alleged
                                    damages. Damages may include monetary losses, moving costs, higher rent, attorney’s
                                    fees and emotional distress such as humiliation, mental anguish, and psychological injuries.
                                    Complainant’s damages may also include equitable relief, such as specific performance of
                                    a rental of a dwelling, or a requested reasonable accommodation. In addition to relief for
                                    the complainant, a conciliation agreement includes relief in the public interest to aid in the
                                    elimination of discriminatory housing practices in the future like fair housing training for
          Conciliation
                                    respondents, eliminating discriminatory practices and policies, record-keeping and reporting.
                                    The investigator will engage in a conciliation process with you and the other parties to provide
                                    an opportunity for voluntary resolution of the complaint.

                                    HUD may resolve the investigation through a document called a Conciliation Agreement. If
                                    other civil rights laws are involved, it is called a Voluntary Compliance Agreement-Conciliation
                                    Agreement. Both types of agreements are subject to HUD approval. Following a signature by
                                    both parties, HUD will close the investigation and monitor compliance with the agreement. The
     Resolution   of the Case       agreement, in most cases will be public.




      Tips and Resources
                  ) mesponeent Obligations In

                     ay NT ree
                  * Fair Housing Investigations

                                    Resolution        of the Case
Notification of a Filed Complaint
                                    If the complaint is not successfully conciliated, the investigator uses the evidence to
                                    recommend a “finding” on whether there is “reasonable cause” or “no reasonable cause” to
                                    believe that a violation of the Fair Housing Act has occurred.

                                    If HUD determines that there is reasonable cause to believe that discrimination occurred, a
                                    “Determination of Reasonable Cause” and a “Charge of Discrimination” will be issued. All
                                    complainants and respondents have 20 days after receiving notice of the Charge to decide
     The Complaint     Process      whether to have the case tried before a Federal District Court judge. If no one does so, the
                                    case is heard by a HUD Administrative Law Judge (ALJ).

                                    After the hearing, an Administrative Law Judge may order you to pay the complainant
                                    monetary damages for actual losses, including out of pocket expenses and emotional distress,
                                    order injunctive or other equitable relief, and order you to pay a civil penalty.

                                    If HUD finds that there is no reasonable cause to believe that discrimination occurred, HUD
                                    will dismiss your complaint with a Determination of No Reasonable Cause. HUD will notify the
          Conciliation
                                    parties of the dismissal, and you may request a copy of the Final Investigative Report.

                                    The outcome of the housing discrimination case, whether conciliated without a finding or
                                    results in a reasonable or no cause finding, is public information, subject to some limited
                                    exceptions.

                                    The complainant   has the right to file a lawsuit during the process.

     Resolution of the Case




      Tips and Resources
                  ) mesponeent Obligations In

                     ion NT re”
                  * Fair Housing Investigations

                                    Complaint         Process Tips
Notification of a Filed Complaint
                                    Take the complaint allegation(s) seriously and be open to the complaint process — You have
                                    the opportunity to learn about the impartial process, the perspective of the complainant, how
                                    to gather evidence, and steps you can make to support fair housing practices.

                                    The investigator, an impartial professional, did not file the complaint — The investigator is
                                    not acting as an advocate for any party, and no determination of whether the complaint has
                                    merit will be made without a sufficient investigation.
     The Complaint     Process
                                    Ask for clarification — HUD will assist you with understanding            the process and what you can
                                    expect during the investigation and/or conciliation.

                                    Review the allegations carefully and respond accordingly with factual evidence — Taking the
                                    time to carefully read the allegations and provide relevant evidence will help the investigative
                                    process.

                                    Cooperate fully with the Investigation — Follow the legal guidelines, keep HUD apprised of
          Conciliation              any changed information, and respond to the investigator’s request timely to help move the
                                    investigation along. This will help you in the long run.

                                    Know the law — Read the Fair Housing Act and any applicable local or state fair housing laws.
                                    Understanding fair housing protected classes, prohibited actions, and other details of these
                                    laws will help with establishing best business practices.

                                    Obtain training on fair housing laws that may be available in your community and online —
     Resolution of the Case         This will helo you understand your fair housing rights and obligations, and help you establish
                                    business practices to avoid future allegations.




                                                                            Fair Housing         Resources
                                                                               The    Fair Housing    Act

      Tips and Resources                                                   HUD’s     Investigative Partners

                                                                             Damages       and   Penalties

                                                                       Fair Housing    Training and    Resources
