                       U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
                                Office of Inspector General
                                         451 7" St. S.W.
                                     Washington, D.C. 20410-4500

                                       October 17. 2008

MEMORANDUM          FOR:   Steven Preston, Secre


                             PA
FROM: Kenneth M. Donohue, Inspegtof
                                             i-—
                                            General,G

SUBJECT:     Management and Performance Challenges

        In accordance with Section 3 of the Reports Consolidation Act of 2000, the Office of
Inspector General (OIG) is submitting its annual statement to you summarizing our current
assessment of the most serious management and performance challenges facing the U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) in fiscal year 2009 and beyond. Through
our audits, investigations, and inspections and evaluations, we work with departmental managers in
recommending actions that best address these challenges. More details on our efforts in relation to
these issues can be found in our Semiannual Report to Congress.

        The Department’s primary mission is to increase homeownership, support community
development and increase access to affordable housing free from discrimination. HUD seeks to
accomplish this mission through a wide variety of housing and community development grant,
subsidy, and loan programs. Additionally, HUD assists families in obtaining housing by providing
Federal Housing Administration (FHA) mortgage insurance for single-family and multifamily
properties. HUD relies upon numerous partners for the performance and integrity of a large number
of diverse programs. Among these partners are hundreds of cities that manage HUD’s Community
Development Block Grant funds, hundreds of public housing agencies that manage assisted housing
funds, thousands of HUD-approved lenders that originate and service FHA-insured loans, hundreds
of Ginnie Mae mortgage-backed security issuers that provide mortgage capital, and other federal
agencies with which HUD coordinates to accomplish its goals. HUD also has a substantial
responsibility for administering disaster assistance programs. Currently, HUD is administering new
mortgage assistance and grant programs in response to the nation’s financial crisis, increase in
foreclosures, and declining home values.

         Achieving HUD’s mission continues to be an ambitious challenge for its limited staff,
given the agency’s diverse programs, the thousands of intermediaries assisting the Department,
and the millions of beneficiaries in its housing programs. In its January 2007 high risk update,
the Government Accountability Office removed HUD’s single-family mortgage insurance and
rental housing assistance programs from its high risk list. Although HUD was removed from the
high risk list, it needs to continue to place a high priority on efficient and effective management
of these programs. Proposed and new program changes have introduced new risks and oversight
and enforcement challenges. More specifically, HUD has implemented mortgage assistance for
homeowners at risk of foreclosure through refinance options in its FHA-Secure and Hope for
Homeowners programs. In addition, HUD has seen a dramatic increase in FHA-insured home


                                             Page 376
                                             SECTION 4: OTHER ACCOMPANYING            INFORMATION
         INSPECTOR    GENERAL’S    SUMMARY     OF MANAGEMENT      AND PERFORMANCE       CHALLENGES

 equity conversion (also known as “reverse”) mortgages. Asa result, HUD will be challenged to
 develop adequate systems to account for these loans and help prevent fraud on this vulnerable
 population of seniors.

        HUD’s reported management challenges are addressed in the President's Management
 Agenda’s government-wide and HUD-specific initiatives. As of the end of the third quarter of
 fiscal year 2008, HUD’s President’s Management Agenda scoring status for the nine applicable
 initiatives consisted of five “green,” three “yellow,” and one “red” baseline goal scores. Based
 upon a comprehensive set of standards, an agency is green if it meets all of the standards for
 success, yellow if it has achieved some but not all of the criteria, and red if it has even one
 serious flaw. It is noteworthy that HUD’s human capital score has progressed from yellow to
 green; however, as noted in two OIG reports, HUD needs to improve existing procedures and
 controls regarding its succession planning and management of human capital. HUD’s score for
 competitive sourcing declined to red during the third quarter of fiscal year 2007; however, during
 fiscal year 2008, the score increased from red to yellow.

         HUD'’s baseline score for E-Government (E-Gov) declined from green to yellow during
fiscal year 2008. HUD was downgraded from green to yellow because it did not remediate
weaknesses in the agency’s strategic plan and did not fulfill all E-Gov funding requirements.
HUD's initiative to eliminate improper payments had declined from green to yellow because it
was unable to achieve its reduction target by 0.5 percent.    In the most recent scorecard. however,
the score was raised back to green. HUD has been scored red on its credit management program
since it was added to the President’s Management Agenda in fiscal year 2006.

         Although the management structure, size, and range of departmental programs make it
difficult to correct and overcome program weaknesses, HUD is working to address these challenges.
The Department’s management challenges we are reporting this year include the following:

     ©   HUD’s response to the nation’s financial crisis.

     ©   Human capital management,

    ©    Financial management systems,

    O    FHA single-family management,

    ©    Public and assisted housing program administration, and

    ©    Administering programs directed toward victims of natural disasters.

        The attachment provides a greater discussion of these challenges and OIG’s efforts to
help the Department resolve these matters.

Attachment




                                              Page 377
 DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT
 FY 2008 PERFORMANCE AND ACCOUNTABILITY REPORT
                        HUD Management and Performance Challenges
                                  Fiscal Year 2009 and Beyond



 HUD’s response to the nation’s financial crisis.   \n view of the current credit and financial
crisis impacting the nation, we are reporting a new management challenge to recognize the
profound impact this will have on HUD. As we note later in our discussion of FHA’s single-
family program, HUD has already sustained significant losses in its single-family program, based
on the results of the latest actuarial study, and is taking on additional risk. In response to
increasing delinquencies and foreclosures brought about by the deteriorating subprime mortgage
market, in September 2007, HUD acted administratively to provide mortgage assistance through
the FHA Secure program to refinance existing conventional mortgages. This program was
expanded in May 2008 to provide lenders the added flexibility to refinance and insure more
mortgages, including those for borrowers who were late on a few payments and/or received a
voluntary mortgage principal write-down from their lenders. The Housing and Economic
Recovery Act of 2008 was enacted on July 30, 2008, and created a new Hope for Homeowners
program to enable FHA to refinance the mortgages of at-risk borrowers provided that (1)
mortgage holders write down the principal of the mortgages, (2) borrowers agree to share future
equity with the federal government, and (3) borrowers can afford to repay their new loans.
These programs are challenges for HUD to administer while minimizing risk to the FHA fund.
The Congress authorized FHA to guarantee $300 billion in new loans to help prevent an
estimated 400,000 homeowners from foreclosure.

The Housing and Economic Recovery Act of 2008 also created a new Neighborhood
Stabilization Program. As part of this legislation, HUD must administer $3.92 billion in
Community Development Block Grant funds to redevelop abandoned and foreclosed homes. In
response to the state and local communities hard-hit by foreclosure, HUD was required to design
the program and determine funding allocations within 60 days of enactment. Currently, there is
no database that will provide HUD with sufficient data on units assisted, acquired, or disposed
of. HUD must rely on the grantees to maintain this information at the local level. HUD is
challenged to ensure, as Congress directed, that these grant funds are obligated for specific
activities within 18 months and that state and local governments make the most effective use of
available funds.

 HUD needs to quickly hire more staff and upgrade its technology to be able to handle the huge
 increase expected in new business, but questions remain as to whether HUD will be given the
resources it needs. In addition, we are concerned as to whether HUD has the necessary capacity
or internal controls in place to assume the risks of the mortgage market being placed upon the
agency. In creating the Hope for Homeowners program, the Housing and Economic Recovery
Act of 2008 provided a mechanism, through the issuance of “HOPE bonds,” to fund
administrative costs for that program. HUD reports that funding for 22 staff positions and about
$20 million in systems improvements have been made available in this manner. The Housing and
Economic Recovery Act of 2008, however, did not provide for additional resources for other
FHA modernization initiatives in the Act, nor did it provide HUD with additional resources to
implement the Neighborhood Stabilization Program. FHA has had to reprogram other funds to
address other     FHA modernization needs. While the Congress subsequently appropriated $6.5



                                            Page 378
                                            SECTION 4: OTHER ACCOMPANYING             INFORMATION
         INSPECTOR    GENERAL’S   SUMMARY     OF MANAGEMENT         AND PERFORMANCE    CHALLENGES

million that HUD may use for the Neighborhood Stabilization Program, part of that funding is
also to be used for other unrelated disaster recovery activities.

Human capital management. For many years, one of the Department’s major challenges has
been to effectively manage its limited staff to accomplish its primary mission. To address its
human capital needs and respond to the President’s Management Agenda, HUD developed a
comprehensive Five-Year Strategic Human Capital Management Plan that identifies three
strategic goals for human capital:

     ©   Becoming a “mission-focused agency,” resulting in a more effectively deployed
         workforce;

    ©    Maintaining a “high quality workforce,” which recruits, develops, manages, and retains
         a diverse workforce; and

    o    Implementing “effective succession planning” to ensure that retirees over the next five
         years are succeeded by qualified employees.

To link HUD’s human capital initiatives as presented in the Strategic Human Capital
Management Plan, HUD has recently instituted a Human Capital Accountability System. In
May 2006, to address the potential staff reduction due to retirement, HUD implemented a
probability model to more accurately project future retirement and target high-risk critical
positions for succession planning purposes. A 2007 OIG audit found that HUD had not fully
initiated adequate succession planning to address future staffing concerns. Specifically, some
HUD offices had failed to identify and/or support the actions needed to fully implement HUD’s
succession plan. HUD needs to ensure that all program offices initiate succession planning to
comply with HUD’s requirements.

HUD lacked a valid basis for assessing its human resource needs and allocating staff within
program offices, as evidenced in OIG’s 2008 audit pertaining to HUD’s management of human
resources. Three of the five offices we reviewed could not provide adequate documentation to
support their assessment of human resource needs and allocation of staff among their
headquarters and field office locations. As a result, HUD lacked assurance that its allocation of
staff was based on supportable need and it accurately determined the human resources required
to meet its performance goals. Some of HUD’s program offices lacked adequate documentation
to support their hiring practices. As a result, HUD lacked assurance that its program offices’
hiring was appropriate.

Financial management systems. Since fiscal year 1991, OIG has annually reported on the lack
of an integrated financial management system, including the need to enhance FHA’s
management controls over its portfolio of integrated insurance and financial systems. During the
past several years, HUD has made progress by partially implementing new core financial
systems at FHA and Ginnie Mae and addressing most of the previous weaknesses that OIG
identified. These improvements enabled OIG to reclassify the weakness in financial
management system requirements from a material weakness to a significant deficiency.
However, the FHA home equity conversion mortgage systems were identified as a material



                                              Page 379
 DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT
 FY 2008 PERFORMANCE AND ACCOUNTABILITY REPORT
 weakness in the fiscal year 2007 FHA financial statement audit. The rapidly growing program
 was being supported by a combination of servicer-provided applications, vendor databases,
 modification of existing FHA legacy systems, and manually performed input to FHA’s general
 ledger. FHA initiated a series of planned corrective actions during fiscal year 2008. These
 actions included performing a risk analysis of home equity conversion mortgage processing to
 identify accounting control risks. The risk analysis identified staff capacity as the primary
 vulnerability, and, reportedly, FHA is addressing this risk.

 The HUD Integrated Financial Management Improvement Project (HIFMIP), launched in fiscal
 year 2003, has been plagued by delays, and implementation of the core financial system has not
 yet begun. Additionally, the HIFMIP project manager position has been vacant since February
 2008. HIFMIP was intended to modernize HUD’s financial management systems in accordance
 with a vision consistent with administration priorities, legislation, Office of Management and
 Budget directives, modern business practices, customer service, and technology.   HIFMIP will
 encompass all of HUD’s financial systems, including those supporting FHA and Ginnie Mae.
 HUD had intended to begin the implementation in fiscal year 2006. Due to delays with the
 procurement process, however, HUD anticipates that it will not be able to begin the
 implementation of its core financial system until fiscal year 2009. The success of the HIFMIP
 project continues to be at risk due to dated requirement documents, as well as the project
manager vacancy. We continue to note the following weaknesses with HUD’s financial
management systems:

    fo)     HUD’s ability to prepare financial statements and other financial information requires
            extensive compensating procedures.

    fe)     HUD has limited availability of information to assist management in effectively
            managing operations on an ongoing basis.

We continue to report weaknesses in internal controls and security regarding HUD’s general data
processing operations and specific applications. The effect of these weaknesses is that HUD
cannot be reasonably assured that system information will remain confidential, safeguarded, and
available to those who need it without interruption.

Another information technology systems concern is FHA’s inability to fund systems
development and to upgrade and replace legacy (developed in the 1970s and 1980s) application
systems that had been previously scheduled to be integrated. Given the significant growth in
FHA market share (from 16 to 36 percent during the year ending July 2008) that is expected to
continue, FHA’s system environment remains at risk.

As of June 30, 2008, HUD’s E-Gov element on the President’s scorecard has slipped from green
to yellow status. In addition, as part of our annual information technology security review
mandated by the Federal Information Security Management Act, we found that HUD has not
completed all risk assessments for systems that are Web accessible and require some form of
authentication (e.g., password).

FHA single-family management. FHA’s single-family mortgage insurance programs enable
millions of first-time borrower, minority, low-income, elderly, and other underserved households



                                            Page 380
                                            SECTION 4: OTHER ACCOMPANYING           INFORMATION
         INSPECTOR   GENERAL’S    SUMMARY     OF MANAGEMENT      AND PERFORMANCE     CHALLENGES

to realize the benefits of homeownership. HUD manages a rapidly growing portfolio of more
than $450 billion in single-family insured mortgages. Effective management of this high-risk
portfolio represents a continuing challenge for the Department. The President’s Management
Agenda has committed HUD to tackling long-standing management problems that expose FHA
homebuyers to fraudulent practices. A key component of the Housing and Economic Recovery
Act of 2008 is the FHA Modernization Act of 2008, which includes the following provisions:

    ©     Increasing the minimum cash investment or downpayment for an FHA mortgage from
          3.0 to 3.5 percent.

    ©     Raising FHA loan limits in high-cost areas by setting the limit in such areas at 115
          percent of the Jocal area median home price, not to exceed a nationwide loan ceiling of
          $625,500 (150 percent of the conforming loan limit).

    o     Making several changes to FHA reverse mortgages by creating a higher, nationwide
          uniform loan limit, capping the maximum fee lenders can charge seniors for FHA
          reverse mortgages, establishing protections to prohibit requiring seniors to purchase
          other financial products in conjunction with FHA reverse mortgages, and authorizing
          reverse mortgages to be eligible for home purchase.

    ©     Imposing a one-year moratorium on risk-based FHA insurance premiums.

    ©     Eliminating seller-funded downpayment assistance.

While FHA did not participate directly in the subprime mortgage market, the collapse of that
market and resultant decline in house prices has already had a significant impact on FHA’s risk
exposure. The recently completed actuarial review of FHA’s Mutual Mortgage Insurance Fund
estimates that the fund’s economic value decreased from last year’s $21.3 billion to $12.9
billion. This decline, coupled with a 29 percent increase in insurance in force, resulted in the
fund’s fiscal year 2008 capital ratio’s decreasing from last year’s 6.4 percent to 3.0 percent. The
fund is mandated by law to maintain a capital ratio of at least 2.0 percent.

We continue to focus interna! audit resources on the single family program. For example, we
reported that HUD’s Office of Single Family Housing had not fully implemented an internal
control structure in accordance with Government Accountability Office internal control
standards and HUD requirements. Specifically, it did not (1) perform a formal, systematic
annual risk assessment of its programs and administrative functions, (2) plan and conduct
ongoing management control reviews or alternative management control reviews of its programs,
(3) establish an overall strategy regarding its risk-based monitoring of program activities and
participants, or (4) identify corrective actions required to improve its management controls in a
timely manner. Our internal audit of controls over the FHA appraiser roster indentified
weaknesses in the quality control reviews and monitoring of the roster and in the retention of the
initial application packages for all active appraisers on the roster. The roster contained
unreliable data including the listing of 3,480 appraisers with expired licenses and 119 appraisers
that had been state sanctioned. In another audit, we found that HUD’s appraiser review process
was not adequate to reliably and consistently identify and remedy deficiencies associated with



                                             Page 381
 DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT
 FY 2008 PERFORMANCE AND ACCOUNTABILITY REPORT

appraisers. Additionally, HUD did not maintain information necessary to assess the
effectiveness of its review process.

In support of HUD and the President’s Management Agenda, OIG’s strategic plan gives priority
to detecting and preventing fraud in FHA mortgage lending through targeted audits and
investigations. Our audits target lenders with high default rates. Our detailed testing focuses on
mortgage loans that defaulted and resulted in FHA insurance losses. Results from these audits
have noted significant lender underwriting deficiencies, prohibited late-endorsed loans,
inadequate quality controls, and other operational irregularities. During fiscal year 2008, we
completed 16 external audits of FHA-approved mortgage lenders as well as seven internal audits
of single-family program activities. Judicial actions taken on Office of Investigation single-
family-related cases included 261 indictments/informations.     Recoveries on investigative cases
totaled more than $45 million.

Public and assisted housing program administration. HUD provides housing assistance funds
under various grant and subsidy programs to public housing agencies and multifamily project
owners. These intermediaries, in turn, provide housing assistance to benefit primarily low-
income households. HUD monitors these intermediaries’ administration of the assisted housing
programs.

HUD’s Section 8 voucher program has evolved over the last four years as Congress passed
legislation in the fiscal year 2005 appropriation bill that included budget-based funding for the
Section 8 Housing Choice Voucher program. Under this methodology, public housing agencies
receive an annual fixed amount of program funds. At year end, all excess funds are retained by
the housing agencies, which account for the excess funds in a net restricted assets equity account
but report to HUD on a quarterly basis. The excess program funds not used during the current
year are eligible for program use in the next fiscal year, or if not used in subsequent fiscal years,
the funds are reclassified as unusable but remain at the housing agencies. The challenges HUD
faces in the monitoring of the Section 8 voucher program to ensure that housing agencies are
fully utilizing public housing vouchers are evidenced in the June 30, 2008 indicators of public
housing agency use of funds and voucher utilization rates, as follows:

      0   2,335 public housing agencies participating in the Section 8 Program have accumulated
          $1.9 billion in excess funds since 2005, of which $1.4 billion is classified as unusable
          by HUD under the current program rules.

      o   The average voucher utilization rate for the 2,335 participating public housing agencies
          is 93.3 percent, which is less than the fiscal year 2004 rate of 98.5 percent achieved
          using the previous funding mechanism.

      o   17 public housing agencies participating in the Moving to Work program have
          accumulated $1.8 billion in excess funds. Under the Moving to Work program, funds
          are expended in accordance with an agreement between HUD and each public housing
          agency.




                                              Page 382
                                             SECTION 4: OTHER ACCOMPANYING         INFORMATION
           INSPECTOR   GENERAL’S   SUMMARY    OF MANAGEMENT      AND PERFORMANCE    CHALLENGES

While progress has been made, HUD continues to face challenges in establishing processes and
systems for budgeting and funding Section 8 project-based contract renewals and amendments to
meet program needs and ensuring appropriate funds control, Our work in fiscal year 2007
indicated that approximately $752 million in funding could have been recaptured.

HUD’s ability to effectively monitor housing agencies and assisted multifamily projects
continues to present challenges in achieving the intended statutory purposes of the housing
assistance funds. These deficiencies have been reported for a number of years in OIG’s annual
audits of HUD’s financial statements. HUD has made progress but needs to complete the
implementation of the initiatives that address housing agencies’ rental subsidy determinations,
underreported income, and assistance billings. Although HUD has made substantial progress in
taking steps to reduce erroneous payments, it must continue regular on-site and remote
monitoring of the public housing agencies and project owners and use the results from the
monitoring efforts to focus on corrective actions when needed.

Paralleling HUD efforts, our investigative and audit focus is concentrating on fraudulent
practices and the lack of compliance with the Section 8 program statute and requirements. OIG
conducted 34 external audits and two internal audits of the Section 8 Housing Choice Voucher
program during fiscal year 2008. OIG also has professional appraisers on staff to assist in
evaluating housing quality requirements as part of our audit efforts. In total, these external
audits addressed whether housing agencies are correctly calculating subsidy amounts, correctly
determining family income, complying with housing quality standards, fully using authorized
vouchers, and implementing controls to prevent duplicative and fraudulent housing assistance
payments. Our external audits identified questioned costs of $95 million and reported more than
$40 million that could be put to better use.

Administering programs directed toward victims of natural disasters.     Natural disasters
continued to be a challenge for HUD in 2008. After spring floods in the Midwest and fires in
California, the Gulf Coast was hit by two more major hurricanes, Gustav and Ike. Ike caused
major home destruction in Texas along the Gulf Coast including Galveston and in the city of
Houston. Gustav caused damage in Louisiana in and around New Orleans, as well as in the city
of Baton Rouge. As result, HUD received more than $6.6 billion in emergency supplemental
funding for rental assistance, the public housing capital fund, and the community development
fund. As the disaster funds are awarded to various states, our OIG audit, investigative, and
inspection staff resources will be assigned accordingly, since disaster funding is particularly
vulnerable to waste, fraud, and abuse.

Due to unprecedented storm damage caused by hurricanes Katrina, Rita, and Wilma in 2005,
HUD is overseeing approximately $20 billion provided in three separate supplemental disaster
appropriations. For the period ending September 30, 2008, more than $10.5 billion has been
disbursed for disaster recovery by the five Gulf Coast states: Alabama, Florida, Louisiana,
Mississippi, and Texas. During the past year, we issued seven audit reports, resulting in findings
of questioned costs of more than $20 million. In addition to the homeowner program, OIG has
identified some other high-risk areas that will require continued oversight, including the
following:

       ©    Economic development (Small Business Loan Program),



                                              Page 383
 DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT
 FY 2008 PERFORMANCE AND ACCOUNTABILITY REPORT
       o   Texas Homeowner Program, and

       o   Gulf Coast regional infrastructure programs.

The Office of Investigation focused on disaster fraud regarding not only the Gulf Coast region
hurricanes, but also the California wildfires and the Midwest region’s floods. We continue to
work with HUD to improve oversight and reduce program vulnerabilities. Current
accountability concerns include (1) new disaster programs involving huge amounts of money,
introduced with untested requirements and results, and (2) restrictions in using computer
matching between HUD and other federal and local agencies. Such natural disasters will impact
on HUD’s resources and remain challenges into the future.




                                           Page 384
                                             SECTION 4: OTHER ACCOMPANYING          INFORMATION
           MANAGEMENT      AND PERFORMANCE     CHALLENGES    — HUD   MANAGEMENT      PERSPECTIVES



      MANAGEMENT AND PERFORMANCE CHALLENGES                                                    -
            HUD MANAGEMENT PERSPECTIVES
In accordance with the Reports Consolidation Act of 2000, HUD’s annual Performance and
Accountability Report “...shall include a statement prepared by the agency’s Inspector General
that summarizes what the Inspector General considers to be the most serious management and
performance challenges facing the agency and briefly assesses the agency’s progress in
addressing those challenges.’ On October 19, 2008, HUD’s Inspector General (IG) provided a
statement on six management challenges for inclusion in this FY 2008 Performance and
Accountability Report:
1    HUD’s response to the nation’s financial crisis;
2    Human capital management;
3    Financial management systems;
4.   FHA single family management;
5.   Public and assisted housing program administration; and
6    Administering programs directed toward the victims of natural disaster.


HUD Management’s Perspective
HUD management generally agrees that the six areas identified in the Inspector General’s
statement are challenges currently facing the Department. As an indicator of the importance
being placed on addressing each of these issues, four of these six challenges are included in high-
visibility initiatives in the President’s Management Agenda. The remaining two challenges (1.e.,
HUD’s response to the nation’s financial crisis, and administering programs directed toward
victims of natural disasters) are being addressed by very specific initiatives directed toward
recovery of the housing market (one of the significant issues contributing to the financial crisis),
and for providing relief to the victims of hurricanes and other natural disasters. In addition to the
progress on these challenges that is discussed below, and which is also acknowledged in the IG’s
statement, further information on HUD’s specific FY 2008 actions to meet these challenges is
provided in the President’s Management Agenda section of this report.
HUD’s response to the nation’s financial crisis
HUD’s response to the financial crisis is an enormous challenge, as well as an enormous
opportunity for the Department to provide significant relief in a tumultuous housing market,
while maintaining the viability of its mortgage insurance program and maximizing the benefits
from grant funds available for redeveloping abandoned and foreclosed homes.
HUD understands the importance of its role in providing safe and affordable mortgage options to
potential homebuyers and to homeowners facing difficulties in meeting obligations of existing
mortgages. HUD has risen to the challenge of these difficult times by changing some
requirements for FHA insured loans, first through FHASecure and more recently, through the
implementation of Hope for Homeowners program mandated by the Housing and Economic



                                              Page 385
 DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT
 FY 2008 PERFORMANCE AND ACCOUNTABILITY REPORT
Recovery Act of 2008. To expeditiously implement a fiscally sound program, the requirements
for the Hope for Homeowners program were crafted by a board consisting of high level officials
of not only HUD, but also Treasury, the Federal Reserve Board, and the Federal Deposit
Insurance Corporation. A front end risk assessment is currently underway at HUD to examine
the risks and controls needed for this newly implemented program. HUD is also discussing
whether another front end risk assessment is needed to review elements of the FHA
Modernization Act, which was also enacted in the July 2008 legislation. As HUD analyzes risk,
a major focus will be to ensure the financial stability of the FHA insurance funds. As noted in
the Housing section of the MD&A, the capital ratio dropped from 6.4 percent in FY 2007 to
3.0 percent in FY 2008, still above the congressionally mandated minimum of 2.0 percent, but
reflecting the serious downturn in the housing market.
Management acknowledges the strain that these new programs have on its resources.
Recognizing the need for increased staff, HUD has focused on an initiative to accelerate and
improve the hiring and recruiting process. A streamlined hiring process was adopted and 545
new positions were approved. As of September 30, 2008, 274 jobs had been filled by the Office
of Housing during the 4th quarter. And, as noted in the IG Memorandum, resources for system
development are scarce; however, management is working with Congress to obtain the resources
needed to implement these very critical programs.
A front end risk assessment of the new Neighborhood Stabilization Program is also underway by
HUD’s Office of Community Planning and Development. HUD has published a Federal
Register notice of allocations and application procedures for grants under this program and is
proceeding to implement this program in a timely manner.
HUD disagrees with the IG’s assertion that HUD does not have a database that provides
sufficient data on units assisted, acquired, or disposed.       The Disaster Recovery Grant Recovery
system possesses the capability to collect such data at an address level. CPD expects that
grantees will report address level data directly to HUD via the Disaster Recovery Grant
Reporting (DRGR) system.
There is no doubt that risk has increased in this time of financial crisis, and that HUD must be
vigilant in monitoring the effects of the changes to programs so that outcomes can be determined
and reported accurately and corrective actions can be promptly taken to mitigate risk levels.
Human Capital Management — Management has recognized the challenges in this area and is
moving forward with implementation of its Strategic Human Capital Management Plan. The
Office of Personnel Management and the Office of Management and Budget have recognized the
progress that has been made by scoring HUD as “Green” on the President’s Management
Agenda Human Capital Initiative in the 3 quarter of FY 2008.
HUD has organized its current workforce of only 9,183 fulltime equivalent (FTE) staff’ to more
efficiently and effectively deliver 112 active programs and many more program set-asides and
terminated programs that are still spending-out old obligations. This significant level of activity
is supported by $54.0 billion in annual budgetary resources that includes supplemental disaster
and related funding, and significant off-budget risks and costs associated with a combined FHA

' Includes all staffing funded from both Salaries & Expense (S&E) and Working Capital Fund (WCP), with the
exclusion of OIG, OFHEO,   and FHFB, which are independent organizations not involved in the administration of
HUD’s programs.



                                                   Page 386
                                            SECTION 4: OTHER ACCOMPANYING           INFORMATION
          MANAGEMENT      AND PERFORMANCE      CHALLENGES    — HUD   MANAGEMENT      PERSPECTIVES

housing mortgage insurance and Ginnie Mae Mortgage-Backed Securities program portfolio that
peaked at over one-trillion dollars early in this administration. HUD currently has eight program
organizations, and thirteen support organizations that represent both the typical support functions
required of a major cabinet level federal agency, as well as two unique organizational
components (FPM and ODOC) necessary to coordinate, support and oversee HUD’s extensive
field office operations and decentralized program activity.
HUD’s last major reorganization/realignment occurred in the 1996-1998 period, with input from
a congressionally mandated study by the National Academy of Public Administration (NAPA).
Those changes included centralization and/or streamlining of many functions, as well as an
elimination of a regional program management structure to make field resources more
accountable to the program Assistant Secretaries responsible for program performance. That
reorganization/realignment also enabled HUD to better adapt to a budget-driven downsizing of
the HUD workforce by 30 percent. For example, the HUD CFO closed 10 Regional Accounting
Offices and centralized accounting in the Fort Worth Office. This was a major contributor to the
overall reduction in OCFO staffing from 480 FTE staff to a current level of 212 FTE staff. HUD
also established and centralized two new organizations with cross-program functional
responsibility for program enforcement (the Departmental Enforcement Center - DEC) and
implementation of remote monitoring systems on the physical conditions and financial
compliance of the public and assisted housing portfolios (the Real Estate Assessment Center —
REAC). REAC systems support multiple program areas and produce data that enable program
staff to use risk-based targeting of available resources for on-site monitoring, technical assistance
and enforcement to improve program compliance and performance.
A study of the need for further organizational refinements was conducted at the beginning of this
administration in 2001, and additional realignments and staffing strategies were executed to
make support functions more accountable to program clients and to right-size the staffing in
support functions to free-up available resources for core program needs. For example, the CIO
and CPO organizations were split out of the Office of Administration, who is also a key client of
the CIO and CPO, and now report directly to the Deputy Secretary to better serve the
Department. The new Departmental Enforcement Center was realigned under OGC to better
support legal enforcement activity, and REAC was closer aligned with the public and assisted
housing program areas to better work with those organizations. Staffing in the Office of Field
Policy and Management, a HUD organization/function that coordinates, supports and oversees
program field office activity, was reduced from 934 FTE staff in 2000 to 386 FTE staff for 2008,
to free-up a greater percentage of HUD’s resources for direct program needs.
The organizational changes implemented at HUD over the past 10 years have been contributing
factors to the Department’s success in eliminating material weakness and high-risk program
designations identified by the OIG and GAO. HUD continues to look for opportunities to further
streamline operations through improved use of automation and business process reengineering
(BPR). BPR studies are currently underway in the areas of correspondence control and tracking
and Internet web site management. Additionally, the Department has undertaken Lean BPR
reviews in the Offices of Housing, Administration, and Procurement.      The Office of Housing has
led the way on Lean BPRs with an initiative to accelerate automation and streamlining across all
FHA program areas. To date, the Lean BPR approach has been used for the 232-223(f) Skilled
Nursing Facility/Assisted Living Facility and the Single Family (SF) Home Ownership Center
(HOC) endorsement process. These same Lean BPR techniques are being applied by the Office


                                              Page 387
    DEPARTMENT    OF HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT
    FY 2008 PERFORMANCE    AND ACCOUNTABILITY      REPORT

of Administration to improve the Human Resources function and streamline the process for
recruitment and hiring new employees, while providing a blueprint of the BPR staffing/hiring
process to the incoming Administration. The Office of the Chief Procurement Office also is
undertaking a Lean BPR effort to strengthen and improve the procurement and acquisition
process by mapping and automating the current process from the annual strategic plan through
award, creating paperless procurement request process, reducing the number of forms
significantly, standardizing the review process and providing improved accountability. In
addition, HUD is piloting the use of service level agreements by central service providers in the
Admin/HR, CIO, CPO and CFO/Budget functions as a possible means of streamlining processes,
improving performance, and reducing shadow support staff in program client organizations to
free-up resources for program needs.
Like other agencies that are already scored green on this PMA initiative, HUD has met the Green
“organization structure” standards of this initiative through demonstrated improvements to the
organization of available resources to improve performance results. In addition, we have
strategies and plans to continue to assess and pursue opportunities for further efficiencies in the
organization of available resources to improve results. The three areas identified in the IG’s
memorandum have been addressed by HUD as follows:
e    Becoming a “mission-focused agency.” HUD has implemented “SMART” performance
     plans throughout HUD. These plans tie each individual’s performance plan and critical
     elements to specific strategic goals of the Department from senior executives to front-line
     staff. Managers and supervisors were provided training on how to develop SMART
     standards to meet these criteria.
e    Maintaining a “high quality workforce.” The Secretary has recognized the need to recruit,
     develop, manage, and retain a diverse workforce. Upon his arrival at HUD in July, he
     established a 200 day plan called iMPACT 200 that included two working groups to further
     address the Department’s human capital needs. One group’s focus was on HUD’s hiring
     process and the other on management effectiveness. The hiring process working group’s
     focus was on conducting a business process reengineering effort to address current
     inefficiencies in the office that slows the hiring of new employees. The management
     effectiveness working group focused on training, specifically for managers, but also for
     employees. Currently, 300 managers are participating in a 360 assessment program that will
     assist them in developing their managerial skills. The managers, in conjunction with this
     program will also be assisted by personal coaching. The working group recommended, and
     the Secretary accepted a recommendation to establish an executive board with representation
     from each program area to provide oversight over HUD’s training academy to ensure all
     training needs are being assessed. The managerial working group also is looking at best
     practices used by other agencies to retain staff.
e    Succession planning. HUD continues to implement its Succession Management Plan. This
     year, management implemented the HUD Fellows Program and the appointment of the 2008
     class of Emerging Leaders to develop its leaders for the future.
Regarding Human Capital Management as a whole, HUD has taken significant steps to better
utilize existing staff capacity, and to obtain, develop, and maintain the capacity necessary to
adequately support HUD’s future mission-critical program delivery. The Department’s five-year
Human Capital Management Strategy seeks to ensure that: 1) HUD’s organizational structure is


                                              Page 388
                                           SECTION 4: OTHER ACCOMPANYING          INFORMATION
          MANAGEMENT     AND PERFORMANCE      CHALLENGES    — HUD   MANAGEMENT    PERSPECTIVES

optimized; 2) succession strategies are in place to provide a continuously updated talent pool;
3) performance appraisal plans for all managers and staff ensure accountability for results and a
link to the goals and objectives of HUD’s mission; 4) hiring strategies are in place to sustain a
diverse workforce; 5) skill gaps are assessed and corrected; and 6) human capital management
accountability systems are in place to support effective management of HUD’s human capital.
Financial Management Systems — Management recognizes the challenges in this area as well,
and OMB has recognized the progress that HUD has made on the Improving Financial
Performance Initiative of the President’s Management Agenda by scoring HUD’s status as
“Green.” Specifically, OMB recognized HUD’s use of financial information by managers for
decision making and the continued progress towards the implementation of the HUD Integrated
Financial Management Information Project (HIFMIP). Also during FY 2008, HUD continued to
build on the successes generated in previous years, and again was able to report substantial
compliance with the federal financial systems requirements of the Federal Financial
Management Improvement Act of 1996 and Section 4 of the Federal Managers’ Financial
Integrity Act of 1982.
Further, HUD was able to report substantial compliance for the Department’s internal control
over financial reporting, as required by Appendix A of OMB Circular A-123. HUD’s financial
systems supported the preparation and audit of Department-wide consolidated financial
statements within 45 days after the end of the fiscal year, with an unqualified audit opinion.
To address the specific issues identified in the OIG’s memorandum, management provides the
following comments.
HUD has significantly addressed the FHA home equity conversion mortgage system material
weaknesses through its corrective actions to eliminate one material weaknesses, and lower the
second material weakness to the level of a significant deficiency. FHA continues its efforts to
improve in this area by supporting business process engineering and related development and
configuration work to adapt the FHA Subsidiary Ledger to new processes for HECM financial
operations.
Progress continues towards an implementation of HIFMIP. As noted in the OIG Memorandum,
the project manager position has been unfilled since February 2008, however the position has
been filled in an “Acting” capacity since that time, and a selection for the position has been
made.
HUD disagrees that the requirements documents are dated. Since the issuance of the original
Request For Proposal, the requirements have been updated with each of the 10 amendments to
the proposal.
A Shared Service Provider/Systems Integrator contract will be awarded in Quarter | of FY 2009
and as mentioned above, a project manager has been selected and will report in early FY 2009.
During FY 2008, HUD staff examined and documented 18 OCFO financial management systems
and their interfaces with HUD Program Office systems and external business partner systems to
document and verify 114 interfaces with supporting functional descriptions, data elements/data
file layouts, technical requirements, and quality assurance actions in preparation for HIFMIP
systems implementation/integration.




                                             Page 389
    DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT
    FY 2008 PERFORMANCE AND ACCOUNTABILITY REPORT
HUD’s ability to prepare financial statements accurately and timely has not been deterred by the
lack of a new core financial system, however, we recognize the benefits in efficiencies and
effectiveness of procuring a system utilizing the latest technologies, and are moving forward as
expeditiously and prudently as possible.
HUD continues to improve its controls over HUD’s computing environment to reduce the risks
associated with safeguarding funds, property, and assets from unauthorized use or
misappropriation. In FY 2008, HUD:
e    Obtained sufficient audit record storage capacity,
e    Established an audit reduction and report generation capability to support the fact
     investigations of security incidents,
e    Ensured that all Unisys security audit log events are monitored, analyzed, reported and
     followed up for the Unisys production system, and
e    Restricted access to log files to those whose job function requires that access.
The Department does not agree, however, with the Inspector General’s assessment that HUD has
limited availability of information to assist management in effectively managing operations on
an ongoing basis. During FY 2008, the Department maintained its score of “Green” on the
“Improved Financial Performance” initiative of the President’s Management Agenda, in large
part due to the Department’s ability to document the availability and current uses of financial
information to facilitate decision-making, much of which comes from the HUD Financial Data
Mart. The Financial Data Mart assists management decisions in the areas of budget planning,
budget execution and spending, project management, and contract management. Data is also
used to support information requests, improve trend analyses, meet OMB's accelerated deadlines
for financial reporting, provide metrics to measure financial/accounting performance, identify
and reduce unneeded unobligated balances, and ensure that unexpended funds are managed
appropriately.
The Department has provided Financial Data Mart access to over 400 users representing
10 major allotment holders and over 150 unique HUD organizational units. The users are
primarily those that are responsible for financial decision-making, e.g., budget officers, program
managers, financial analysts, accountants, and auditors.    Users of the Data Mart access hundreds
of millions of financial records via over 530 web-based or broadcast reports, primarily financial
in nature, e.g., Status of Funds, cash management, general ledger reconciliation, grant-level
subsidiaries, contract balances, historical activity-based, and event-based quality assurance.   In
addition, HUD staff has created hundreds of specialized reports since deployment of the
Financial Data Mart to meet ad-hoc requests.
The IG’s concern about FHA’s inability to fund systems development and upgrade and replace
legacy application systems that had been previously scheduled to be integrated has been partially
addressed through Home Economic Recovery Act provisions that allow HUD to finance
administrative costs including system development by selling bonds. Although this does not
cover all system development needs, it does provide some funding relief.
HUD acknowledges the slippage in its scores on the PMA E-GOV initiative. HUD had an OMB
approved Plan of Action and Milestones, and HUD met all but two milestones during FY 2008.
OMB lowered HUD’s score because it did not obtain the funding from Congress for all its



                                               Page 390
                                            SECTION 4: OTHER ACCOMPANYING          INFORMATION
          MANAGEMENT      AND PERFORMANCE      CHALLENGES    — HUD   MANAGEMENT     PERSPECTIVES

E-GOV initiatives and because HUD did not use one of the grant management line of business
centers of excellence for its grant management systems. The Appropriators did not have the
same sense of urgency regarding the funding of E-GOV initiatives as HUD concerning the
former, while the latter was a prudent business decision on HUD’s part to not proceed with a
change in the business process that would not meet its requirements, as the centers of excellence
were unable to meet HUD’s unique requirements for grant management.
FHA single family management — FHA Single Family Housing Mortgage Insurance Program
risks are higher in the current economic climate, and HUD has taken actions to ensure these risks
are managed effectively. HUD is monitoring, through program evaluations, the impact of new
activities for the purpose of proposing legislative or administrative changes to ensure the
financial stability of FHA. The financial stability of the Mutual Mortgage Insurance fund is
important to HUD and the Congress. To ensure the stability of this fund, Congress has mandated
a minimum level for the capital ratio, currently set at 2.0 percent. The capital ratio is defined as
the ratio of the economic value or present value of cash flows (1.e., the present value of
premiums and proceeds from the sale of foreclosed properties) to the value of the insurance-in-
force. The capital ratio has consistently exceeded this minimum requirement. In FY 2007, it
significantly exceeded the requirement at a value of 6.4 percent. In FY 2008, HUD again
surpassed the minimum level, though this ratio decreased significantly to 3.0 percent. This
decrease was caused by two primary factors. The estimated economic value of the fund
decreased significantly with the forecast of expected house price declines due to the declining
housing market. Conversely, the total MMI insurance-in-force increased significantly due to the
volume of new endorsements. The combination of these factors resulted in the decrease in the
capital ratio.
FHA is striving to conduct the actions noted by the IG including performing a formal, systematic
annual risk assessment of its programs and administrative functions, planning and conducting
ongoing management control reviews, establishing an overall strategy regarding its risk-based
monitoring of program activities and participants, and identifying corrective actions required to
improve its management controls in a timely manner.
In order to effectively implement new programs, FHA must still overcome the challenge of
modernizing and integrating old, COBOL-based program feeder systems into its integrated core
financial system, the FHA Subsidiary Ledger System. Systems development plans have been
delayed by funding cuts in HUD’s Working Capital Fund for IT investments. Sufficient IT
systems investments will eliminate the need for compensating manual controls over aspects of
FHA’s business.
Public and assisted housing program administration — As noted in the IG’s memorandum,
there are several issues concerning public and assisted housing. HUD has undertaken a
comprehensive approach to address the utilization of public housing vouchers and the monitoring
of housing agencies and assisted multifamily projects.
To enhance its monitoring efforts that will address both of the above issues, during FY 2008,
HUD:
e   Continued improvements in oversight and monitoring of subsidy calculations and
    intermediaries program performance by timely completing all monitoring activities,
    including the development of an internal tool to identify high-risk PHAs targeted for on-site



                                             Page 391
    DEPARTMENT    OF HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT
    FY 2008 PERFORMANCE     AND ACCOUNTABILITY     REPORT

     monitoring, and providing training to the Public Housing Revitalization Specialists, Financial
     Analysts, and Facilities Management staff members on conducting the monitoring reviews,
     and developed an internal checklist that ensures consistency in gathering and analyzing
     monitoring information,
e    Conducted 90 Tier I monitoring activities, as prescribed in the PIH FY 2008 Management
     Plan, and 92 Voucher Management System onsite reviews,
e    Conducted on-site reviews in multifamily housing,
e    Awarded a contract to assist in the review, evaluation, and verification of rental assistance
     data,
e    Issued an Operating Subsidy Review Guide,
e    Completed a thorough review of all operating subsidy calculations by the Subsidy and Grants
     Information Systems and provided training on the same to National Association of Housing
     and Redevelopment Officials,
e    Provided Enterprise Income Verification training to all HUB and Program Centers to
     coincide with the implementation of EIV for multifamily housing, with publication of the
     final rule for mandatory use of EIV scheduled for early FY 2009,
e    Obtained sufficient funding to increase the scope of A-133 audits,
e    Trained staff on how to review Financial Assessment Subsystem submissions,
e    Developed Utilization and Net Restricted Assets-Housing Assistance Payment tools for the
     field,
e    Converted Section 8 projects under the FMC payment process to Performance Based
     Contract Administrator contracts under Housing, and
e    Converted the remaining portfolio of the traditional Contract Administrators’ Section 8
     contracts back into Housing’s accounting system.
HUD set and communicated clear measurable goals and corrective actions for reducing improper
rental housing assistance payments and improving public and assisted housing conditions, and
continues to work collaboratively with the housing industry and local housing program
administrators to meet or exceed those goals.
To accomplish this progress, PIH modified its overall monitoring strategy for public and assisted
housing during FY 2007 by stratifying PHAs into two tiers. Tier 1 is composed of
approximately 500 PHAs, which account for more than 80 percent of the PIH funding provided.
Tier 2 covers the remaining 3,600 PHAs.      HUD   conducted detailed annual reviews of
approximately 20 percent of the Tier 1 PHAs and as many of the Tier 2 PHAs as funding
permitted, concentrating monitoring resources on the PHAs with the greatest risk.
Similarly, HUD’s Office of Multifamily Housing and their Performance-Based Contract
Administrators continued to conduct on-site monitoring reviews in FY 2008, directed at
improving program administrator performance to reduce improper payments and improve
housing conditions. The full implementation of HUD’s Enterprise Income Verification System
for upfront verification of tenant income has the potential to eliminate much of the remaining




                                               Page 392
                                             SECTION 4: OTHER ACCOMPANYING          INFORMATION
           MANAGEMENT        AND PERFORMANCE    CHALLENGES    — HUD   MANAGEMENT     PERSPECTIVES

improper rental assistance payment problem caused by tenant under reporting of income.
Implementation of EIV was initiated for Multifamily Housing Programs in January 2008.
Results of the increased monitoring focus that began in FY 2007, in addition to program
changes, have resulted in a profound reduction in the improper payment rate for HUD’s rental
assistance programs. The estimated recovery rate for FY 2007 (there is a one year lag in the
reporting) was 3.5 percent compared to a goal of 4.6 percent. This achievement resulted in
HUD’s score for the Eliminating Improper Payment PMA Initiative to returning to a status of
“Green’’ at June 30, 2008.
Finally, to address the IG’s specific comment concerning their estimate that approximately
$752 million in funding for Section 8 project-based contracts should have been recaptured, HUD
responded to the IG on March 17, 2008 that upon further review, approximately only
$100 million should have been recaptured. However, HUD agrees to modify its FY 2008
recapture methodology to include consideration of current year expirations (that were not
included in the prior methodology) in our review. Recaptures will be made when field offices
can certify that the contract is terminated and no outstanding, unpaid vouchers remain.
Concerning unused Housing Assistance Payment (HAP) funds and their classification as
unusable,” the terms “usable” and “unusable” are informal designations of that portion
respectively of the Net Restricted Assets (NRA) that is estimated to be required for a program to
reach 100 percent utilization, and the portion that is estimated to not be required for that purpose.
In reality, all NRA funds are available to be used and no portion is officially categorized as
unusable.
A challenge to raising the utilization rate and using all funds is the leasing cap that has been
included in each recent Appropriations Act which restricts each PHA to assisting only the
number of households covered by vouchers provided for in its Annual Contributions Contract.
Accordingly, if a PHA is more efficient in the use of the funds provided, it will reach the leasing
cap, and thus create or increase the NRA balance.
Similarly, a dollar based budget with a fixed number of vouchers creates the opportunity for
lower utilization.   If the PHA nears the dollar limit, but has an ample number of vouchers and
due to the uncertainty of what the funding provisions in future years will be, the PHA will under-
lease in order to build a cushion in their NRA accounts to avoid the potential need to terminate
families’ assistance if all funds are used.
Additionally, regarding the $1.9 billion NRA balances accumulated as of June 30, 2008, we must
clarify that Congress required an offset of $723 million of the (unusable) NRA balances in 2008.
This was accomplished. Language has also been incorporated in the President’s FY 2009 and
FY 2010 budget requests to account for the NRA balances in future funding allocations.
Notwithstanding these challenges, PIH is concerned with and taking steps to improve utilization
rates. Since implementing the budget-based approach, utilization rates improved in 2007 and
2008.   As of June 30, 2007, the voucher utilization rate was 91.7 percent and as of June 30, 2008,
the rate increased to 93.3 percent.   The HCVP goal will be 95 percent by 2010, and 97 percent by
2011.




                                               Page 393
 DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT
 FY 2008 PERFORMANCE AND ACCOUNTABILITY REPORT
Administering Programs Directed Toward Victims of Hurricanes Katrina and Rita - HUD
responded quickly in the wake of this unprecedented natural disaster to help meet the temporary
housing needs of displaced households, assess the impacts on HUD-supported housing, and plan
the long-term recovery of the devastated region. While HUD’s response was immediate and
comprehensive, it also recognized that the enormous amount of relief funds creates the potential
for fraud and abuse. The Community Planning and Development (CPD) Disaster Recovery and
Assistance (DRA) Division was provided an influx of disaster funding beginning in FY 2005 and
continuing into FY 2008 to address the hurricane disaster recoveries. In addition to the
$19 billion of appropriated funds for hurricanes Katrina, Rita, Wilma, in FY 2008, HUD
received (1) $300 million for the Mid-west floods, (2) $3.9 billion for the Neighborhood
Stabilization Program (NSP) to assist state and local governments to acquire and redevelop
foreclosed properties that might otherwise become sources of abandonment and blight within
their communities, and (3) $6.5 billion supplemental funds as enacted for 2008 disasters. In
total, HUD has oversight of approximately $30 billion in disaster supplemental funding.
Management recognizes the program vulnerability, and the need for oversight of disaster funds.
To address such concerns, in FY 2008 CPD awarded a contract to examine grantee oversight of
the Gulf Coast disaster recovery funds, by assessing the design and execution of the program
delivery structure and internal controls for the States of Louisiana and Mississippi. Funding for
these states comprises more than 90 percent of the $19 billion in Gulf Coast disaster recovery
funds. The contractor’s overall assessment concluded that both states had design control gaps as
lacking either: (1) written policies and procedures to guide internal control and quality
assurance, or (2) a formal monitoring plan that seperately addresses fraud, waste, abuse, and
mismanagement of funds.
The contractor’s report on suggested best-practices recommended more stringent monitoring
protocols over disaster recovery funds to together reduce program vulnerabilities. Action on a
number of the recommendations was already underway because the issues had previously been
identified as part of HUD program monitoring, grantee internal audit, or audits by the Office of
Inspector General.
Additionally, CPD recognizes the shortcomings of staffing, support, and systems mentioned in
the memo, and is proposing funding in the FY 2010 budget to address them.




                                            Page 394
                                              SECTION 4: OTHER ACCOMPANYING           INFORMATION
                                    IMPROPER    PAYMENTS    INFORMATION    ACT REPORTING     DETAILS



              IMPROPER PAYMENTS INFORMATION ACT
                       REPORTING DETAILS
The Requirements
Under the Improper Payments Information Act (IPIA) of 2002 (Public Law 107-300) and Office
of Management and Budget (OMB) implementing guidance in Appendix C of Circular
No. A-123, agencies are to assess all programs and activities they administer and identify those
that may be susceptible to significant improper payments. Where the risk of improper payments
is assessed as potentially significant, agencies are required to estimate the annual amount of
improper payments and report the estimates along with plans to reduce improper payments to the
President and the Congress. The statute defines a “significant” level of improper payments as
annual improper payments exceeding a $10 million dollar threshold.
An “improper payment” is any payment that should not have been made or that was made in an
incorrect amount under statutory, contractual, administrative, or other legally applicable
requirements. Incorrect amounts are overpayments and underpayments (including inappropriate
denials of payment or service). An improper payment includes any payment that was made to an
ineligible recipient or for an ineligible service. Improper payments are also duplicate payments,
payments for services not received, and payments that do not account for credit for applicable
discounts. Also, when an agency’s review is unable to discern whether a payment was proper as
a result of insufficient or lack of documentation, this payment must also be considered an error.
In addition to identifying substantive errors that might warrant repayment, HUD’s statistical
sampling of support for payments also considered “process” errors that increase the risk of
substantive payment errors, and process errors are included in HUD’s improper payment
estimates.
HUD’s Commitment

The Secretary designated the Chief Financial Officer as the lead official for directing and
overseeing HUD actions to address improper payment issues and bring HUD into compliance
with requirements of the IPIA and OMB implementing guidance. The Office of the Chief
Financial Officer developed a plan for implementing the IPIA and after necessary contract
support services were put in place by the Chief Financial Officer and FHA, HUD began to
execute the plan in FY 2004. HUD’s plans, goals, and results for identifying and reducing
improper payments are tracked under the President’s Management Agenda.
HUD’s Process
The HUD process for complying with the Improper Payments Information Act consists of four
steps:
1)   Step one is an initial survey of all program and administrative activities, for potential
     indicators of significant improper payments;
2)   Step two is a detailed risk assessment of programs identified in the first step with annual
     expenditures in excess of $40 million;
3)   Step three consists of statistical sample testing of payments by independent reviewers in any
     program activity determined to be susceptible to a significant improper payment level; and


                                               Page 395
     DEPARTMENT    OF HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT
     FY 2008 PERFORMANCE     AND ACCOUNTABILITY     REPORT

4)    The final step is to establish, execute, and monitor corrective action plans for reducing
      improper payments in the identified at-risk programs.
Summary of HUD Results to Date
HUD is fully compliant with the requirements of the IPIA and was the first federal agency to
achieve the President’s goals for reducing improper payments. HUD’s initial annual assessment
of the risk of improper payments was conducted in FY 2004, based on the $52.9 billion in
payments made in FY 2003 in support of over 200 programs and administrative activities.
HUD’s initial assessment identified 10 activities, representing 57 percent of all payments, as
potentially “at risk” of a significant improper payment level. Statistical sampling to measure and
estimate the actual level of improper payments in those 10 program activities found that only 5
of the 10 areas actually had a significant improper payment problem. Corrective actions were
subsequently completed to eliminate the significant improper payments in 2 of those 5 areas,
pertaining to payments under the Single Family Acquired Asset Management System and the
Public Housing Capital Fund.
Prior to enactment of the Improper Payments Information Act, the Office of Management and
Budget requested agency input on improper payments in select programs, including the CDBG
Entitlement and State/Small Cities Programs, through Section 57 of OMB         Circular No. A-11.
HUD’s original Section 57 assessment and initial annual risk assessments found these CDBG
programs to be at low risk of improper payments not warranting reporting. However, OMB
subsequently revised its guidance to clarify that agencies should report on the former Section 57
programs until they can document a minimum of two consecutive years of improper payments
that are less than $10 million annually, as the basis for a request for OMB relief from annual
reporting.
HUD’s analysis determined that the CDBG Program is below the annual $10 million threshold
for required reporting, and on March 14, 2007, OMB approved HUD’s request for relief from
annual improper payment reporting. HUD will continue to conduct an annual assessment of the
CDBG programs and provide results to OMB by March 31.
HUD set aggressive goals for reducing improper payments in the remaining three high-risk
program areas — the Public Housing, Housing Choice Vouchers and Project-based Assistance
Programs — collectively referred to as HUD’s rental housing assistance programs. HUD has
reduced the combined baseline gross improper rental Housing Assistance Payment estimates of
$3.430 billion in Fiscal Year 2000 to $993 million in Fiscal Year 2007, a reduction of 71 percent.
Results of Annual Risk Assessment Update and Continued Payment Testing
The FY 2008 risk assessment update was based on payment and other relevant activity that
occurred during FY 2007. An inventory of over 200 distinct program and administrative
payment activities was identified from all of HUD’s financial management systems in FY 2007,
with total payments of $63.3 billion.




                                                Page 396
                                             SECTION 4: OTHER ACCOMPANYING                 INFORMATION
                                   IMPROPER    PAYMENTS      INFORMATION        ACT REPORTING   DETAILS

The payment universe consisted of the following general distribution:

                                     HUD's Payment Universe
                                     2%
                                                          Rental   Assistance

                                                45%     | mIFHA
                                                          Hother   Activities Over $40M

                                                          OHOother Activities Under $40M




HUD’s risk assessment update in FY 2008 did not identify any new activities as being at-risk of
a significant improper payment level. Programs that previously tested below the improper
payment threshold established by the IPIA were removed from HUD’s at-risk inventory and are
not subject to re-testing unless there is significant change in the nature of the activity, HUD’s
internal control structure, or operating environment.
Rental Housing Assistance Programs
HUD’s rental housing assistance programs — Public Housing, Housing Choice Vouchers, and
Project-based Assistance — had previously been assessed as at high risk of significant improper
payment levels, and continue to be reported as such, with corresponding error measurement
methodologies, corrective action plans, and error reduction goals described below. These
programs constituted over $28 billion, or 45 percent, of HUD’s total payments in FY 2007.
Prior to enactment of the IPIA, HUD had already established the Rental Housing Integrity
Improvement Project in FY 2001 to reduce an acknowledged improper payment problem in its
rental assistance programs. This project is directed by the responsible HUD program offices,
with oversight by the Office of the Chief Financial Officer and statistical sampling support from
the Office of Policy Development and Research. HUD’s Rental Housing Assistance Programs
are administered by over 26,000 Public Housing Agencies and multifamily housing owners or
management agents on HUD’s behalf. In general, beneficiaries pay 30 percent of their adjusted
income as rent, and HUD payments cover the remainder of the rental cost (or the operating cost,
in the case of public housing).
There are three major components of potential errors and improper payments in these complex
programs:
1)   Program administrator error — the program administrator’s failure to properly apply income
     exclusions and deductions and correctly determine income, rent, and subsidy levels;
2)   Tenant income reporting error — the tenant beneficiary’s failure to properly disclose all
     income sources and amounts upon which subsidies are determined; and
3)   Billing error — errors in the billing and payment of subsidies due between HUD and third
     party program administrators and/or housing providers.




                                              Page 397
      DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT
      FY 2008 PERFORMANCE AND ACCOUNTABILITY REPORT
From FY 2000 through FY 2007, HUD reduced the gross improper payments for the first 2 of
these 3 categories of error from $3.22 billion to $921 million, a reduction of 71 percent. A
baseline measurement for the third component, billing error, was completed in FY 2005, based
on FY 2003 expenditures, and was estimated to be $214 million. In FY 2007 the billing error
was estimated to be $71 million. The following chart provides a summary for all three error
components for FY 2007 as compared to FY 2006 and the baseline year (FY 2000).


                      IMPROPER RENTAL ASSISTANCE PAYMENT                                    ESTIMATES
                                  2007            2007             2007              2007             2006             2000
      Administration/           Subsidy         Subsidy             Net             Gross            Gross            Gross
         Error Type              Over-           Under-         Erroneous | Erroneous | Erroneous | Erroneous
                               Payments*      | Payments*      | Payments*      | Payments*      | Payments*      | Payments”
     Public Housing
Administrator Error               $26,598          $10,743          $15,855          $37,341         $172,824      $602,557
Income Reporting Error             13,864                  0         13,864           13,864          101,050       294,000
Billing Error**                      8,750            3,500            5,250          12,250           49,000 | Not available
                Subtotal:         $49,212          $14,243          $34,969          $63,455         $322,874      $896,557

Housing Choice
Vouchers
Administrator Error              $282,840         $152,172         $130,668         $435,012         $520,020 | $1,096,535
Income Reporting Error              97,543                0           97,543          97,543          193,428       418,000
Billing Error**                           0               0                 0               0          72,000 | Not available
                Subtotal:        $380,383         $152,172         $228,211         $532,555         $785,448 | $1,514,535

Total PHA
Administered
Administrator Error              $309,438         $162,915         $146,523         $472,353         $692,844 |      $1,699,092
Income Reporting Error            111,407                  0        111,407          111,407          294,478           712,000
Billing Error**                     8,750             3,500           5,250           12,250          121,000     | Not available
            PHA Subtotal:        $429,595         $166,415         $263,180         $596,010 |     $1,108,322     | $2,411,092

Total Project
Based/Owner
Administered
Administrator Error              $134,460          $64,644          $69,816         $199,104         $261,324      $539,160
Income Reporting Error            138,412                 0         138,412          138,412           90,512       266,000
Billing Error**                    24,000           35,000          (11,000)          59,000           59,000 | Not available
             Project Based
                  Subtotal:      $296,872          $99,644         $197,228         $396,516         $410,836          $805,160

Total Improper
Payments
Administrator Error    $443,898                  $227,559          $216,339         $671,457    $954,168 | $2,238,252
Income Reporting Error  249,819                           0         249,819          249,819      384,990       978,000
Billing Error**          32,750                     38,500           (5,750)          71,250      180,000 | Not available
        GRAND TOTAL: =      467                  $266,059         $460,408         $992,526 | $1,519,158 | $3,216,252
TOTAL
SRST  PROGRAM
        S                      ToS                     cc              —
                                                                       —          $28,151,954|     $27,505,331}     $18,800,000
IMPROPER PAYMENT               .                       .               -
                                                                                        3.5 %            5.5 %           17.1%
RATE
ok     Dollars in Thousands.
***    Billing error estimates are baselines established in FY 2004 for PHA Administrators and FY 2005 for Owner
       Administrators.




                                                          Page 398
                                                  SECTION 4: OTHER ACCOMPANYING        INFORMATION
                                          IMPROPER   PAYMENTS   INFORMATION    ACT REPORTING    DETAILS



                                    Percent Reductions in Improper Payments
                       Error Type               Baseline           FY 2007           Percent
                                               Estimates*         Estimates*        Reduction
         Administrator Error                     $2.238             $0.67 1            70%
         Income Reporting Error                  $0.978             $0.250             74%
         Billing Error                           $0.214             $0.071             67%
         Total                                   $3.430             $0.992             1%
*Dollars in billions

Corrective Actions Taken to Reduce Improper Payments
The overall reduction in improper payments for HUD’s three major types of Rental Housing
Assistance Programs over the past eight years has been primarily attributed to HUD’s efforts to
work with its housing industry partners through enhanced program guidance, training, oversight,
and enforcement. Collectively, these efforts have had a positive impact on the program
administrators’ ability to reduce their errors in the calculation of income, rent and subsidies.     The
Department also has found a direct correlation in the reduction of improper payments to the
number of monitoring reviews of public housing agencies (PHAs) and the number of
management and occupancy reviews at multifamily housing properties, as well as the increased
availability and use of the Enterprise Income Verification system by PHAs, owners, management
agents, and contract administrators for HUD’s Project-based Assistance programs.
More recently, program structure changes have reduced the opportunities for improper payments
in two of HUD’s Rental Housing Assistance Programs. In HUD’s Public Housing program,
significant program structure changes were implemented to improve the efficient use of funding
in the Public Housing Operating Fund. These structure changes effectively eliminated all three
previously reported types of improper payments due to Administrator, Income Reporting, and
Billing errors. It should be noted that PHAs could still make Administrator errors, and tenants
could still not report or under-report their income. However, in the new structure, the effect of
these errors would be borne by the PHA and HUD’s subsidy payment would remain unchanged.
Nonetheless, HUD retains program oversight responsibility to ensure the proper performance and
benefits of the program, and will continue to focus on effective measures to reduce performance
errors by PHAs. These changes were implemented in the second quarter of FY 2007 (1.e., error
reductions affecting HUD were realized for three-quarters of the year); accordingly, the
Improper Rental Assistance Payment Estimate chart on the preceding page reflects the estimated
improper payment amount for the first quarter. In addition, the establishment of a budget based
funding methodology was implemented for the Housing Choice Voucher Program in FY 2005 to
eliminate the opportunity for billing errors in that program.
HUD’s Improper Payment Reduction Forecast
HUD will continue to take aggressive steps to address the causes of improper rental housing
assistance payments to ensure that the right benefits go to the right people. Based on the above
results for the three types of rental housing assistance errors, as well as plans to address known
causes and levels of improper payments, HUD provides the statistical results for FY 2007 and



                                                     Page 399
 DEPARTMENT          OF HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT
 FY 2008 PERFORMANCE                 AND ACCOUNTABILITY         REPORT

the outlook for improper payment percentages on a combined program basis from FY 2008 —
FY 2010, as follows:
                          Rental Assistance Improper Payment Reduction Outlook
                                             FY 2008 — FY 2010
                                               (Dollars shown in billions)

                                          FY 2006                             FY 2007
      _.      | FY 2006 |FY 2006]           IP%     | FY2007|/FY 2007}           IP% | PY 2008| FY 2009) FY 2010
  Activity     |payments|     — IP         Goal/     |Payments|       IP        Goal/      [ite      [ee       [ite
                 y                                                                        Goal      Goal      Goal
                                           Actual                              Actual
  Rental
Assistance]     $27.505     | $1.519    | 5.0/5.5   | $28.151     | $0.992   | 4.6/3.5     3.4       3.2       3.1


                                     Estimated Payments                                  $28,553 | $29,000 | $29,000

* The annual Improper Payments calculation is based on prior year data. Accordingly, the FY 2008, FY 2009, and
  FY 2010 results will be reported in the FY 2009, FY 2010, and FY 2011 PARs respectively.

The FY 2007 goal was originally set at 5.5 percent. During FY 2008, however, the FY 2007
goal was revised based on program changes made to the Rental Housing Assistance Programs
during FY 2007. The full implementation of the Enterprise Income Verification system, the
efficient use of funding in the Public Housing Operating Fund, the establishment of a budget
based funding methodology in the Housing Choice Voucher Program, and the technical
assistance and training to minimize Administrator errors made it possible to lower HUD’s
FY 2007 and future improper payment reduction outlook. HUD believes that the goals for
FY 2008 and beyond are realistic and achievable.
Further information on HUD’s efforts to reduce improper rental housing assistance payments is
provided in Indicator E.3 in Section 2 of this report.
Recovery Auditing Activity
In addition to the requirements of the IPIA, Section 831 of the Defense Authorization Act
of 2002, and OMB guidance, requires agencies that enter into contracts with a total value in
excess of $500 million in a fiscal year to carry out a cost-effective program for identifying errors
made in paying contractors and for recovering amounts improperly paid to contractors. In
FY 2003, HUD hired a contractor to conduct an independent recovery auditing review. In its
study, HUD’s contractor performed a detailed review on contracts with a value of $206.5 million
to determine the potential universe of contracts for which recovery auditing was appropriate.
Their review identified potential recoveries of only $46,650 on two contracts, which they
referred to HUD for validation. Further work by HUD’s Contracting Officer and Government
Technical Representative validated these payments as being proper and correct. As a result, no
recoveries were realized from the contractor’s efforts.
The current internal controls present in HUD’s contract payment and contract close-out process
are adequate to reduce the risks of overpayments. HUD continues to focus on strengthening its
funds control processes, increasing training classes for Government Technical Representatives
and Government Technical Monitors, and further improving the contract close-out process.
Therefore, HUD concluded that a recovery auditing program would not be beneficial and is not
warranted.



                                                          Page 400
                                               SECTION 4: OTHER ACCOMPANYING               INFORMATION
   ROLE   OF   PROGRAM   EVALUATIONS   AND   RESEARCH   STUDIES   IN ASSESSING   PROGRAM   PERFORMANCE




     ROLE OF PROGRAM EVALUATIONS AND RESEARCH
      STUDIES IN ASSESSING PROGRAM PERFORMANCE
Each year, HUD completes a number of program evaluations and research studies related to
significant policy issues. These studies provide a level of detail and confidence about the
programmatic impacts that performance measures alone cannot capture. The Department uses
the findings of this research to make informed decisions on HUD policies, programs, budget, and
legislative proposals. This Appendix presents the primary findings of selected research reports
completed since the beginning of FY 2008. Most of the reports are available from the Office of
Policy Development and Research clearinghouse, HUD USER, which can be accessed at
http://www.huduser.org.
Strategic Goal A:         Increasing Homeownership Opportunities
HUD publishes the U.S. Housing Market Conditions (quarterly), the American Housing Survey
for specific metro areas (annually), and the American Housing Survey for the United States
(biennially) to provide data and analysis about housing markets. HUD and the Census Bureau
jointly release monthly statistics on new residential construction including starts, permits,
inventories of unused permits, new housing units under construction and completions, new
residential sales such as new single-family sales, prices and inventories of unsold homes. HUD
also publishes quarterly reports on the placement of new manufactured housing units and the
absorption of new multifamily housing units.
Study of Closing Costs for FHA Mortgages. This study presents findings on how much
borrowers pay in closing costs when they purchase a house, how much these costs vary, and
factors to which the variation is related. The analysis uses data from a national sample of 7,560
FHA- insured, 30-year fixed-rate home purchase loans. Findings of the study demonstrate that
loan fees, title fees, and real estate agent fees all add significantly to the total closing costs
incurred by homebuyers. Closing costs vary with borrower characteristics, lender characteristics,
neighborhood racial composition, and across states, even after controlling for factors that are
legitimately related to lender costs. Minority borrowers and borrowers in minority
neighborhoods and neighborhoods with lower educational attainment consistently pay higher
fees. In addition, borrowers in neighborhoods with low educational attainment receive
substantially higher-cost offers, and although a significant share “walk away” from these offers,
enough accept them to be profitable to lenders and brokers.
Cityscape: A Journal of Policy Development and Research, Vol. 10 No. 2. This special issue
examines the homeownership experience of low-income and minority households over time, and
whether their experiences differ from those of higher income households. The articles show that
low-income and minority households are as likely as others to gain from home value
appreciation and reap the traditional benefits of homeownership. However, such households are
more likely to face higher payment burdens, which make them more likely than higher income
and non-minority households to return to being renters.
Strategic Goal B: Promote Decent Affordable Housing
Housing Needs of Persons With Disabilities: Supplemental Findings to the Affordable
Housing Needs 2005 Report. This study supplements Affordable Housing Needs 2005, which



                                                 Page 401
 DEPARTMENT      OF HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT
 FY 2008 PERFORMANCE       AND ACCOUNTABILITY     REPORT

presented estimates of worst case needs for affordable rental housing. It provides additional
analysis and findings about worst case needs among households with disabilities. The new
results indicate that a larger proportion of the 5.99 million households with worst case needs in
2005 included persons with disabilities than previously estimated.
Section 202 Supportive Housing for Elderly: Program Status and Performance
Measurement. The Supportive Housing for the Elderly program provides capital advances and
project rental assistance, under Section 202 of the Housing Act of 1959, for housing projects
serving elderly households. This study assesses whether the program has been effective in
meeting the needs of very low-income elderly Americans. The research findings demonstrate
that Section 202 provides good quality housing for its residents. The study also offers
programmatic recommendations for performance measurements.
Intergenerational Housing Needs and HUD Program Options: Report to Congress. This
report addresses a Congressional mandate for “a study to determine an estimate of the number of
covered families in the United States and their affordable housing needs” and includes
“‘recommendations...regarding how the major assisted housing programs of the Department of
Housing and Urban Development, including the supportive housing for the elderly program
under Section 202 of the Housing Act of 1959 can be used and, if appropriate, amended or
altered, to meet the affordable housing needs of covered families.” The study, conducted by
HUD and the Bureau of the Census, uses 2000 Census and American Housing Survey data to
clarify the housing issues faced by grandparents and other relatives who accept the responsibility
of providing care for minor children.
Trends in Housing Costs: 1985 - 2005 and the 30-Percent-of-Income-Standard. Public
policy has focused on the ability of families both to acquire safe and sanitary housing in decent
neighborhoods and to have sufficient income left over to purchase other basic necessities. Over
time, policy analysts have come to use “30 percent” of household income as a standard to assess
the affordability of housing. The belief is that households who have to pay more than 30 percent
of their incomes for housing may be forced to forego other necessities. In this study, HUD
examined the adequacy of the 30 percent-of-income standard. In general, the study finds that if
spending 30 percent of income for housing allowed for an adequate level of non-housing
expenditures in 1985, then spending 30 percent on housing in 2005 also allowed for an adequate
level of non-housing expenditures. Additionally, the study examined changes in housing costs
relative to income for owners with mortgages, owners without mortgages, and renters, and found
that housing costs rose for each group.
Characteristics of HUD-Assisted Renters and Their Units in 2003. This report is the fourth
in a series of reports providing information on the size, composition, and quality of HUD-
assisted housing stock and the characteristics of its occupants. These reports are intended for the
use of policymakers, analysts, and proponents of housing assistance for low-income households.
HUD obtains this information by identifying assisted households that are also surveyed in the
biennial national American Housing Survey. Data in the report represent assisted households
and units in all 50 states and the District of Columbia, but exclude households and units in Puerto
Rico, Guam, and the Virgin Islands, which are not included in the American Housing Study.
The 2003 data are a statistically valid description of assisted households.
Cityscape: A Journal of Policy Development and Research, Vol. 10 No. 1. This issue of
Cityscape represents the second series of articles devoted to research on the over 4 million


                                              Page 402
                                               SECTION 4: OTHER ACCOMPANYING               INFORMATION
   ROLE   OF   PROGRAM   EVALUATIONS   AND   RESEARCH   STUDIES   IN ASSESSING   PROGRAM   PERFORMANCE


households that receive housing assistance from HUD. Assisted housing is found in every
metropolitan area and in every state, and nearly 15 percent is in non-metropolitan areas. The
papers use a variety of theoretical and methodological tools to examine the relationship between
housing assistance and poverty deconcentration; family composition and tenure in voucher
program; and housing assistance and neighborhood quality.
US Housing Market Conditions. This is a series of quarterly reports on the current housing
market conditions produced by HUD. The reports examine mortgage interest rates, as well as
housing production and vacancy rates among single and multifamily homes. Each report also
includes national, regional and historical data on housing activity. In addition, the last four
quarterly reports (Q3 2007 — Q2 2008) have focused on the purchase goals of the GSEs, New
Market Tax Credits, Home Equity Conversion Mortgages, and the use of income leverage in
studying the recent mortgage market turmoil.
Strategic Goal C:         Strengthen Communities
Study of Subdivision Requirements as a Regulatory Barrier. This study addresses the
regulatory barriers that increase costs during the subdivision of land for single-family detached
dwellings. Two distinguishable types of regulatory barriers were identified: a) those that
lengthen the time for approval of a subdivision and b) land and site development standards that
are more costly than minimum “benchmark” standards selected to provide adequate public health
and safety.
Cityscape: A Journal of Policy Development and Research, Vol. 9 No. 3. This issue focuses
on the challenges facing communities in planning for and responding to disasters. The goal of
the articles is to highlight opportunities for planners to proactively position their communities for
increased disaster resiliency. Each paper illustrates actions that can help minimize the effects of
disaster on a community. Long-range planning and preparation can strengthen a community’s
pre-disaster environment as well as its response during rescue and recovery. Thus, a well-
developed plan can position communities to accelerate some recovery aspects through rapid,
critical decision-making.
Comprehensive Housing Market Analysis Report. HUD’s Economic and Market Analysis
Division prepares Comprehensive Housing Market Analyses that assist and guide HUD in its
operations, but also could be useful to builders, mortgagees, and others concerned with local
housing conditions and trends. Each analysis takes into consideration changes in the economic,
demographic, and housing inventory characteristics of a specific housing market area during
three periods:   from 1990 to 2000, from 2000 to the as-of date of the analysis, and from the as-of
date to a forecast date. The reports present counts and estimates of employment, population,
households, and housing inventory. Comprehensive housing market analyses were completed
for 18 cities and counties across the nation including Baton Rouge, Louisiana; Memphis,
Tennessee; Orange County, California; and Reno, Nevada.
Empowering Local Communities Through Leadership Development and Capacity
Building. This report offers practical approaches to developing and managing leadership
development and capacity-building initiatives that have been supported by HUD’s Office of
University Partnerships. The research was based on a one-year study by program staff. Key
approaches that grantees used in their communities include relationship building, leadership
development, and service provision.



                                                 Page 403
 DEPARTMENT      OF HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT
 FY 2008 PERFORMANCE      AND ACCOUNTABILITY      REPORT

Regional Approaches to Affordable Housing. This report, prepared by the American Planning
Association with funding from HUD and the Fannie Mae Foundation, examines regional
planning strategies that enhance the feasibility of affordable housing development and retention.
The study identifies successful and promising planning approaches, effective institutional
structures, alternative ways of providing financial assistance, and incentives for local
governments to address regional housing needs. Among the strategies examined are fair-share
programs, state and regional affordable housing trust funds, and private sector approaches.
Review of Regulatory Barriers to Employer Ability to Recruit and Retain Employees.                This
literature review surveys existing research on the influences of residential development
regulation on housing markets, and through them, on businesses, labor markets, and regional
economic competitiveness.
Zoning as a Barrier to Multi-family Housing Development. This study, part of HUD’s
Regulatory Barriers to Affordable Housing research series, examines whether zoning regulations
limit the development of multifamily housing. Examination of census data, interviews of land-
use experts, and reviews of zoning statutes reveals that the impact of zoning ordinances generally
depends on factors such as local housing conditions and regional oversight on local zoning.
Accessory Dwelling Units: Case Study. Communities with land use restrictions or where all
available land is used have significant barriers to overcome for increasing the stock of affordable
housing. The limited availability of land suitable for development forces community leaders to
come up with creative solutions to the affordable housing crisis. Several jurisdictions are now
turning to accessory dwelling units -- also referred to as granny flats, accessory apartments, or
second units -- as an inexpensive way to increase their housing supply. Restrictive zoning
policies are being revised to allow development of these units. However, such policies are often
met with community opposition from residents concerned that accessory units will change their
neighborhood’s character, promote overcrowding, and increase traffic congestion.      This case
study examines the history and benefits of accessory dwelling units, and highlights six
communities that have successfully implemented ordinances to permit them.
Strategic Goal D: Ensure Equal Opportunity In Housing
Evaluation of the 2005 Change in the American Housing Survey (AHS) Income
Questionnaire. After redesigning the AHS in 1997, the Census Bureau and HUD compared the
income data collected in that survey with those found in the Current Population Survey. That
study found that the AHS reported fewer households with non-wage income than the Current
Population Survey and that American Housing Survey respondents tended to report self-
employment income as wages. In addition, American Housing Survey data users requested that
disability-related income sources be reported separately from other sources, to make it easier to
count the number of households with disabled persons.
Summary Report: Consumer Testing of Good Faith Estimate Form. During the 2002 -
2007 period, a contractor conducted six rounds of qualitative testing on various mortgage forms
to determine how they could be revised to become more consumer friendly. The objective was
to increase clarity about added fees, interest rate comparisons across loan types, and the fiduciary
roles of lenders and brokers, so that borrowers could become better consumers.     The final
outcome led to several key improvements to the Good Faith Estimate form, including additional
consumer information, loan price comparisons, and important loan dates to note.



                                              Page 404
                                                SECTION 4: OTHER ACCOMPANYING          INFORMATION
   ROLE OF PROGRAM        EVALUATIONS AND RESEARCH STUDIES IN ASSESSING PROGRAM         PERFORMANCE

Strategic Goal E: Embrace High Standards of Ethics, Management, and
Accountability
Quality Control for Rental Assistance Subsidies Determinations:             Final Report for
FY 2007.       This study provides national estimates of the extent, severity, costs, and sources of
rent errors in tenant subsidies for the PHA-administered public housing, Section 8 Housing
Choice Voucher, and Moderate Rehabilitation programs, as well as owner-administered
Section 8 programs. Findings show a continued downward trend in the percentage of errors
when compared with results from previous studies. Detailed results are presented elsewhere in
this report.




                                                 Page 405
 DEPARTMENT            OF HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT
 FY 2008 PERFORMANCE AND ACCOUNTABILITY REPORT
                          UNITS/HOUSEHOLDS RECEIVING HUD ASSISTANCE
                                                                                     2005           2006            2007        2008 Actual
Section 8 Low Income Rental Assistance Program:



Tenant-based assistance a/                                                     2,056,430       2,084,917      2,110,000          2,071,195
Project-based assistance                                                       1,306,740       1,287,529      1,286,662          1,285,331
Total Section 8                                                                3,363,170       3,372,446      3,396,662          3,356,526

Public Housing Program b/                                                      1,177,337       1,172,204      1,155,377           1,140,294
Sub-total                                                                      4,540,507       4,544 650      4 552,039          4,496,820

Housing for the Elderly Sec. 202                                                  82,359          86,056         93,925              99,221
Housing for the Disabled Sec. 811                                                 23,243          25,227         26,656              28,014
Tenant-based 811                                                                  14,739          14,634         14,836              14,811
Sub-total                                                                        120,341         125,917        135,417             142,046

Other Assistance Programs
Homeownership Assistance Program (Section 235)                                      6,699          5 573          4,758               4,302
Rental Housing Assistance Program (Section 236)                                  322,083        318,561         298,046            280,636
Rent Supplement                                                                   17,239          16,619         15,041              13,904
Sub-total                                                                        346,021        340,753         317,845            298 842

Less estimated number of households receiving more than one form of
assistance (double count)                                                       (217,250)       (217,250)      (217,250)           (189,069)

Total, Public and Assisted Housing a/                                          4,789,619       4,794,070      4.788.051          4,748,639



HOME Tenant-Based Assistance                                                      20,554          23,325         18,172              25,381

HOME   Rental Units Completed                                                     33,612          47,598         28,039              23,170

HOME   Homebuyer Units Completed                                                  32,307          55,652         34,985              26,790

HOME   Existing Homeowners Completed                                              14,832          16,821         11,221              10,847

HOME Total Households                                                            101,305         143,396         92.417              86,188

CDBG   Households (homeownership assistance)                                       7,530           7,628           6,919              4,521

CDBG   Households (owner-occupied rehabilitation)                                124 544         131,508        117,830             121,158

Self Help Homeownership Opportunity Program New Homebuyers                         2,277           1,868           1,887              1,927    |

Housing Opportunities for Person With AIDS Households                             70,325          67,000         67,850              62,210

Indian Housing Block Grant Households                                              8,606           8,027           6,168              4,192

Rural Housing & Economic Development                                                  NA              NA             NA                  NA

Native Hawaiian Homeland Block Grant Households                                        72             23              65                 95

ADDI (American Dream Downpayment Initiative)                                       8,894           9,096           6,094              4,209

Total of CDBG, HOME, Self Help Homeownership Opportunity
Program, Housing Opportunities for Persons With AIDS, Indian
Housing Block Grant, Rural, Title VI Native Hawaiian Homeland
Block Grant, Households Served                                                   323,553         368 546        299 230            284 500

a/ Figures represent HUD's estimate of funded units. Funded units are the number of units leased during a snapshot in FY 2004 with
   increases for new tenant protection vouchers. Disaster assistance vouchers are not included.
b/ The calculation used for the PAR has changed to Eligible Unit Months (EUMSs), which is the basic unit for the Operating Fund
   formula. In addition, most formula elements are paid "per unit month" (PUM) in accordance with the formula regulation.
c/ This number is for the period July 1, 2007 to June 30, 2008. Fourth quarter data were not available in time for publication of the PAR.

NA-Not Available



                                                               Page 406
                                                   SECTION 4: OTHER ACCOMPANYING             INFORMATION
                                           COMPLIANCE   STATUS OF FINANCIAL       MANAGEMENT        SYSTEMS


                   FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT                                  SYSTEMS
                                    AS OF SEPTEMBER 30, 2008
                         Total Systems:       42        Total Non-compliant:        2

COMPLIANT SYSTEMS - 40                                   Public and Indian Housing (2)
                                                         P113      Inventory Management System (IMS)
Office of Administration (2)                             P232      Subsidy and Grants Info. System (SAGIS)
D67A _   Facilities Integrated Resources Management
            System (FIRMS)                               Office of Housing (19)
P162     HUD Integrated Human Resources Training         A43       Single Family Insurance System (SFIS)
            System (HIHRTS)                              A43C      Single Family Insurance Claims Subsystem
                                                                     (CLAIMS)
Office of Chief Financial Officer (14) *                 A80B      Single Family Premium Collection System-
A21    Loan Accounting System (LAS)                                  Periodic (SFPCS-P)
A39    HUD Consolidated Financial Statement              A80D      Distributive Shares and Refund Subsystem
         System (HCFSS) (Hyperion)                                   (DSRS)
A65A — Section 235 Automated Validation and              A80N _ Single Family Mortgage Notes (SFMN)
         Editing (SAVE)                                  A80R      Single Family Premium Collection System-
A67    Line of Credit Control System (LOCCS)                         Upfront (SFPCS-U)
AT75   HUD Central Accounting and Program                A80S      Single Family Acquired Asset Management
         System (HUDCAPS)                                             System (SAMS)
AQI1   Consolidated Cost and FTE Files (CCFF)            D64A      SF Housing Enterprise Data Warehouse
A96    Program Accounting System (PAS)                                (SFHEDW)
D08    Bond Payment System (BONDMAPPER)                  F12       Home Equity Conversion Mortgages
D21    Departmental Accounts Receivable                              (HECM)
         Tracking/Collection System (DARTS)              F17       Computerized Home Underwriting
D61    EZBudget Budget Formulation System                            Management System (CHUMS)
          (EZB)                                          F42D      SF Default Monitoring Subsystem
D65A — Section 8 Budget Outlay Support System                        (SFDMS)**
          (BOSS)                                         F47       Multifamily Insurance (MFIS)
D91A — Total Estimation and Allocation Mechanism         F51       Institution Master File (MF)
         — Resource Estimation and Allocation            F71       Debt Collection & Assets Management
         Process (TEAM-REAP)                                         System --Title I Notes (DCAMS)
H18    Integrated Automated Travel System (IATS)         F72       Title I Insurance and Claims (TIIS)
P221   Electronic Travel System Interface (eTravel)      F75       Multifamily Insurance and Claims (MFIC)
HIFMIP HUD Integrated Financial Management               F87       Tenant Rental Assistance Certification
         Improvement Project *                                       System (TRACS)
                                                         PO13      FHA Subsidiary Ledger (FHA-SL)
Office of Chief Procurement Officer (0) *                PO57      Multifamily Delinquency and Default
HIAMS HUD Integrated Acquisition Management                          Reporting (MDDR) **
            System *
                                                         **During FY 2008, the Office of Housing reported
Community Planning and Development (2)
                                                         these systems as non financial. However, they need to
C04      Integrated Disbursement & Information
                                                         be validated by independent reviews.
           System (IDIS)
C38      Special Needs Assistance Program (SNAPS)

Ginnie Mae (1)                                           NON COMPLIANT SYSTEMS - 2
P237     Ginnie Mae Financial & Accounting System        Office of Chief Procurement Officer (2)
           (GFAS)                                        A35       HUD Procurement System (HPS)
                                                         PO035      Small Purchase System (SPS)
* Tn development; these systems are not included in
            the total inventory count of 42.




                                                    Page 407
