                OFFICE OF                         CITY OF MEDFORD                                   TELEPHONE (541) 774-2000
      (JHE CITY MANAGER                              411 WEST 8TH STREET                                 FAX: (541) 618-1700
E-mail: citymanager
                 @ cityofmedford.org               MEDFORD, OREGON 97501                               www.ci.medford.or.us

       May 13, 2015


       Bryan G. Guiney
       Committee Administrator
       Oregon State Legislature
       House Committee On Veterans’ Services and Emergency Preparedness

       Dear Mr. Guiney:

       Thank you for including the City of Medford in your invitation to provide input for the Committee on SB 87A
       regarding veterans’ preference for public employment. Currently the City of Medford incorporates the
       following questions in its application process in order to properly identify veteran status eligibility:

           1.    Under Oregon law, veterans who meet minimum qualifications for a position may be eligible for
                 employment preference. If you think you qualify, please read the following questions carefully and
                 answer completely. If you claim veteran's preference, any false statements may be cause for
                 disqualification or dismissal, regardless of when discovered. Preference will not be awarded
                 without the appropriate documentation. You must submit a copy of your long form DD-214 or 215
                 and certificate of honorable discharge. Documentation must be received by the City of Medford
                 Human Resources Department as soon as possible, but no later than the close of the recruitment.
                 Late submissions will not be processed. You may claim veteran's preference if you are a qualified
                 veteran. "Active duty" does not include attendance at a school under military orders, except
                 schooling incident to an active enlistment or regular tour of duty, or normal military training as a
                 reserve officer or member of an organized reserve or National Guard unit. Did you serve on active
                 duty with the Armed Forces of the United States for a period of more than 178 consecutive days
                 and were you discharged or released under honorable conditions?

           2.    Did you serve on active duty for 178 days or less and were you discharged or released from active
                 duty under honorable conditions because of a service-connected disability?

           3.    Did you serve on active duty with the Armed Forces of the United States for at least one day ina
                 combat zone and were you discharged or released from active duty under honorable conditions?

           4.    Did you receive a combat or campaign ribbon for service in the Armed Forces of the United
                 States?

           5.    Qualified disabled veteran's preference may be claimed by submitting a copy of your long form
                 DD-214 or 215, your certificate of honorable discharge, and a public employment preference letter
                 from the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs. These must be submitted to verify disabled
                 veteran's preference status. Are you entitled to disability compensation under laws administered
                 by the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs?

           6.    Were you discharged or released from active duty for a disability incurred or aggravated in the line
                 of duty?

           7.    Were you awarded a Purple Heart for wounds received in combat?


                                       Continuous Improvement — Customer Service
       8.   | have attached a copy of my DD-214 or DD-215 and/or a copy of my honorable discharge
            paperwork. (Note: You MUST provide this documentation to receive veteran's preference.)

       9.   Please describe ONLY specific MILITARY experience that directly and substantially relates to the
            position you are applying for. (Responses MUST thoroughly describe how your MILITARY
            experience/training pertains to the position you are applying for.

Once the application is completed and the applicant is eligible for veterans’ preference, the City provides 5
veterans’ preference points at each stage of the process and 10 veterans’ preference points to a disabled
veteran.     The City will appoint a veteran to a vacant position if the results of a veteran’s or disabled
veteran’s application examination, when combined with the veteran's or disabled veteran’s preference, are
equal to or higher than the results of an application examination for an applicant who is not a veteran or
disabled veteran.

As for the proposed changes to veterans’ preference law in SB 87A, the City is supportive.




                  Why
     . Eric Swanson
City Manager

CG          Representative Deborah Boone
            Representative Sal Esquival
            Representative Paul Evans
            Representative John Huffman
            Representative John Lively
            Representative Julie Parish
            Representative Carla Piluso
            Cindy Robert
