Charity Ratings and Donor Resources | Charity Navigator Sign in/Create an account Sign Out Nonprofit Resources Support Charity Navigator Discover Charities Best Charities Animal Rescue Charities with Perfect Scores Cost-Effective Organizations Donations as Gifts Protect the Environment Popular Charities Celebrity-Related Charities Charities Everyone's Heard Of Most Followed Charities Where To Give Now SNAP Support Hurricane Melissa Sudan Landslide & Conflict Crisis Relief Ongoing Crisis in Gaza and Israel Ukraine Relief & Recovery Causeway Funds Animal Welfare Fund End Hunger Fund Climate Change Fund End Homelessness Fund Global Health Fund Donor Basics Protect Your Giving Avoiding Charity Scams Protecting Your Data Avoiding Online Scams Giving And Taxes Donation Bunching Charitable Deductions Tax Benefits Estate Planning Donor Tools Giving Basket Donor Video Resources Volunteer Opportunities Planned Giving Charity Navigator Account Giving Circle Finder Giving 101 Tips for Giving in Times of Crisis What is a Customer First Approach? Support Underfunded Charities Introduction to Effective Giving Does My Small Donation Really Matter? Other Ways To Give How to Donate Food and Prevent Food Waste Why Aren't Donated Clothes Always Given Away for Free? Best Items to Donate to an Animal Shelter Donations Asks from Friends & Family About Us Contact Us/FAQs Knowledge Base Update Your Nonprofit's Profile/Rating Press Room Support Charity Navigator Business Resources Thought Leadership & News In Support of America’s Charitable Sector A Closer Look at How Charitable Giving is Failing the South Giving Guide: Finding and Evaluating Effective Nonprofits 2024 Methodology Enhancement Donors Prefer Charities that Earn All Four Beacons Our Methodology Ratings Curated Lists Alerts About Us Mission Values Our History Our Team Discover Charities Best Charities Animal Rescue Charities with Perfect Scores Cost-Effective Organizations Donations as Gifts Protect the Environment Popular Charities Celebrity-Related Charities Charities Everyone's Heard Of Most Followed Charities Where To Give Now SNAP Support Hurricane Melissa Sudan Landslide & Conflict Crisis Relief Ongoing Crisis in Gaza and Israel Ukraine Relief & Recovery Causeway Funds Animal Welfare Fund End Hunger Fund Climate Change Fund End Homelessness Fund Global Health Fund Donor Basics Protect Your Giving Avoiding Charity Scams Protecting Your Data Avoiding Online Scams Giving And Taxes Donation Bunching Charitable Deductions Tax Benefits Estate Planning Donor Tools Giving Basket Donor Video Resources Volunteer Opportunities Planned Giving Charity Navigator Account Giving Circle Finder Giving 101 Tips for Giving in Times of Crisis What is a Customer First Approach? Support Underfunded Charities Introduction to Effective Giving Does My Small Donation Really Matter? Other Ways To Give How to Donate Food and Prevent Food Waste Why Aren't Donated Clothes Always Given Away for Free? Best Items to Donate to an Animal Shelter Donations Asks from Friends & Family About Us Contact Us/FAQs Knowledge Base Update Your Nonprofit's Profile/Rating Press Room Support Charity Navigator Business Resources Thought Leadership & News In Support of America’s Charitable Sector A Closer Look at How Charitable Giving is Failing the South Giving Guide: Finding and Evaluating Effective Nonprofits 2024 Methodology Enhancement Donors Prefer Charities that Earn All Four Beacons Our Methodology Ratings Curated Lists Alerts About Us Mission Values Our History Our Team Sign in/Create an account Sign Out Nonprofit Resources Support Charity Navigator Error attempting donation You're too fast! Your donation attempt encountered a problem. Please refresh the page to try again. You're faster than our page! Give the page a little longer to finish loading and try your donation again. Refresh and try again Back to the page Search for Charities Explore charities that match your passions, view their ratings, and support them with your donation. Try our new AI-powered tool for personalized recommendations and data-driven insights to inform your giving. Ask Horizon AI Search Holiday Season Make an Impact this Holiday Season With our ratings and tools, giving confidently becomes easy, transforming your generosity into a powerful impact for the causes you care about. Holiday Giving Hub Support Charity Navigator Discover Charities View all Support Animal Rescue Charities committed to rescuing and rehoming companion animals in need. Donations as Gifts Highly rated charities that offer you the opportunity to make a donation that signifies a tangible item. Cost-Effective Organizations Saving Lives Globally Discover highly impactful charities that use evidence and cost-effectiveness to address the world’s most pressing challenges, saving and improving lives on a global scale. Load More Causeway Funds View all End Hunger Fund Our End Hunger Fund supports organizations effectively addressing food insecurity via food distribution and policy change in the areas with the greatest need. End Homelessness Fund Our End Homelessness Fund supports charities that address the causes of homelessness and implement solutions to increase the availability of affordable housing. Veterans & Military Assistance Fund The Veterans and Military Assistance Fund helps nonprofits provide U.S. veterans with mental health care, career readiness, and substance abuse treatment. Load More WHO WE ARE Charity Navigator is a research tool for anyone looking to make a difference. You can use Charity Navigator to find and support thousands of charities that align with your passions and values. We use data from the IRS, partners, and the charities themselves to power our unbiased ratings so that you can give with confidence. Learn more about us 20+ YEARS 8M+ VISITORS ANNUALLY 225K+ CHARITIES RATED $250M+ DONATED VIA OUR GIVING BASKET Donor Basics See more Giving 101 Just starting out with giving? Look here for questions to ask a charity, strategies for maximizing your donation, and more. Where to Give Discover and support organizations responding to current events and crises. Donor Tools Whether you’re a new donor or a seasoned philanthropist, use these tools to help make the most of your giving. Load More THE SMART, EASY WAY TO GIVE Donate with the Giving Basket Charity Navigator's Giving Basket empowers you to support multiple charities in one convenient checkout while controlling how much of your information you share with each organization. Learn more Mailing address for check donations in support of Charity Navigator: Charity Navigator PO Box 5117 Boone, IA 50950 Note: We cannot process checks in support of other nonprofits. Use our Giving Basket to support other organizations through our website. Press Room Financials and Policies Privacy Policy Terms of Use FAQs/Contact Us Our Team Careers Business Resources Copyright ©2025 | EIN 13-4148824 | Bridge ID 3108588923