 g     %,
:. ial x                                  U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT
% HT |":                                                           WASHINGTON, DC 20410-5000
     _ ND oe
OFFICE OF PUBLIC AND INDIAN HOUSING
OFFICE OF HOUSING


Special Attention of:                                                             Notice PIH 2023-17
Public Housing Agencies;
Office Directors of Public Housing;                                               Issued: July 7, 2023
Regional Directors
                                                                                 This Notice remains in effect
                                                                                 until amended, superseded, or
                                                                                 rescinded.

                                                                                 Cross Reference: 24 CFR § 990.185, 24
                                                                                 CFR Part 965 Subpart C, 2 CFR Part 200,
                                                                                 Notice PIH-2011-36 (HA), Notice PIH
                                                                                 2018-20, PIH Notice 2022-34, and   HUD
                                                                                 Handbook 7460.8 REV 2 (2/2007).




SUBJECT:           Guidance on the Rate Reduction Incentive in Public Housing

Table of Contents

I.         PURPOSE. ..........cccsscsscsscscscccscsccscscscscccscscecsccscscssccssscsssscccscscsescscsscssnsscscscssscsscscnsscscesssossscscnssccees 2
TT.      —§ APPLICABILITY .................sscssssccsssscccccscsccccsccsesccscssssscscscssccncscscscssscsssscncscscsescscsssssssscscnssoeees 2
THT.       TABLE OF CONTENTS. ............ccccsscssssscssscscsccscsccscsscsccscescsssscscscscscscsssssnsscscsessscsessonsscscesscnsees 1
TV.        BACKGROUND .............cccssscsssscscsscscsescscccscscccssonecscscsssssesssscnsscscsescssessonescscsescsssssonsscsscesoneees 2
V.         OVERVIEW OF CHANGES. .u.......ccccsscscssccscsscscscscscscscsccessccesccssescsccssssssscscscscscsesssssscscsssoncees 3
VI.        ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS .u..........cccsccssssccscsscscccscscscscsccssscssscscscscsscssscsssscsceesoncees 3
VIL.       DEFINITIONS ...........ccccsscsccsscssscccscscscsescsccscscsssscsscscesscscsssessonsscscssscsssssonsscscssscscsessossscscessoncees 3
VITE.      RRT APPROVAL PROCESS. ...........cccsscscssscscsscscccscscscscscsesscscscncscscsccescsecsscscscssscsssscnsscscsssoneees 6
IX.        ACTIVITIES THAT MAY BE ELIGIBLE FOR AN RRL... cssssseccsssescsssessesssseeees 10
X.         ACTIONS THAT ARE NOT ELIGIBLE TO RECEIVE AN RRL ....0.......cccssccssssssessssseees 14
XI.        INTERACTION WITH AN EPC uuu...                                 cc ccsctecscscccsccccsccecccccscncscssscsscscncssccssessscsssscnsscscsesoees 15
XID.       FURTHER INFORMATION uuu... ccccscssccscsecscscccscscccsccscscccscscssscscsscscncsscsesessssssscncssscsseoees 17
XI.        PAPERWORK                REDUCTION ACT uuu... cccscscssscsctsccsccscscsescscscescccsscscesccscscscscsssscnsscscsssoees 17
XIV.       APPENDIX I: SAMPLE PHA SUBMISSION ...........sccssssssssscscseccsccscscscscsssessscsessenescsccssseees 19
XV.        APPENDIX II: CALCULATING UTILITY RATE SAVINGS .........ccsccsscsssecsscescsceeencees 22
XVI.       APPENDIX III: ON-SITE RENEWABLE ENERGY RRI....0...... eccscsctecscceescteronceesenees 27
IL     Purpose


This Notice serves as guidance to Public Housing Agencies (PHAs) on the use and eligibility of
the Rate Reduction Incentive (RRI). This Notice supersedes and replaces Notice PIH-2022-34
(HA) and supplements information in the current Energy Performance Contracting (EPC), Utility
Partnership Program (UPP), and the Operating Fund grant processing notices.

Il.    Applicability


This Notice applies to all PHAs that operate a public housing program and provides guidance
under the Public Housing Operating Fund program pursuant to the U.S. Department of Housing
and Urban Development (HUD) regulations at 24 CFR part 990.

Moving to Work (MTW) housing authorities with Alternative Operating Subsidy formulas are only
eligible to claim financial incentives for rate reductions if their Alternative Operating Subsidy
formula explicitly permits it or that the Alternative Operating Subsidy Formula does not modify the
Utility Expense Level portion of the Operating Subsidy formula found in 24 CFR part 990.

lll.   Background


The RRI is a financial incentive for PHAs that pursue special and significant efforts beyond what
is required by statute and/or regulation to reduce their utility rate. The PHA’s action must exceed
the activities required by statute and/or regulation. Pursuant to HUD regulation 24 CFR §
990.185(b), “If a PHA takes action beyond normal public participation in rate-making proceedings,
such as well-head purchase of natural gas, administrative appeals, or legal action to reduce the rate
it pays for utilities, then the PHA will be permitted to retain one-half the annual savings realized
from these actions.”

The RRI provides additional Operating Fund grant formula eligibility to a PHA that undertakes a
special and significant action to reduce its utility rate. A PHA must undertake an eligible action that
results in the PHA paying a lower utility rate to be eligible for an RRI. The lower rate cannot be a
result of factors that do not require the PHA to take an action and/or are beyond a PHA’s control
including, but not limited to, market changes, legislative changes, rate changes for all customers, or
consuming energy at a different time of day. A coincidental change in the effective rate paid by the
PHA from one year to the next is not always a result of a PHA action and therefore is not eligible for
an RRI.

The RRI is not an incentive for complying with required procurement practices, conducting
maintenance, and/or reducing utility consumption. The RRI is a tool to incentivize PHAs to lower the
overall utility costs of the public housing program. In general, pursuant to 24 CFR § 990.185, the
RRI evenly divides the financial benefit of the lower utility rate between the PHA and HUD (.e., 50
percent to the PHA and 50 percent to HUD). RRI financial benefits, which are provided through the
Public Housing Operating Fund grant, may be used for any eligible Operating Fund grant activity
allowable under Section 9(e) of the United States Housing Act of 1937.
IV.     Overview of Changes


This Notice updates Notice 2022-34 to revise the submission date for RRI requests. from August 30
to July 31 annually.

V.      Acronyms and Abbreviations


 ACC           Annual Contributions Contract
 AMP           Asset Management Project
 BTU           British Thermal Unit, a measure of energy
 CCF           100 Cubic Feet, common unit of natural gas or water
 CFFP          Capital Fund Financing Program
 CFR           Code of Federal Regulations
 EPC           Energy Performance Contracting
 FO            Field Office
 HUD           Department of Housing and Urban Development
 kWh           Kilowatt hours (unit of electricity)
 M&V           Measurement and Verification
 MTW           Moving to Work
 OFFP          Operating Fund Financing Program
 OGC           Office of General Counsel
 OPH           Office of Public Housing
 PHA           Public Housing Authority
 PPA           Power Purchase Agreement
 PV            Solar Photovoltaics (generate electricity from solar
               energy)
 RBCL _| Rolling Base Consumption Level
 RRI           Rate Reduction Incentive
 UEL           Utility Expense Level
 UPP           Utility Partnership Program

VIL       Definitions


 Term                     Definition

 59722. Form              Form HUD-52722 — “Operating Fund Grant: Calculation of Utilities
      ”                   Expense Level (UEL) PHA-Owned Rental Housing.” This form is used to
 HUD-52722, or                          yea:                               nee             ;
 HUD-52722                calculate the Utilities Expense Level component of eligibility for Operating
                          Funds pursuant to 24 CFR §§s 990.170 — 990.180.

                          Total amount of a utility consumed, such as kWh of electricity or “therms”
 Actual                                       ;             ;
 Consumption              of natural gas, during the reporting period. The best source of actual
           P              consumption for PHA reporting is from utility bills or invoices.
                      Total amount paid by the PHA for a given utility. In addition to the price of
                      the actual commodity, this typically includes the transmission and
Actual Cost
                      distribution of the commodity and other fees charged by the utility. The best
                      source of total cost information is from utility bills or invoices.
                      For purposes of calculating Utilities Expense Level (Form HUD 52722), the
                      actual average rate from the most recent 12-month period that ended June
                      30th prior to the beginning of the applicable funding period. The rate will be
                      calculated by dividing the actual utility cost by the actual utility
                      consumption, with consideration for pass-through costs (e.g., state, and local
Actual Utility Rate   utility taxes, tariffs) for the time period specified in this paragraph.

                      Additionally, for purposes of calculating RRI savings, utility rate may also
                      refer to a component of the overall utility rate for which the PHA has
                      negotiated a cheaper rate (e.g., for the energy/commodity portion of a PHA’s
                      utility rate only).

Annual Reporting
                      Annual Reporting Requirements are enumerated in HUD Approval Letter.
Requirements


                      The utility consumption amount that would have been expected if ECMs had
Baseline              not been implemented. Baseline consumption is used to calculate RRI
Consumption           savings in cases where an RRI action has been approved in conjunction with
                      an EPC. This value is typically included in the EPC approval letter.
                      Total amount the PHA would have paid in the reporting period if it had not
Default Cost          taken any RRI action. The total default cost should include the additional
                      costs associated with the transmission and distribution of the commodity and
                      other fees charged by the utility.
                      The utility rate that the PHA would have paid in the reporting period if it had
Default Utility       not taken any RRI action. The default rate of the actual commodity should
Rate                  include the additional costs associated with the transmission and distribution
                      of the commodity and other fees charged by the utility.
                      Utilities in deregulated markets are prohibited from generation and
                      transmission ownership and are only responsible for distribution (lower
Deregulated           voltage electricity delivered to point of use), operations, maintenance, and
Market                billing ratepayers. As a result, customers located within these deregulated
                      areas have the option to purchase the commodity or supply of energy from a
                      different provider, which can result in a cheaper rate for the commodity.
                      ECMs are defined by the Department of Energy, FEMP and by HUD as the
ECMs (Energy          measures that improve energy efficiency, are life cycle cost effective, and
Conservation          involve energy conservation, cogeneration facilities, renewable energy
Measures)             sources, improvements in operations and maintenance, or retrofit activities.
                      HUD defines energy efficiency as including water as well as energy.

EPC (Energy           Energy Performance Contract — An energy conservation program financed
Performance           with non-Department funds, that is the subject of a written approval by HUD
Contract)             pursuant to 24 CFR part 965 Subpart C and 24 CFR 990.185.
                       The utility consumption at a relevant site or AMP prior to the installation of
EPC Baseline           ECMs. For all incentives, the EPC Baselines are identified in the EPC
Consumption
                       approval letters.

                       The EPC cash flow provided in the EPC approval letter is a method of
                       calculating financial results using certain projections or presumptions. The
                       EPC cash flow covers the period of the HUD incentive term from year 1 till
EPC Cash Flow
                       end of term (20 years max). It compares EPC savings less total EPC project
                       costs to show excess savings and includes finance rate, estimated inflation
                       rate and shows the percentage of savings used to pay Project Costs.

                       The three EPC incentives are: Add-On Subsidy (AOS), Frozen Rolling Base
EPC Incentive
                       (FRB), and Resident Paid Utilities (RPU).


                       An Energy Services Company (ESCO) is an entity that will develop, design,
Sine                   and build projects that save energy, including energy engineering firms as
Company)               well as other energy engineering consultants hired by the PHA to undertake
    Pany               part, or all, of an energy/utility project.


Funding Year           The Calendar Year for which an Operating Fund grant is provided.



HUD Approval           An official letter issued by the person with approval authority to a PHA that
Letter PP              approves the RRI. HUD’s approval of the RRI is subject to the conditions
                       and criteria outlined in the letter.


M&V                                          woes              ;
(Measurement and       Measurement and verification (M&V) is the approach used to calculate and
Verification)          document annual EPC energy savings.



M&V      Report        An M&V Report is a written accounting of EPC Project Costs, consumption
            P          savings, and cost savings that PHAs are required to submit annually to HUD.

                       A demonstration program for PHAs that provides them the opportunity to
                       design and test innovative, locally designed strategies that use Federal
Movine       To Work   dollars more efficiently, help residents find employment and become self-
         8             sufficient, and increase housing choices for low-income families. MTW
                       allows PHAs exemptions from many existing public housing and voucher
                       rules and provides funding flexibility with how they use their Federal funds.

Operating Fund         The grant program established pursuant to Section 9(e) of the U.S. Housing
                       Act of 1937 as amended, 24 CFR part 990, and annual appropriation acts.
                           The formula used to determine Operating Fund eligibility, established by
 Operating Fund            negotiated rulemaking as mandated by Section 9(e) of the U.S. Housing Act
 Formula                   of 1937. For approved EPCs, EPC incentives are elements in the Operating
                           Fund Formula.


 Operating Subsidy         Grant amounts provided to public housing projects pursuant to the Operating
                           Fund program.


 Operating    Subsid       The electronic HUD-52722 and/or HUD-52723 which, in combination,
 Tools                 Y | calculate Operating Subsidy eligibility and are submitted for each project
                           annually by the PHA

                           A contract between two parties, one which generates electricity (the seller)
                           and one that purchases electricity (the buyer). The PPA defines the
 Power Purchase
                           commercial terms for the sale of electricity between the two parties.   A PPA
 Agreement
                           that is approved by HUD and results in net savings for the PHA may be
                           eligible for the RRI.
                           A financial incentive for PHAs that pursue special and significant efforts
 Rate Reduction            beyond what is required by statute and/or regulation to reduce their utility
 Incentive                 rate. The PHA’s action must exceed the activities required by statute and/or
                           regulation (24 CFR § 990.185(b)).
                           The 12-month period for which actual utility consumption is measured each
                           year. Consistent with calculation of the UEL, the RRI reporting period is the
 Reporting Period
                           12-month period from July 1 to June 30 that is prior to the first day of the
                           applicable Funding Year.
                           Convenience fee charged by electric company for the electricity generated
                           on-site. This covers the local power company's need to standby and provide
 Standby Charge            backup power if the renewable energy system goes offline. Not all utility
                           companies charge this fee. Utility companies that charge this fee will use
                           different methods for calculating it.

                           The Utility Expense Level (UEL) is the PHA paid utilities component of the
 VEL (Utility
                           Operating Fund Formula pursuant to §§ 990.170-180 The UEL is the output
 Expense Level)
                           of the HUD Form 52722.

                           According to the American Gas Association, the definition of wellhead price
                           is "the cost of gas as it comes from the well excluding cleaning,
 Wellhead Purchase
                           compression, transportation, and distribution charges."
                           (https://www.aga.org/natural-gas/glossary/)

VII.     RRI Approval Process


A PHA seeking an RRI must submit a request to HUD for review and approval. The PHA’s
submission must be approved before the PHA is eligible to include RRI savings in its HUD Form
52722. Previous approval of an RRI is not a guarantee of future approval.        A PHA seeking approval
of an RRI is subject to Section 9(e) of the United States Housing Act of 1937, HUD’s regulations at
24 CER part 990, and the terms and guidelines of the current RRI Notice. Any time limits for RRI
eligibility will begin in the Operating Subsidy Funding Year following the RRI approval. The
process for the review and approval of an RRI is as follows:

      Step 1: PHA Eligibility Submission

To determine eligibility,    a PHA interested in pursuing an RRI is required to submit a request to its
local Field Office (FO) and the energy policy mailbox (PIHEnergyBranch @hud.gov) for review.
The request for eligibility must be submitted no later than 5:00 p.m. eastern time on July 31* prior
to the upcoming funding year for which the RRI would be applicable to determine eligibility of the
PHA.

     For example, the submission request for an RRI for the 2024 Funding Year (January 2024 —
     December 2024) must be received by HUD no later than 5:00 p.m. eastern time on July 31,
     2023.

Failure to meet this deadline will result in denial of the RRI request. At a minimum, each RRI
request must include the following information (see Appendix I for a sample PHA submission):

      1.  PHA Name and PHA code;
        . Asset Management Project (AMP) number for each AMP included in the proposed RRI;
      3. A brief description of the action the PHA undertook to reduce the utility rate and
             supporting documentation;
      4.     Anexplanation of how the PHA will calculate savings (see Appendix II for more
             information);
      5.     Identification of the incentive the PHA will claim, whether it is 50 percent or 100 percent
             of the actual savings (see Section 10 Interaction with an EPC for more information); and
      6.     Identification of whether the PHA is seeking single or multi-year approval.

Submitted requests that are incomplete or insufficient by the deadline will also be denied. PHAs must
submit a separate application for each action for each utility. PHAs are encouraged to submit an RRI
eligibility request ahead of the stated deadline. For actions that impact more than one AMP, the PHA
may submit one application. Supporting documentation to submit with the eligibility request
includes, but is not limited to:

      e      Fully executed agreement, such as a supply or net metering contract with the utility
             provider, which typically includes terms, contract rates/unit prices, and included
             properties/accounts.
      e      If applicable, the current EPC approval letter.
      e      If applicable, Departmental Field Office approval documentation for contracts that exceed
             five years in length.

      Multi-Year Approval

For PHA’s with an existing multi-year RRI approval in place, if there are no changes to the
information contained in the original request, the PHA does not need to submit a new RRI eligibility
request for the duration of the RRI approval but must submit savings calculations and documentation


                                                                                                           7
annually for Departmental review (see Step 4: Reporting Annual Savings). The PHA must continue
to submit savings calculations for all AMPs approved for the RRI action, including AMPs with
negative savings, unless the AMP is no longer eligible for the Operating Fund grant. When a PHA
enters into a new contractual agreement under an eligible RRI scenario, even if the action impacts the
same utility and set of AMPs as a previously approved RRI action, this is considered a new RRI
action and requires a new RRI request submission. In this instance, the PHA must submit the
information listed above (a new eligibility request) by July 31° prior to the upcoming Funding Year
for which the RRI would be applicable even if the information resembles a previous submission
and/or action.

      Step 2: Departmental Review of Eligibility

HUD will review the eligibility submission and supporting documentation to determine
preliminary RRI eligibility based on the completeness of the submitted information, whether the
action the PHA undertook is eligible, and whether the request was submitted on time. The review
process will not start until all supporting documentation has been received. During the review
process, HUD may contact the PHA to request additional documentation or clarification to
determine preliminary RRI eligibility. PHAs must respond to additional documentation and/or
clarification requests by date specified by HUD or within ten (10) business days.

      Step 3: Departmental Eligibility Determination

Once HUD completes its review of the eligibility submission, HUD will make an initial
determination of whether the PHA has undertaken an eligible RRI action and will notify the PHA
by email from the PIHEnergyBranch @hud.gov. Please note: this eligibility determination is not
the final approval of an RRI. A PHA must submit clear documentation of the savings analysis and
calculations for HUD to make a final determination regarding the eligibility of the RRI action and
the amount of the RRI benefit for the applicable Funding Year (See Step 4: Reporting Annual
Savings). If HUD determines the action is not eligible, HUD will process a denial letter for the
PHA. PHAs that receive a denial letter from HUD have a right to appeal the denial within ten (10)
business days of the denial letter date.

      Step 4: Reporting Annual Savings and Departmental Final Review

HUD’s final approval of RRI eligibility and amount of the RRI benefit for the applicable Funding
Year is based on the PHA’s submission of its savings calculations which document the total net
savings the PHA realized from the RRI action during the reporting period at the AMP level.
Regardless of whether the PHA has submitted a new RRI eligibility request or has an existing multi-
year RRI approval in place,   a PHA must submit documentation of the savings annually to its FO and
the PIHEnergyBranch@hud.gov mailbox no later than the September 30" prior to the upcoming
Funding Year.

     For example, the savings calculations submission for an RRI for the 2024 Funding Year
     (January 2024 — December 2024) must be received by HUD no later than 5:00 p.m. eastern
     time on September 30", 2023.

If a PHA does not meet this submission deadline, they will not be eligible to claim an RRI
incentive for the applicable Funding Year, regardless of whether they received Departmental
preliminary approval for the action or have a multi-year RRI approval in place. Submitted
calculations that are incomplete or insufficient by the deadline will also be denied.

At a minimum, the RRI savings calculation submission must include the following information:

      e   Clearly identifiable and traceable calculations that illustrate and verify annual net
          savings by AMP. This includes, as applicable based on the type of action and savings
          calculation methodology employed, the total savings, default costs, actual costs, default
          utility rate, actual utility rate, and actual consumption during the reporting period (July 1
          — June 30 prior to the applicable Funding Year).
      e   Copies of 2-3 sample utility invoices/bills cross referenced with rates, costs,
          consumption, and dates for any AMPs considered in this submission.

The preferred reporting format for the calculation submission is Microsoft Excel so that numbers are
legible, and calculations are more easily traceable during HUD’s review. For additional guidance on
allowable calculations methods and documentation examples, see Appendix II. The review process
will not start until all supporting documentation has been received. During the review process, HUD
may contact the PHA to request additional documentation and/or clarification to review and validate
the savings calculation submission. PHAs must respond to additional documentation and/or
clarification requests dates specified by HUD or within ten (10) business days.

      RRI Withdrawal


If, after submission of a new RRI eligibility request, the PHA wishes to withdraw its request for
eligibility, the PHA should notify the FO and the PIHEnergyBranch    @ hud. gov inbox of their desire
to withdraw. HUD will acknowledge the withdrawal via email and no further action is required.

If a PHA has an existing multi-year RRI approval in place and does not wish to participate in an
eligible Funding Year in the event, for example, that the action does not produce a net savings, the
PHA should notify their FO and the PIHEnergyBranch
                                               @ hud. gov inbox that they will not include an
RRI incentive in their operating subsidy submission.

In either of the above examples, the PHA will not be precluded from participating in future RRI
eligibility provided it follows the instructions included in this Notice.

      Step 5: Departmental Final Approval

Once HUD completes its review and validation of reported savings, the PHA will receive a signed
approval letter from HUD and is then eligible to claim an RRI on its HUD Form 52722 on the “Rate
Reduction Incentive” line (line no. 23) for each approved AMP. The approval letter will identify the
number of years the PHA is eligible to claim the RRI for this action. RRI actions that require a
contract are not eligible to receive RRI incentives beyond the term of the contract. PHAs that receive
an approval letter from HUD are eligible to clatm RRI savings in their annual Operating Subsidy
request provided that the action continues to result in a net savings to the PHA. Savings must be
reported in the HUD Form 52722 by the initial submission date as identified in the Operating
Subsidy Notice for each eligible Funding Year. As a reminder, after HUD determines that           a PHA
took an eligible action (Step 3 above) and the action has received full approval from HUD, the PHA
only needs to submit documentation of the savings in subsequent years. If there are any changes from
the original approval letter, such as a new contract or a new contractor, then the PHA must submit a
new eligibility request (repeat Steps 1-3 above).

IX.    Activities That May Be Eligible for an RRI


Activities listed in this section may be eligible to receive an RRI if the action results in a lower utility
rate for the PHA, subject to Departmental approval under the terms of this Notice. HUD will not
consider an action eligible for an RRI if the action violates a current policy, regulation, or statute, or
inhibits   a PHA from complying with a current policy, regulation, or statute. Contract Restrictions:
In general, contracts shall not exceed a period of five years, including options for renewal or
extension, as stated in Chapter 10.8 of The Procurement Handbook for Public Housing Agencies
(HUD Handbook 7460.8 REV 2, dated 2/2007).’

Described in more detail below, a FO will approve contracts with periods of more than five years if it
determines there is no practical alternative. HUD will not approve RRI actions with contracts more
than five years that have not received explicit FO approval in writing. PHAs must include the FO
approval letter for the executed contract as part of their RRI eligibility submission. FOs must consult
with the Office of Public Housing Program’s (OPHP) Energy Branch (EB) where such contracts
related to energy include RRIs.

An RRI cannot be combined with any public housing financing (e.g., Capital Fund Financing
Program’, Operating Fund Financing Program’, Section 30 EPC’, or Public Housing Mortgage
Program?) without Departmental approval of the financing.

The scenarios below are not an exhaustive list or a guarantee of approval for RRI eligibility or
payment.


       Scenario 9-1: Special rate negotiated by and for the PHA

       e   The PHA actively works with the local utility company to create a special rate for the PHA.
           The result is a reduced rate or accommodation not available to the public, low-income
           households, or subsidized housing in general. The action taken by the PHA must extend
           beyond simply writing letters, attending public meetings, or completing administrative
           paperwork.
       e   The PHA may be eligible to receive an RRI approval for up to five years for each
           negotiation.



l https://www.hud.gov/sites/documents/74608c
                                    1OPIHH. pdf
94 CFR part 905, https://www.hud.gov/program_offices/public_   indian _housing/programs/ph/capfund/cffp
> https://www.hud.gov/sites/documents/OPEUND-FINANCING-GUIDE.PDF
4 Energy Performance Contract Section 30 Reviews and Approvals Guidebook,
https://www.hud.gov/sites/documents/SECTION30GUIDEBOOK.PDF
> PIH Notice 2011-30 (HA): PHA Mortgaged Projects: Procedures for Section 30 Mortgage Transactions,
https://www.hud.gov/sites/documents/PIH2011-30.PDF

                                                                                                          10
      Scenario 9-2: Wellhead purchase of natural gas

      e    The PHA negotiates a natural gas rate at the wellhead.°
      e    The RRI savings must reflect the impact to the wellhead portion of the bill only. In this
           scenario, HUD will only pay an incentive on the savings associated with the wellhead
           portion of the utility bill. Most commodity purchases are inclusive of the wellhead price as
           well as fuel processing and transportation charges.
      e    The PHA may be eligible to receive an RRI approval for up to five years for each
           procurement action.


      Scenario 9-3: Power Purchase Agreement (PPA) using a third-party energy supplier

      e    The PHA participates in a power purchase agreement (PPA), including a PPA for on-site or
           off-site solar energy, where a third-party finances, owns, maintains, and operates an energy
           generating system and the PHA purchases the output (e.g., electricity, steam, or chilled
           water). In this scenario, the PHA receives a reduced utility rate for the output, typically
           through invoice credits or via a fixed utility rate.
      e    If aPHA elects to pursue a PPA and the contract term exceeds five years, then the contract
           must be subject to a procurement exception review (under 2 CFR part 200) by the FO. FOs
           must consult with the OPHP EB in reviewing such requests. HUD will consider contracts
           longer than five (5) years when:
               o The contract is executed in conjunction with an EPC, or an EPC extension’, for a
                   term of up to twenty (20) years; and/or
                o   There is no practical alternative to the procurement action and the action is found to
                    have been conducted in a manner providing full and open competition as described
                    in 2 CFR § 200.319 (a)). The PHA should submit any proposed PPA contract to FO
                    in a timely manner for review by FO to have a HUD approved contract at the time
                    of the RRI request.
      e    If aPHA receives FO approval to enter into a PPA contract in excess of five years, the
           approval is only for entering into that contract and not an automatic approval of an RRI.
           The PHA must separately request Departmental approval of the RRI by the deadline with
           appropriate information and should include documentation (e.g., FO approval letter) in
           their RRI eligibility submission.
      e    If the PHA receives contract approval, and the associated RRI is also approved, the PHA
           will be eligible to receive an RRI approval for the life of the contract, which cannot exceed
           20 consecutive years.

      Scenario 9-4: Energy efficiency investments that lead to lower utility rates

      e    Some utilities offer lower rates for customers that make energy efficiency investments or
           upgrades, including, but not limited to, boilers, windows, or toilets.
      e    If the investment involves the physical installation of new equipment as a requirement to


6 According to the American Gas Association, the definition of wellhead price is "the cost of gas as it comes from
the well excluding cleaning, compression, transportation, and distribution charges." (https://www.aga.org/natural-
gas/glossary/)
7 See 24 CFR § 990.185(a) regarding EPC term extensions

                                                                                                                     11
           qualify for a lower rate, then the PHA may be eligible to receive an RRI for the lower
           utility rate but not any reductions in utility consumption (e.g., kilowatt hours (kWh), 100
           cubic feet (CCF), gallon).
       e   Energy efficiency investments that reduce utility consumption and reduce the actual utility
           rate simply by eliminating or reducing the amount of consumption tied to a higher marginal
           rate are not eligible under this scenario.®
       e   RRIs do not apply to physical investments that result in a property using different fuels,
           which, for example, could include a permanent switch from natural gas to electric heat to
           be eligible for a reduced electric rate.
       e   The PHA may be eligible to receive an RRI approval for up to three years for each
           investment.’

      Scenario 9-5: Investments to allow for fuel switching capability to participate in an
      interruptible utility rate

       e   Some utilities offer lower rates for customers that agree to participate in fuel switching
           programs in which customers are required to switch fuels at the direction of their local
           utility company. Participation in the program requires a PHA to temporarily (cannot be
           permanent) switch between fuels. Fuel switching occurs usually in response to disruptions
           in the fuel supply or changes in market conditions. For example, a utility company may
           require a PHA to switch from natural gas to fuel oil during a temporary price surge.
       e   If fuel switching capability requires the installation of new equipment, then the PHA is
           eligible to receive an RRI. If the PHA does not install new equipment, then it will not be
           eligible to receive an RRI.
       e   The PHA may be eligible to receive an RRI approval for up to three years for each
           investment.

      Scenario 9-6: Commodity purchases of regulated utilities in a deregulated market that
      result in a lower utility rate

       e   This RRI activity does not apply to non-regulated fuels including, but not limited to, fuel
           oil, diesel fuel, propane, or kerosene. Since there is no default provider, the PHA is always
           required to follow Federal competitive procurement procedures (2 CFR part 200) when
           purchasing these fuels.


8 “Utility rate means the actual average rate for any given utility for the most recent 12-month period that ended the
June 30" prior to the beginning of the applicable funding period.” 24 CFR § 990.115
  The Operating Fund grant formula determines eligibility based on the current utility rate multiplied by the
payable consumption level. The payable consumption level factors in the current consumption and the rolling
base consumption level (RBCL). When a PHA reduces its consumption, the PHA is able to retain 75 percent of
the difference between the current consumption and the RBCL (24 CFR § 990.170). The HUD Form 52722 refers
to this as the Utility Consumption Incentive or the 75 percent/25 percent Split. This allows the PHA to retain 150
percent of the consumption savings incentive spread over 3 years (assuming no consumption variation from year
to year). PHAs that pay a utility bill that does not reflect actual consumption (e.g., cost per dwelling unit rather
than cost per gallon) are not eligible to utilize the Utility Consumption Incentive and therefore not able to capture
these savings when a capital investment results in a lower utility consumption. Therefore, the PHA may be
eligible to claim the RRI for up to three years to capture these savings, provided the actions and savings meet the
criteria of this Notice.


                                                                                                                    12
e   Each PHA property has a default utility provider(s) that maintains the local electricity lines
    and/or natural gas distribution system. The default provider(s) operates as a regulated
    monopoly and is the only provider physically capable or legally allowed to provide utility
    delivery services to a PHA property.
e   The charge for this service is listed on the utility bill as either the transportation and/or
    delivery portion of the electricity or natural gas bill.
e   PHAs do not take specific steps to procure transmission and distribution utility services
    from the default utility provider as there is only one provider capable and legally allowed to
    provide service to the PHA property.
e   In addition to utility service delivery, the default provider also provides the energy supply
    or commodity.
e   When a customer initiates utility service with the customer’s local utility provider, the local
    utility provider is the default commodity provider. PHAs do not need to undergo a
    procurement action to purchase commodity from the default provider when they initiate
    utility service.
e   PHA properties that are physically located in a deregulated utility market have the option to
    procure the energy supply or commodity from a provider other than their default local
    provider. A PHA that chooses to exercise this option must follow Federal procurement
    guidelines (2 CFR part 200 and HUD Handbook 7460.8 REV 2, dated 2/2007). If a PHA
    exercises this option and reduces its utility rate, then that PHA may be eligible for an RRI.
    The PHA may be eligible to receive an RRI approval for up to five years for each
    procurement action.
e   Asa   best practice,   a PHA that chooses to procure   a commodity separately from its default
    provider is encouraged to continuously review the financial costs and benefits of the
    procurement action to ensure that the procurement action continues to be financially
    advantageous to the PHA.

Scenario 9-7: Active commodity trading

e   Active commodity trading, or participating in a reverse auction, is where the PHA, or an
    agent on its behalf, purchases electricity or natural gas on the spot market at regular
    intervals throughout the year. Unlike a commodity purchase that typically happens once a
    year, a reverse auction may require the PHA, or an agent on its behalf, to frequently
    monitor energy costs to ensure the best rate. Purchases in a reverse auction may range from
    short-term intervals of a few days up to multiple years.
e   The PHA may be eligible to receive an RRI approval for up to five years for each
    procurement action.


Scenario 9-8: On-Site renewable energy

e   Ifa PHA installs a renewable energy system, the PHA may include the electricity generated
    on-site for the purposes of calculating the blended rate. See Appendix III for a sample
    project, including an example methodology of how to calculate the savings.
e   PHAs choosing to install on-site renewable energy are encouraged to investigate the
    financial benefits, risks, and penalties when evaluating whether to invest in such projects.
e   Ifthe renewable energy investment results in higher electricity costs, then the PHA is not
    eligible for the RRI.
e   The renewable energy RRI is not eligible to claim the 100 percent rate savings, only 50

                                                                                                     13
          percent, even if proposed for an RRI with a concurrent EPC. (24 CFR § 990.185(b)).
      e   The PHA may be eligible to receive an RRI for the life of the equipment, not to exceed 20
          years.

      Scenario 9-9: Other

      e   Additional RRI scenarios proposed by PHAs will be reviewed on a case-by-case basis.

X.    Actions That Are Not Eligible to Receive An RRI


The following are some examples of activities that do not qualify as eligible to receive an RRI. This
list is not exhaustive and is provided as a general guide for evaluating eligible activities.

      Scenario 10-1: Energy investments that lower utility consumption but not the rate (unit
      cost)

Justification: If the investment reduces energy consumption, the PHA may be eligible to receive an
incentive under 24 CFR § 990.170(c) as automatically calculated in the Form HUD-52722, but not
an RRI. Energy and water investments using third party funds may be eligible for incentives when
they are included in an approved EPC. For more information on EPCs, see 24 CFR § 990.185(a)
and/or the current EPC Notice.

Examples of ineligible activities:
      e   Energy or water conservation investments that may result in reduced utility consumption
          but not a reduced utility rate including, but not limited to, replacing, repairing, or upgrading
          existing equipment such as boilers, insulation, windows, or toilets.
      e   Investments in energy technology that use fuel more efficiently including, but not limited to,
          cogeneration, combined heat and power, trigeneration, or geothermal heat pumps.
      e   Routine maintenance to repair faulty equipment and/or leaky pipes.

      Scenario 10-2: Selecting the best available utility rate

Justification: If a local utility company offers multiple rate options from which the PHA may be
eligible, then the PHA is expected to select the utility rate that is most financially advantageous to
the PHA and/or HUD.

For example,   a PHA may have the option of choosing to pay $0.12/kWh for a standard
commercial rate or $0.10/kWh for an affordable housing rate. It is expected that the PHA will
choose the cheaper rate. When the PHA does this, it is considered a good business decision rather
than a special or significant action worthy of an RRI.

Examples of ineligible activities:
     e Selecting a lower rate that is available to the public, even if there is an application or
          income verification process.
      e   Assisting tenants in applying for a lower rate.
      e   Participating in an interruptible rate program except as explained in Scenario 8-5.


                                                                                                         14
      e    Switching into, or out of, a time-of-use rate.!°

      Scenario 10-3: Combining or removing utility meters in a manner that prohibits the
      PHA from individually metering tenant level consumption

Justification: Removing or consolidating individual meters inhibits a PHA from complying with the
requirements of 24 CFR part 965 subparts D & E (§ 965.401- § 965.508), which requires PHAs to
individually meter utility consumption where technically feasible and appropriate.

HUD may consider a negotiated rate for meter consolidation provided that the PHA metering
remains in compliance with Departmental regulations for assigning tenant responsibility. For
example, a PHA may install a master utility meter upstream from individual meters and convert the
unit level meters from individual utility accounts to PHA operated CheckMeters.'! In a CheckMeter
system, a PHA must bill tenants for excess consumption. In this case, the PHA may be eligible to
receive the RRI, subject to Departmental approval, provided that the action lowers the cost to the
PHA and/or HUD.

      Scenario 10-4: Fuel switching to obtain a better rate when new equipment is not required

Justification: If new equipment purchases are not required, then these actions amount to energy
conservation activities and/or compliance with the requirement to select the most favorable
utility rate.


Examples of ineligible activities:
      e    Using an on-site generator to reduce electricity consumption from your default provider.
      e    Converting electric heat to natural gas because natural gas is cheaper per British Thermal
           Unit (BTU, a unit of energy).
      e    Switching between natural gas and oil when it is price advantageous to the PHA and/or
           HUD, except as described in Scenario 9-5.

XI.   Interaction with an EPC


RRIs executed at the same time as an EPC are eligible to retain up to 100 percent of the savings
(rather than 50 percent of the savings with the RRI alone) during the EPC repayment period when
the EPC and RRI impact the same AMP and utility. The requirements for a PHA to be eligible to
retain 100 percent of the RRI savings are as follows:

The PHA must be eligible for both EPC incentives and RRI incentives (1) at the same AMP, (2) for
the same utility, and (3) in the same funding period. For an EPC and an RRI to be considered
executed at the same time, the RRI action needs to be submitted to HUD for review after the PHA


10 Time-of-use rates charge different rates based on the time of day, season, or type of day (weekday or weekend). In
an electric time-of-use rate, the unit cost of electricity ($/kWh) costs more during peak (daytime) hours and less
during off-peak (nighttime) hours.
'! Public Housing Environmental and Conservation Clearinghouse’ s ECM: Install Checkmetering or Individual
Metering webpage, https://www.hud.gov/program_offices/public_indian_housing/programs/ph/phecc/strat_m4.

                                                                                                                   15
submits the EPC package to HUD for review and before HUD approves the EPC. The PHA’s RRI
submission must state that it is requesting a 100 percent RRI benefit because it is being executed in
conjunction with an EPC.     A PHA’s EPC submission must state that the PHA is pursuing an RRI in
conjunction with an EPC. Both the RRI and EPC approval letters from HUD must indicate that the
PHA is pursuing both approvals in conjunction with each other. The PHA should submit to Energy
Branch (PIHEnergyBranch@hud.gov) PHA Name, PHA Code, Asset Management Number for
AMP (Project) included in the proposed RRI and EPC, a brief description of the action that the
PHA undertook to reduce the utility rate and supporting documentation. To receive 100% savings
for the RRI Action, the documentation for the RRI Action (e.g., executed contract, default rate
documentation, and savings calculations) should be submitted by August 30th before the year of the
first EPC Incentive payment.    See below for clarifications on some common scenarios:

      e   Scenario 11-1: If a PHA executes a Departmental approved EPC at two (2) of its three (3)
          AMPs and simultaneously executes a Departmental approved RRI at all 3 AMPs, only the
          2 AMPs included in the EPC may be eligible to retain 100 percent of the savings. The third
          AMP that is not included in the EPC may be eligible to retain 50 percent of the savings.
      e   Scenario 11-2: If a PHA has a Departmental approved EPC that includes both electricity
          and water savings and simultaneously executes a Departmental approved RRI for natural
          gas, the PHA may be eligible to retain 50 percent of the savings because the EPC and RRI
          impact different utilities.
      e   Scenario 11-3: Eligibility to retain 100 percent of the RRI savings is only applicable when
          the PHA is also receiving EPC incentives. Therefore, the PHA is only eligible to retain 50
          percent of the savings during the construction period, or after the EPC benefits end for any
          reason.
      e   Scenario 11-4: If a PHA executes an RRI and an EPC at the same time and the EPC has a
          payback term longer than the RRI eligibility, and the PHA receives approval of another
          RRI action after the expiration of the previous RRI, then the PHA may be eligible to
          extend RRI eligibility at 100 percent provided that:
              o the new RRIis similar in nature to the previous RRI;
              o the new RRI meets the requirements identified in the current RRI Notice;
              o the new RRI took place at the same AMP for the same utility as the expired RRI;
                 and
              o    the RRI and EPC both include incentives at the same AMP for the same utility.

If the RRI renewal meets the above criteria, then the PHA may be eligible to retain 100 percent of the
savings, rather than 50 percent, while the AMP is receiving both EPC and RRI incentives. If the EPC
repayment periods ends before RRI eligibility ends, then the PHA is only able to retain 50 percent of
the savings for the approved RRI that is in place after the EPC repayment period ends. The PHA does
not need to use the same contractor as was used in the previously approved RRI as a condition of
retaining 100 percent eligibility. The intent of allowing flexibility for extensions is to ensure that the
PHA is continually seeking the best value in contract selection.

      For Example:
      A PHA executed an EPC with a 10-year payback and simultaneously executed a commodity
      contract for electricity at all sites included in the EPC. The commodity contract covered
      electricity purchases for three (3) years. For each of the three years, HUD determined that the
      PHA was eligible for an RRI and was able to retain 100 percent of the savings. At the end of

                                                                                                             16
       the commodity contract the PHA procured a new commodity contract for electricity for one
       year that covered the same AMPs.
Based on the information above, HUD determined that the PHA was eligible to retain 100
percent of the RRI savings for this additional year.
       1.   The requirement that the RRI and EPC be completed within a specified timeframe, the
            submission requirement, and Departmental approval letter requirements apply only to EPCs
            and RRIs approved after the date of this Notice. Departmental determinations as to the
            percentage of an RRI that can be claimed for existing EPC and RRI approvals made
            pursuant to prior RRI Notices will remain in effect. There is no requirement for the PHA to
            use the same contractor for both transactions.

       2.   The PHA must submit savings calculations each year per this Notice to receive eligibility
            for the RRI benefit. See Appendix II for the acceptable method for calculating savings
            when the RRI is executed in conjunction with an EPC.

XII.   Further Information


For additional information or questions regarding this Notice, please direct inquiries to the PIH
Financial Management Division Energy Branch mailbox at PIHEnergyBranch@hud.gov.:
PIHEnergyBranch @hud.gov.

XIII. Paperwork Reduction Act


       RRI Eligibility Submission and Supporting Documentation

The public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 2.0 hours,
including the time for reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources, gathering, and
maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. HUD may
not conduct and sponsor, and a person is not required to respond to, a collection of information
unless the collection displays a valid OMB Control Number.

This collection of information is required for Public Housing Agencies (PHAs) to receive an (RRI
pursuant to 24 CFR § 990.185. RRI enables a PHA to retain 50% of any savings attributable to
taking specific actions to reduce the cost of their energy consumption. The information will be used
by HUD to determine whether applications meet eligibility requirements and application submission
requirements. No assurances of confidentiality are provided for this information collection.

Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any other aspect of this collection of information,
including suggestions to reduce this burden, to Reports Management Officer, Department of Housing
and Urban Development, 451 7th Street SW, Room 4176, Washington, DC 20410-5000, or
PaperworkReductionActOffice     @hud.gov.

       RRI Annual Savings Submission

The public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 10.0 hours,
including the time for reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources, gathering, and


                                                                                                        17
maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. HUD may
not conduct and sponsor, and a person is not required to respond to, a collection of information
unless the collection displays a valid OMB Control Number.

Public Housing Agencies (PHAs) that receive Rate Reduction Incentive (RID) pursuant to 24 CFR §
990.185 are required to submit documentation on energy cost saving attributed to the reduction in the
rate. The information will be used by HUD to determine the amount to the incentive included in its
Operating Subsidy calculation each year. No assurances of confidentiality are provided for this
information collection.

Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any other aspect of this collection of information,
including suggestions to reduce this burden, to Reports Management Officer, Department of Housing
and Urban Development, 451 7th Street SW, Room 4176, Washington, DC 20410-5000, or
PaperworkReductionActOffice     @hud.gov.




                                                       Richard J. Monocchio
                                                       Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary for
                                                        Public and Indian Housing




                                                                                                   18
XIV. Appendix I: Sample PHA              Submission


        New RRI Eligibility Request and Savings Calculations

Provided below are examples of a new RRI eligibility request and savings calculation
submission to illustrate the type of information and documentation required for HUD to review
and determine RRI eligibility and annual savings. Depending on the type of allowable RRI
action, information submitted by the PHA may differ from the below example and/or HUD
may request additional information to complete its review. If a PHA has any questions on
submitting information and documentation in accordance with this RRI Notice, please send all
inquiries to PIHEnergyBranch  @ hud. gov.

        Hypothetical Example PHA Submission

The Apple Housing Authority negotiated a lower electricity rate for one of their public
housing properties because the property is located in a deregulated market. The result is that
the housing authority is paying a fixed rate for electricity that is lower than the price they
would have paid if they did not take any action to reduce the rate. The agreement for their
negotiated rate took effect and the PHA began realizing savings on July 1, 2021. Apple
Housing Authority is submitting a new RRI eligibility request to claim an incentive for
Funding Year 2023. The full terms of the contract agreement are July 1, 2021 — December 31,
2023.

Sample Submission for a New RRI Eligibility Request for Funding Year 2023-— Submitted by July
31°t 2022


                 Apple Housing Authority (ZZ045)
        Ne




             .   AMP included in the RRI: ZZ045001
        3.       Action Description: The Apple Housing Authority negotiated a lower electricity rate with
                 the utility provider, resulting in a fixed contract rate of $0.0845 per kWh. Included in this
                 submission is the fully executed agreement with the utility provider that confirms the
                 reduced rate and other pertinent terms.
        4.       The Apple Housing Authority will calculate savings based on the following allowable
                 methodology using values from the applicable reporting period:
        a.       Savings = (Default Utility Rate —Actual Utility Rate) * Total Consumption
        5.       The Apple Housing Authority will claim 50 percent of the actual savings.
        6.       The Apple Housing Authority is seeking a multi-year RRI approval.

        Departmental Review of Eligibility

HUD reviewed the Apple Housing Authority’s eligibility request for a new RRI action. The request
contained all the required information, appears to be an eligible RRI action per the RRI Notice, and
was submitted to the Field Office and the PIHEnergyBranch@hud.gov email inbox before the July
31, 2022, deadline. HUD sent the PHA an initial determination of eligibility and reminded the PHA
to submit their savings calculations by the September 30, 2022, deadline to receive final approval
and to claim their incentive beginning in Funding Year 2023.


                                                                                                                 19
Sample Submission Savings Calculation Methodology- Submitted by September 30, 2022


Provided below are the net savings realized by the Apple Housing Authority for its negotiated
electricity rate for each AMP during the reporting period for Funding Year 2023 (July 1, 2021 —
June 30, 2022).

                                      Default    |    Actual                  Total Savings
                                        Rate          Utility                  (Savings per         RRI
                   Consumption           per         Rate per    Savings          kWh x          Eligibility
   Month              (kWh)            kWh             kWh      per kWh_    | Consumption)         (50%)
 July 2021             49,045         $0.0917 | $0.0854          $0.0063          $308.98           $154
 August
 2021                  57,972         $0.0911 | $0.0854          $0.0057          $330.44           $165
 September
 2021                  57,224         $0.0912 | $0.0854          $0.0058          $331.90           $166
 October
 2021                  45,301         $0.0922 | $0.0854          $0.0068          $308.05           $154
 November
 2021                  44,443         $0.0914 | $0.0854          $0.0060          $266.66           $133
 December
 2021                  47,230         $0.0868 | $0.0854          $0.0014           $66.12            $33
 January
 2022                  56,763         $0.0856 | $0.0854          $0.0002           $11.35             $6
 February
 2022                  57,349         $0.0842 | $0.0854         -$0.0012          -$68.82            -$34
 March
 2022                   55,456        $0.0882    |   $0.0854     $0.0028          $155.28            $78
 April 2022             48,012        $0.0895    |   $0.0854     $0.0041          $196.85            $98
 May 2022               45,156        $0.0963    |   $0.0854     $0.0109          $492.20           $246
 June 2022              41,953        $0.1011    |   $0.0854     $0.0157          $658.66           $329
 TOTAL                 605,904                                                   $3,057.67         $1,529

The PHA provided these additional details and documentation to validate their savings calculated
above:


         e   The default rate is the rate that Apple Housing Authority would have paid if it did not
             negotiate the reduced electricity rate. The default rates used in the savings calculations
             reflect the actual default rate during the reporting period and are published monthly on the
             utility’s website located here: (http://www.utility.com/pricetocompare) under the “Price-to-
             Compare” section.
         e   The actual contract rate is stated in the previously submitted executed agreement with the
             utility provider. Additionally, the contract rate is listed in the sample invoices included as
             documentation in this submission.
         e   The provided sample invoices demonstrate the source of actual electricity consumption and
             actual costs used to determine the actual utility rate for the month of August 2021 and are
             consistent with the information included in the savings calculation table.


                                                                                                              20
      Departmental Final Approval

HUD reviewed the Apple Housing Authority’s submission of savings calculations. The calculations
are correct, clearly traceable, utilize an acceptable calculation methodology, and the additional
documentation submitted (e.g., source of default rate and sample invoices for August 2021)
sufficiently supports the calculations. HUD sent a final approval letter to the Apple Housing
Authority to claim $1,529 on their Form HUD-52722 on the “Rate Reduction Incentive” line for
Funding Year 2023 for the approved AMP. The letter also conveyed that the RRI approval is valid
through December 30, 2023 (Funding Year 2025) provided that the PHA continues to be a party to
the original contract under which this RRI eligibility approval is being granted, the action continues
to produce measurable savings for the PHA, and the PHA submits savings calculations annually for
approval in accordance with the current RRI Notice.




                                                                                                         21
XV.   Appendix II: Calculating Utility Rate Savings


To calculate savings from an RRI action,     a PHA needs to determine the difference between what it
actually paid and what it would have paid if it had not taken any action during the 12-month period
from July 1 to June 30 that is prior to the first day of the Funding Year. A PHA can calculate savings
based on either the difference between the default rate and actual utility rate multiplied by actual
consumption (Formula 1) or the difference between the total default and total actual utility costs
(Formula 2).     A PHA may submit savings for a partial reporting period (less than 12 months) if the
RRI action did not start realizing savings until after the start of the reporting period. For most rate
reduction actions, a PHA should use one of the following formulas to calculate savings rounded to
the nearest whole dollar amount. Either:

      Formula 1. Total Savings = ((Default Utility Rate) - (Actual Utility Rate)) x (Actual
      Consumption)

      Where Utility Rate = Cost/Consumption

            OR

      Formula 2. Total Savings = (Total Default Cost) - (Total Actual Cost)

      Default Utility Rate = The utility rate that the PHA would have paid during the reporting period
      if it had not taken any action.
      Actual Utility Rate = The actual utility rate that the PHA paid during the reporting period as a
      result of the action. This should match the rate reported on the Form HUD-52722 unless RRI
      savings calculations are based on a sub-component of the overall utility rate (e.g.,
      energy/commodity rate only).

The actual utility rate and consumption are the current amounts for the reporting period in
consideration. The Default rate is the rate that the PHA would have paid from the utility provider
during the reporting period in consideration without the action taken. PHAs should determine which
formula provides the most accurate accounting of savings resulting from the RRI action. For
example, if a PHA negotiates a lower utility rate for the energy/commodity rate component of the
utility bill only, Formula 1 is the preferred calculation methodology whereby the PHA can calculate
the difference between default and actual utility rate for the energy commodity only as opposed to
including other components of the utility bill not included in the RRI action (e.g., customer charge,
meter charge, or demand charge). These methodologies are further illustrated in Example A2.1 and
Example A2.2 below. An additional, allowable methodology is illustrated in Example A2.3 below,
where the discount is not necessarily tied to consumption but is rewarded as a credit included on the
PHA’s utility bill. Finally, Example A2.4 below describes the allowable RRI-for-EPC methodology,
which can be used only where HUD has explicitly approved the RRI in conjunction with an EPC.

A PHA requesting an RRI must use one of these methodologies to calculate annual savings by AMP.
PHAs are encouraged to reach out to their utility company account representative for assistance in
finding rate information. Unless there is a change in data availability or an update to Departmental
RRI policy, the PHA must use the same methodology for all years that an action is eligible for an

                                                                                                          22
RRI. The PHA must maintain a record of how it calculated savings. Any change from the
methodology used to calculate savings must be identified in the RRI savings calculation the PHA
submits to the FO and Energy Branch each year. Records must be maintained in compliance with 24
CFR part 990. The PHA must keep a record of all information source(s) used to calculate savings.
Records may be reviewed as part of HUD’s review of the RRI savings calculation, during audits, or
reviews of PHA operations. Records must be kept in accordance with 2 CFR §§ 200.333-338.

Each PHA must report its actual utility consumption and actual utility cost in the Form HUD-
52722'*. PHAs must report eligible RRI savings in the Rate Reduction Incentive line. The
methodologies below demonstrate different ways to calculate RRI savings based on data availability.
PHAs eligible for a standard RRI must report 50 percent or half of the savings, on the Rate Reduction
Incentive line on Form HUD-52722 (Line No. 23). If a particular AMP or group of AMPs realized
negative savings during the reporting period, so long as the total net savings for the RRI action are
positive, the PHA is eligible to claim a Rate Reduction Incentive. The PHA must submit all eligible
AMPs, even AMPs with negative total savings in their savings calculations submission and, if
applicable, report the negative savings on the Form HUD-52722 for the relevant AMP(s).

      Example A2.1: Fixed Rate

The PHA is eligible for a lower utility rate and both the default utility rates and actual utility rates
are Clearly identified somewhere such as on the utility company’s website, in a signed letter from
the utility company, or in an executed agreement with the utility company.

      e   Default Utility Rate: $5.25/unit
      e   Actual Utility Rate: $3.75/unit
      e   Total Annual Consumption: 482,123 units
      e   Savings = ($5.25 - $3.75) x 482,123 = $723,259.50
      e   RRI Eligibility (60%): $723,259.50 * 50% = $361,630

      Example A2.2: Variable Utility Rate

The PHA’s local utility company publishes their default commodity rate on the PHA’s monthly bill,
but the PHA’s properties are located in a deregulated location and have the option to purchase the
commodity elsewhere. The PHA must record the default rate that is published on their bill each
month and use this rate to calculate savings. PHAs using this methodology must account for all line
items impacted by the action. For example,        a commodity purchase may impact both the commodity
and transportation costs on the bill as well as any additional monthly meter charges.

                    c              ti             Default                       Actual
                        onsumption                                                                        .
                          (kWh)            Rate             Cost         Rate            Cost         Savings
   July                  135,000         $ 0.1605 |     $21,668        $ 0.1509 |     $20,372         $ 1,296
   August                139,000         $ 0.1673 |     $23,255        $ 0.1539 |     $21,392         $ 1,863
   September             132,000         $ 0.1537 |     $20,288        $ 0.1409 |     $ 18,599        $ 1,690

!2 PHAs with an EPC in repayment must consult their approval letter to determine how to report consumption on
the Form HUD-52722.

                                                                                                                23
   October               125,000            $ 0.1571       $ 19,638         $0.1410 |       $17,625          $ 2,013
   November              136,000            $ 0.0926 |     $12,594          $0.1109 |       $ 15,082        $ (2,489)
   December              140,000            $ 0.2187 |     $30,618          $ 0.1609 |      $22,526          $ 8,092
   January               139,000            $ 0.1352 |     $ 18,793         $ 0.1409    |   $19,585         $ (792)
   February              142,000            $ 0.1366 |     $ 19,397         $0.1329     |   $ 18,872         $ 525
   March                 134,000            $ 0.1496 |     $20,046          $ 0.1359    |   $18,211         $ 1,836
   April                 125,000            $ 0.1421       $ 17,763         $ 0.1360    |   $ 17,000         $ 763
   May                   126,000           $ 0.1424 | $17,942            $ 0.1340 | $ 16,884               $ 1,058
   June                  131,000           $ 0.1651    $ 21,628          $ 0.1520 | $19,912                $ 1,716
 | Tgtal                1,604,000          $ 0.1519 | $243,629         | $0.1409 | $226,059             | $17,570"

In the example above, the PHA needed to calculate the costs and savings monthly to account for
the monthly rate fluctuations.

For each month, as in this example for July, the PHA uses the formula:
      e Savings July = ((Default Utility Rate July) - (Actual Utility Rate July))                 x (Consumption
      July)
      e Savings July = (($0.1605) - ($0.1509)) x (135,000) = $ 1,296

The overall savings is then calculated as:
      e Total Savings = (Total Default Cost) - (Total Actual Cost)
      e Total Savings at 50% eligibility = ($ 243,629 - $ 226,059)                             *50%     = $ 8,786

      Example A2.3: Monthly Discount or Credit/Rebate

The PHA participates in a renewable energy development program that results in a 10% discount
that is applied through net metering credits to each utility bill. These credits are clearly itemized
on each bill from the utility provider and factor in the payments made to the renewable energy
developer. In this example, the discount may or may not be related to consumption; however, the
PHA only needs to know the total net discount or credits by AMP, not the consumption, to
determine the total savings for each AMP. The total net credits from the reporting period are the
sum of net savings from each month, or $280.19. In this example, the PHA is eligible to retain
50% savings, for a final RRI eligibility of $140.


                                                       Payment to
                                                       Renewable                                 RRI
                             Total Invoice               Energy             Total Net         Eligibility
       Month                    Credits                 Developer            Savings            (50%)
 July 2021                       $222.98                 $200.68             $22.30               $11
 August 2021                     $280.58                 $252.52             $28.06               $14
 September 2021                  $260.45                 $234.41             $26.05               $13

'5 Tn the example above, the PHA correctly calculated savings each month to calculate the savings at the end of the
year. If the PHA only used the consumption and the default and actual rates in the total row to calculate
the savings, the resulting value would be $17,644 due to rounding errors.

                                                                                                                      24
 October 2021                 $232.27              $209.04            $23.23            $12
 November 2021                $240.68              $216.61            $24.07            $12
 December 2021                $212.45              $191.21            $21.25            $11
 January 2022                 $214.78              $193.30            $21.48            $11
 February 2022                $121.65              $109.49            $12.17            $6
 March 2022                   $237.90              $214.11            $23.79            $12
 April 2022                   $245.77              $221.19            $24.58            $12
 May 2022                     $256.43              $230.79            $25.64            $13
 June 2022                    $275.98              $248.38            $27.60            $14
 TOTAL                       $2,801.92            $2,521.73          $280.19           $140

      Example A2.4: RRI-for-EPC Methodology

A PHA that executes an RRI at the same time as an EPC are eligible to retain up to 100 percent of
the savings (rather than 50 percent of the savings with the RRI alone) during the EPC repayment
period when the EPC and RRI impact the same AMP and utility. As a reminder, the allowable RRI-
for-EPC methodology can be used only where HUD has explicitly approved the RRI incentive in
conjunction with an EPC. The RRI-for-EPC methodology allows the PHA to calculate savings as
follows:

      e    Savings = (Default Utility Rate — Actual Utility Rate) x Baseline Consumption (EPC
           Approval)

This differs from the traditional RRI methodology because instead of multiplying the savings per unit
of measure by the actual consumption for the reporting period, the PHA multiplies the savings per
unit of measure by the baseline consumption value. This value is found in the PHA’s EPC approval
letter. Consistent with the traditional RRI calculation methodology, the default utility rate and actual
utility rate are the rates from the applicable reporting period. An EPC approval letter may contain a
baseline utility rate to estimate savings over time for the purposes of estimating an EPC incentive,
but calculation of the RRI should continue to utilize current market rates to ensure that the RRI
action continues to generate net savings for the PHA.    The justification for this methodology is to
continue to incentive the PHA to seek the best utility rates for their properties while not significantly
impacting their cash flow during the EPC repayment period.

In the example below, the PHA has an active EPC and an approved RRI that impacts AMPs            1, 3, 4,
7, and 8. These AMPs are eligible to claim 100% of the RRI savings utilizing the EPC-for-RRI
methodology. For example:

      e    AMP I Savings = (Default Utility Rate — Actual Utility Rate) x Baseline Consumption x
           100%
             o $429 = ($0.1065 - $0.0805) x 16,500 kWh x 100%

The other AMPs (2, 5, and 6) are eligible to claim only 50% of the savings and utilize the traditional
RRI savings calculation methodology. For example:

      ©    AMP 2 Savings = (Default Utility Rate — Actual Utility Rate) x Actual Consumption x 50%


                                                                                                            25
                       o    $989 = ($0.0988 - $0.0805) x 108,035 kWh x 50%

         As areminder, in both examples, the default utility rate and actual utility rate are the rates from the
         most recent 12-month period from July 1 — June 30 that ended prior to the beginning of the
         applicable funding period.

           Actual            Baseline     Default    Actual                       Total
         Electricity       Consumption | Utility     Utility | Savings          Savings      RRI-for           RRI       Total
        Consumption         from EPC     Rate per | Rate per     per          (Traditional     EPC          Eligibility   RRI
AMP #      (kWh)              (kWh)        kWh        kWh       kWh               RRI)       Savings     | Percentage | Savings
  1        13,969             16,500      $0.1065   | $0.0805   | $0.0260       $363.19      $429.00          100%         $429
  2        108,035             N/A        $0.0988   | $0.0805   | $0.0183      $1,977.04       N/A            50%          $989
  3        46,099             48,400      $0.1072   | $0.0805   | $0.0267      $1,230.84     $1,292.28        100%        $1,292
  4       580,619            655,000      $0.0918   | $0.0805   | $0.0113      $6,560.99     $7,401.50        100%        $7,402
  5       697,200              N/A        $0.1011   | $0.0805   | $0.0206 |   $14,362.32       N/A            50%         $7,181
  6       645,482              N/A        $0.1065   | $0.0805   | $0.0260 |   $16,782.53       N/A            50%         $8,391
  7        93,351            100,500      $0.1065   | $0.0805   | $0.0260      $2,427.13     $2,613.00        100%        $2,613
  8        51,236             55,100      $0.1065   | $0.0805   | $0.0260      $1,332.14     $1,432.60        100%        $1,433
TOTAL                                                                                                                   $29,729.33




                                                                                                                         26
XVI. Appendix III: On-Site Renewable Energy RRI

In the example below, the PHA installed a solar photovoltaic (PV) system that generated 25 percent
of the electricity consumed by the PHA, 20 percent (157,930 kWh) of the electricity was consumed
on-site and 5 percent (39,483 kWh) was sold back to the grid (this happens if the PHA generates the
electricity at a point in the day when they do not need it).

Without the solar project, the PHA paid $0.1701/kWh but after the project the PHA paid
$0.1901/kWh. The blended electric rate went up slightly because of the standby charge. Despite the
higher utility rate, the PHA paid $21,716 less on the electricity bill because of the electricity
generated on-site. However, if the blended utility rate accounted for all electricity generated on-site
when calculating the blended rate, then the effective blended utility rate would be $0.1426/kWh.

In this scenario, the PHA may account for the solar electricity generated and consumed on-site when
calculating the blended rate for savings determination. The PHA may be eligible to retain 50 percent
of the savings ($13,542.50 in this example) as an operating subsidy benefit, subject to Departmental
approval.

                       Before              After        Savings                          Notes
                                           Energy Consumption (kWh)

 Total On-site
 C onsumption
           ;           789,650            789,650
 Renewable                                                           This is the amount of electricity that
 Energy                                   157,930                    was generated and consumed on-site.
 Consumption
                                                                     This is the excess electricity generated
 Net Metering                             39,483                     on-site that is sold back to the grid.
 Credit

                                                                    Amount of electricity that the PHA was
 Adiusted                                                           billed for = (Total On-site Consumption)
    a                  789,650            592,237       197,413   | - (Renewable Energy Consumption) -
 Consumption                                                                    ;        ;
                                                                     (Net Metering Credit)
 (kWh)

                       Utility Rate ($/kWh)                                     Unit cost of electricity
                                                                     Amount charged by the local
 Delivery              $0.0800            $0.0800                    electric company (default provider)

                                                                     Amount charged for the electricity to be
 Supply                $0.0900            $0.0900                    put into the transmission lines

 Standb
 Charges*                                 $0.0600                    See definition below
                           Utility Bill
 Meter Charge     |    $50.00       |     $50.00                     Flat monthly fee


                                                                                                           27
 Delivery               $63,172         $47.379                      = (Delivery) x (Adjusted Consumption)


 Supply                 $71.069         $53.301                      = (Supply) x (Adjusted Consumption)

 Standb                                                              = (Standby Charges) x (Renewable Energy
 Charges                                $11,845                      Consumption + Net Metering Credit)

 Total Cost            $134,291         $112,575         $21,716   | Utility Bill (sum of charges above)

 Blended Rate          $0.1701          $0.1901         -$0.0200   | > (Total Cost) / (Adjusted Consumption)

                         RRI Calculation
                                                                                                  |
 Blended Rate
 for Savings           $0.1701          $0.1426          $0.0275   | = (Total Cost) / (Total On-site
 Determination                                                       Consumption)
 RRI                                                                 |
 Elivibilit          $10,858.72 = 50 % x (Total On-site Consumption) x (Blended Rate savings)
 Savings *           $10,858.72= 50 % x 789,650       =x $0.0343


*Standby Charges — Convenience fee charged by electric company for the electricity generated on-
site. This covers the local power company's need to standby and provide backup power if the
renewable energy system goes offline. Not all utility companies charge this fee. Utility companies
that charge this fee use different methods for calculating it.

In the scenario above, the PHA will enter the following information on the Form HUD-52722:
       e   Billed electricity consumption = 592,237 kWh
       e   Billed electricity cost = $112,575
       e    Billed electricity blended rate = $0.1901/kWh
       e    Rate Reduction Incentive = $10,858




                                                                                                       28
