                                               Health |                  LA Office of
                                                                            Equity and Inclusion



                                                OHA/OHPEB    Definition of Health Equity

Oregon will have established a health system that creates health equity when all people can reach their full health potential
and well-being and are not disadvantaged by their race, ethnicity, language, disability, age, gender, gender identity, sexual
orientation, social class, intersections among these communities or identities, or other socially determined circumstances.

Achieving   health   equity   requires   the   ongoing   collaboration    of all   regions   and   sectors   of the   state,   including   tribal
governments, to address:

   ¢   The equitable distribution or redistribution of resources and power; and
   ¢   Recognizing, reconciling, and rectifying historical and contemporary injustices.

                                Proposed Health Equity Committee Membership June 4, 2024

The Health Equity Committee (HEC) was established by the Oregon Health Policy Board (OHPB) in 2017. The purpose of
the Health Equity Committee is to coordinate and develop policy that proactively promotes the elimination of health
disparities and the achievement of health equity for all people in Oregon.

The Committee is appointed by OHPB and consists of 15 experienced and skilled individuals in the review, analysis, and
development of health equity policy and results-proven implementation, including but not limited to the social determinants
of health. Members include health equity professionals or individuals who have life experience in health equity policy
advocacy and policy-making processes, community members, and health equity practitioners.

This slate was selected by an ad-hoc HEC membership workgroup and received a vote of approval by the full Committee
on November 14, 2023. The recruitment process was designed to ensure the Committee is representative of communities
experiencing health inequities, including, but not limited to racially and ethnically diverse populations, linguistically diverse
populations, immigrant and refugee populations, LGBTQ+ populations, the aging population, people with disabilities, rural
communities, and economically disadvantaged populations as well as individuals with experience transforming health equity
in operational settings. HEC membership terms are two years, with staggered membership terms to ensure continuity.

HEC membership is granted to the individuals that appear below and not to the organizations that employ them.

                                                Proposed New Members

         Name                Pronouns                Title             Organizational Affiliation      Location by Area

 Juan Pablo Villalobos   | They/them         Executive Director      LatinX Recovery Center           Portland Metro
 Garcia

 With a focus on culturally specific and humble practices within the Latinx recovery community and beyond, Juan has
 worked with communities across cultural and racial differences. Representing indigenous populations in South America
 from a culturally humble level, as well as Spanish-speaking BIPOC communities in Central America, Juan hopes to
 provide the committee with a clear and concise vision of the equity needs of historically disadvantaged communities and
 to collaborate with OHA staff from a balanced space, understanding the needs of the state and those of the community.
 Berryl Omollo              She/Her           Community Health         Rockwood Community               Portland Metro
                                              Worker                   Development Corporation



 Berryl’s community-based health equity work -- fueled by her own lived experience of inequities -- is centered around
 promoting health equity, particularly for BIPOC, immigrant, and refugee communities in the Rockwood neighborhood of
 East Multnomah County. As a community health worker, she bridges the gap between these communities and essential
 health resources and education, ensuring that they are culturally relevant and accessible across cultural and language
 barriers. Her goal is “to empower marginalized individuals by helping them navigate the complexities of the healthcare
 system and providing them with essential education about available resources, all while addressing the underlying social
 determinants of health that contribute to disparities.”
 Jabin Kahl                They/He           Executive Director      Providence                       Central Oregon
                                             Human   Experience
Bringing a wide range of lived and professional health systems experience with populations experiencing health inequities
across Oregon through Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion (DEI) work, community engagement, policy advocacy, and
capacity building, Jabin wants to see HEC actively participate in policy development that prioritizes health equity: “By
actively including and amplifying the prioritizes of underrepresented minorities, and seeking out effective practices to
scale, we can recommend policies that address the root causes of health disparities and ensure equitable access to
healthcare resources.” Jabin’s coalition-building background will contribute to HEC serving as a platform for collaboration
and partnership with community organizations, healthcare institutions, and community members.

Andi Walsh                 She/Her             Children's Institute   | Senior Health Policy Advisor   | Eastern Oregon




Andi’s unique experience as both a social worker and lawyer allows her to understand systemic issues exacerbating and
often causing health inequities. In her current role as Senior Health Policy Advisor for the Children’s Institute, she is
incorporating health equity principles into their statewide work to improve early childhood and family health for all people
in Oregon. Her professional work also includes a focus on community engagement and storytelling to uplift the
experiences of populations that experience the most severe health inequities.
                                                 Current HEC    Members


Name                        Pronouns           Title                  Organizational Affiliation        Location by
                                                                                                        Area
Rocio Munoz                 She/her              Health Equity,        Benton County Health             Willamette Valley
                                                 Engagement, and | Department
                                                 Communications
                                                 Manager
Growing up in substandard housing in rural Oregon, Rocio helped her monolingual Spanish speaking parents navigate
medical and educational systems and provided interpretation and translation services at a very early age. She has
served in an array of positions and training at Benton County Health spanning the public health continuum, taking a
strong lead in improvement and innovative projects that have increased organizational health equity efforts.
Beck Fox                     They/them           Health Equity         InterCommunity Health           Coast
                                                 Liaison               Network Coordinated Care
                                                                       Organization/Samaritan Health
                                                                       Services
Beck’s background is in clinical psychology and program development/directorship for LGBTQIA2S+ communities.
Beck has been involved in health equity efforts throughout the state and in multiple contexts, as a DELTA graduate
(2020-2021 cohort), an involved board of directors member of the Linn Benton Lincoln Health Equity Alliance (the
area’s Regional Health Equity Coalition), and the health equity liaison to InterCommunity Health Network CCO. Their
skills center around a systems-level perspective balanced with an individual/community impact perspective, navigating
uncomfortable and difficult conversations/topics, seeking and sharing knowledge with open curiosity, strategic
planning, and being a rather stubborn advocate for change within systems content to maintain status quo.

Kristin Yarris              She/her             University of         Associate Professor:              Willamette Valley
                                               Oregon; Klamath     Community Partnerships
                                               County Public       Program - consultant
                                               Health
Acting as the Health Equity Coordinator for Klamath County Public Health, Kristin regularly utilizes an equity lens in all
the work she does, both at an organizational level and a community level. She focuses on bringing diverse voices to the
table, and ensuring those same voices are empowered to create change. In her professional role, she has strengthened
community partnerships, conducted community input assessments, and organized a free health equity summit, in
addition to staff trainings on Social Determinants of Health, Health Literacy, Plain Language, Adverse Childhood
Experiences & Resiliency, Implicit Bias, Identity, and Privilege and Oppression. Living in rural and conservative Oregon,
she has seen resistance to change on the policy and systemic level, and views this committee is a key opportunity to
pursue policy changes to further support and action statewide.

Phyusin Myint               She/her             Chief EDI Officer of ) Health Share of Oregon            Portland Metro
                                                Health Share


Health equity work has been central to Phyusin throughout her life: Phyusin and her family were displaced from Burma
when she was a child, and she served as the cultural and linguistic translator for her parents navigating health systems
and governance system in this country. The first in her family to obtain an education in the US, she now holds a
master's degree in public policy and a PhD in public affairs and policy. Through over 15 years of working in local
government to advocate and bridge inequities for communities, she is well-versed in health and racial equity policy
work, centering the experience and expertise of the people impacted by these issues. Before joining Health Share of
Oregon as chief EDI officer, she supervised Washington County’s Health Equity, Planning and Policy program where
she designed, implemented and monitored diversity, equity, and inclusion strategies to ensure that the Public Health
Division operated with health equity as a guiding principle. These various positions have provided her with a deep
understanding of the value of establishing and maintaining strong trusting relationships with community partners, while
focusing on the shared task at hand of eliminating health inequities.

Katie Cox                   She/Her/Hers        Executive Director   | Equi Institute                    Portland Metro



Katie wrote on her application that populations marginalized by gender identity and sexual orientation have, for the most
part, been excluded from mainstream health promotion research, policy and practice. Katie has worked in
LGBTQAI2Sspecific health for the past six years and feels strongly about bringing the lens that she has developed
through this work to the HEC. While Oregon is relatively progressive in LGBTQ+ health policy, the truth is that most
queer and trans Oregonians have very limited access to affirming health care. Even providers who have received training
continue to harm and deny access to care based on gender identity or sexual orientation. Katie wants to be a part of
conversations to address that, and this Committee feels like a great place to start. She hopes to contribute with her lived
experience as a queer person, her experience working in trans and queer specific primary care, and her deep connection
with the LGBTQAI2S+ community.
Bryon Lambert               He/Him/His        Equity, Inclusion & | La Clinica                        Southern Oregon
                                              Diversity Director



Bryon currently works within a community health care system. His primary duties are to advance health equity with
planning and community building; implement and support EDl-related projects, and promote equitable staff recruitment,
development, and retention. He has worked as a professional consultant and trainer to health and human services
organizations seeking to build their EDI training capacity, develop and sustain equitable care practices for those they
serve, and grow a diverse workforce within an inclusive work environment. Bryon feels that thru his professional and
personal experiences, he is well-positioned to help HEC promote the elimination of health inequities through a holistic
equity lens.


Stefanny Caballero         She/Her/Ella       Executive Director   | Virginia Garcia Memorial         Portland Metro
                                                                     Foundation



Stefanie wrote on her application that “as a person of color with direct experiences and challenges relating to limited
access to resources and health care, she chose a professional path that would allow her to contribute towards making
her community a more equitable place and effect systemic change that would lead to more equitable outcomes for all”.
She hopes to join the HEC and contribute her lived experiences and learnings, observations, and advocacy efforts in her
current and previous professional and volunteer roles. She brings a culturally responsive point of view to committee
discussions, work, and health equity efforts that focus on removing barriers and challenges many in our community face.
This includes a deep understanding of the social conditions affecting populations/groups in our community and how we
can address and disrupt the perpetuation of such disparities, injustices, and inequitable allocation of resources to
implement health equity across our region.
Julia Przedworski           They/them/theirs | Lead Scientist,        Diversity Science                Portland Metro
                                              LGBTQ+ Equity
                                              and Inclusion
Julia is a health equity researcher, educator, and activist. Their primary experience is in advancing health and social
equity for queer and trans people, but strongly believes that all forms of systemic oppression need to be dismantled in
order to achieve equity - "no one is free until we are all free" - and has worked to advance health and social equity for
people of color, people with disabilities, people of larger body size, and people living in poverty. As a member of the
HEC, Julia brings deep expertise in community-based equity research (both qualitative and quantitative), extensive
experience   in creating change   at the systemic,    institutional, and   interpersonal   levels, and   lived experience as a person
who is nonbinary, queer, neurodivergent, and an immigrant, and who has previously lived in poverty and experienced
homelessness.



Taylor Geyton                She/Her/Hers            Assistant Professor | Portland State University                Portland Metro


Taylor is a health equity researcher and a mental health professional with specific emphasis on the social determinants
of health and health behaviors among Black women in the US. Her significant lived and learned knowledge of the
intricacies associated with disparate health outcomes and access or utilization of health services among minoritized
communities shapes her approach to health equity work. Speaking to her own lived experience, Taylor writes, “l know
the power that stigma and cultural value hold when it comes to mental health and wellness. | am adept at navigating
health systems as a woman of color and more specifically where medical professionals turn a colorblind eye to my care,
and the damage that such indifference inflicts.” Through serving on HEC, she hopes to expand the meaning of health to
include social, emotional, and behavioral health, which will allow the committee to analyze and propose revisions to
policies that create barriers to access to adequate behavioral and emotional healthcare.

Nancy Cornejo                She/Her/Ella            Community Health        | Familias En Accion                   Portland Metro
                                                     Worker
Through the Health Literacy project in partnership with Washington County, Adelante Mujeres, and Familias en Accion,
along with collaboration with Community Health Workers from different Community Based Organizations, Nancy works
to identify how health organizations can provide equitable, understandable, and culturally responsive services that
address the overall well-being of the community and advocate against racial justice issues that arise within the medical
setting. Nancy’s Social Work training includes workshops and conferences related to health and racial equity such as
challenging implicit bias, how to be anti-racist, how policies affect social determinants of health, and how elements of
power can be harnessed to operationalize health equity in public health practice. But Nancy’s “most impactful and
influential Knowledge comes from my lived experience as a first-generation and undocumented immigrant, learning about
and how to navigate different systems, translating medical forms & conversations, and advocating all while watching my
parents assimilate and put their needs second as a form of survival. There is a wealth of knowledge and burden that
comes with being part of a community that continues to be underrepresented in health care.” She hopes to bring her
knowledge and experience to uplift an anti-racist and holistic approach to policy-making and advocacy.

Jasmine Stewart             She/Her/Hers       Advisory / Board      Care Oregon, Outside In,            Portland Metro
                                               Member                OHSU   Richmond     Clinic



Jasmine brings to the HEC a wealth of lived and cross-cultural experience: she has lived in China, Japan, Southeast
Asia, and the Alaskan Native American Upik community, has firsthand knowledge of challenges facing the low income,
LGBTQIAA2S+, and immigrant communities, and lives with both physical and mental health disabilities and abilities.
Jasmine has served many different community organizations throughout Multnomah County and Oregon, including as
peer-elected chair of the Client Advisory Board (CAB) of Outside In’s Main Clinic in Portland, Oregon, addressing the
concerns of 6,000+ clients of all backgrounds and ages; a member of the Patient Advisory Committee (PAC) for the
Richmond Family Care Clinic; and on the Portland Residents Advisory Board (RAC), striving to improve the livability
and accessibility of housing, education, and community   resources for all 14,000 Home   Forward   residents throughout
Multnomah Community.
