                       AW     About                         DIVERSITY
                                                                EQUITY
        Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion                           INCLUSION

The Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion team works to make Oregon Youth Authority an
agency where we all work toward equity and real inclusion, even when it is challenging.
Our goal is to create systems that include and work for EVERYONE and support
accountability and lasting change.

WHY does diversity, equity, and inclusion work matter?

Short answer: Youth from marginalized populations (including youth of color and
youth who identify as LGBTQ+) are disproportionately represented in the justice system
and are more likely than their peers to experience abuse, neglect, and discrimination.

    e   Diversity, equity, and inclusion are necessary elements to create safer, more just,
        and thoughtful systems of care, communities, and employment for everyone.
    e   Research proves youth receiving services and supports that affirm their cultures
        and identities have better health, learning, and community transitions long term.

WHAT      does the team do?

Short answer: Support youth, staff, and providers by ensuring equity is part of all OYA’s
new and existing policies, practices, and programs.

e   Provide systemic oversight and guidance to help OYA reach its goals of equitable
    programming and outcomes for youth of color, and of diversifying our workforce.
e   Work with OYA staff, youth, and community members to learn what supports they
    need and create meaningful and tangible plans of action.

WHO does this impact?

Short answer: Everyone. The Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion team works with
community members (staff, teams, leaders, and Oregon government and external
groups) to create systems and services that are equitable and inclusive. This leads to:

e   Policies and practices that reflect the needs of everyone--in including underserved
    and marginalized communities.
e   Staff having access to trainings and cultural awareness, voice their needs, and better
    support one another and youth.
e   Providing more opportunities for youth and community members inform and
    participate in the types of services and supports available to youth in OYA care.
