  GeTMENT Og



£ ily %                                       U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT
2 il |" e                                                     WASHINGTON, DC 20410-5000
 %Z               fe)
      ®4n neve’

OFFICE OF PUBLIC AND INDIAN HOUSING



Special Attention of:                                                     NOTICE PIH 2023-13, CPD 2023-05

Public Housing Agencies administering the                                 Issued: June 8, 2023
Housing Choice Voucher and/or Public Housing
Programs; Public Housing Field Office Directors;                          Expires: Effective until amended,
CPD Directors; Continuums of Care                                         superseded, or rescinded

                                                                          Supersedes: PIH Notice 2013-15

                                                                          Cross References: PIH Notice 2015-
                                                                          19, PIH Notice 2017-21 (HA), CPD
                                                                          Notice 2017-01




 Subject: Guidance on housing individuals and families experiencing homelessness
 through the Public Housing and Housing Choice Voucher Programs
         1.             Applicability: This Notice applies to public housing agencies (PHAs) administering
                        Public Housing and/or Housing Choice Voucher (HCV) programs and Continuums of
                        Care (CoCs).

         2.             Purpose: This Notice supersedes previous guidance found in PIH Notice 2013-15 and
                        identifies strategies that PHAs can pursue to expand housing opportunities for individuals
                        and families experiencing homelessness through the Public Housing and HCV programs.
                        Specifically, this Notice:

                        e   Revises the definition of homelessness for the purpose of reporting in the Inventory
                            Management System/Public Housing Information Center UMS/PIC) or its successor
                            system,
                        e   Outlines new guidance on how PHAs and CoCs can share data derived from IMS/PIC
                            or its successor system and the Homeless Management Information System (HMIS),
                        e   Provides updated guidance on:
                                 o waiting list management and preferences,
                                 o screening policies regarding criminal activity, substance use, and rental
                                     history,
                                o     program termination and eviction policies, and
                                      information regarding pairing project-based vouchers with CoC Supportive
                                      Services! to create Permanent Supportive Housing

                        As authorized by the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2022 (P.L. 117-103), HUD

! CoC Eligible Activities — Supportive Services             — HUD   Exchange (This resource was developed by   a HUD   funded
technical assistance provider).
  published PIH Notice 2022-29, awarding more than 19,000 new HCVs to PHAs that may
  be used as an additional resource to combat homelessness in local communities. The
  Fiscal Year 22 Appropriations provides that “the Secretary may specify additional terms
  and conditions to ensure that public housing agencies provide vouchers for use by
  survivors of domestic violence, or individuals and families who are homeless, as defined
  in section 103(a) of the McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act (42 U.S.C. 11302(a)),
  or at risk of homelessness as defined in section 401(1) of such Act (42 U.S.C.
  11360(1)).” This Notice describes how PHAs can use these new vouchers strategically by
  collaborating with their local CoC to establish preferences to assist individuals and
  families who are experiencing or at-risk of experiencing homelessness (See Section 11 of
  the Notice for additional information on preferences for admission). In addition to
  information on preferences, this Notice addresses multiple ways in which PHAs can most
  effectively target and serve families experiencing homelessness through updated
  occupancy policies.

. Background: CoCs and PHAs play a critical role in the efforts to end homelessness.
  Across the country, PHAs administer approximately 850,000 units of public housing and
  2.6 million HCV subsidies, providing safe, stable, and affordable housing for low- and
  extremely low-income households. Many households entering public housing or the HCV
  program transition from CoC-funded projects. HUD encourages PHAs to become
  familiar with their local CoC’s projects and coordinated entry systems to strengthen
  collaborations that can make each organization’s efforts more effective.

  In partnership with the United States Interagency Council on Homelessness (USICH),
  HUD   created a new initiative called House America. Through this initiative, HUD invited
  mayors, city and county leaders, Tribal nation leaders, and governors to leverage
  American Rescue Plan funds as well as other Federal, Tribal, State, and local resources to
  nationally re-house 100,000 households experiencing homelessness through a Housing
  First approach and to bring 20,000 new units of affordable housing into development by
  December 31, 2022.    Local collaboration is essential to House America’s success,
  requiring coordinated efforts by PHAs and CoCs to match available resources to unstably
  housed families. As of   January 2023, 105 communities across 31 states and territories
  housed more than 100,00 households experiencing homelessness and added over 40,000
  affordable housing units into development.

  While coordinating with HUD on House America, USICH released its strategic plan,
  “The Federal Strategic Plan to Prevent and End Homelessness” in December 2022. To
  help meet the Administration’s goal of reducing homelessness by 25% by January 2025,
  the plan focuses on ways to provide housing and supports, homelessness response, and
  homeless prevention, by effectively using equity, data, and collaboration. The plan’s
  emphasis on equity reflects a priority of both HUD and USICH. Black, Latino, and
  Indigenous and Native American persons, Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders and
  other persons of color experience homelessness at significantly higher and
  disproportionate rates than White people, and eliminating these racial disparities is not
  only a focus of HUD and USICH but also The White House, as evidenced in the
  Executive Order On Advancing Racial Equity and Support for Underserved Communities
  Through the Federal Government. The Administration has committed to advancing
             equity, civil rights, racial justice, and equal opportunity by redressing inequities in
             policies and programs that serve as barriers to equal opportunity across the Federal
             Government.

             HUD is expanding its guidance related to how PHAs can leverage their public housing
             and HCV resources to assist individuals and families who are experiencing
             homelessness, including how PHAs can work with their local CoC to accept referrals
             from a Coordinated Entry System (CES). This Notice also updates the definition of
             homeless for Form HUD-50058 reporting to include Categories 2 and 3 of the
             definition under 24 CFR 578.3.

             PHAs play an integral role in offering safe, stable, and affordable housing solutions
             within their communities, particularly to households with the lowest incomes and
             greatest barriers to housing. PHAs have taken varied approaches to assist individuals
             and families experiencing homelessness, both through relationships with partnering
             organizations and by implementing thoughtful policies and procedures aimed at
             removing barriers to housing homeless individuals and families. This Notice also
             provides information on these strategies.

    4.       Definitions:
         e      Homeless” — The CoC program definition of homeless at 24 CFR 578.3 includes the
                following four “homeless” categories. Categories | through 3 are based on section
                103(a) of the McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act, whereas Category 4 is based
               on section 103(b) of that Act.      PHAs should keep this distinction in mind when
               determining whether an individual or family is homeless as defined by section 103(a)
               of the McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act.
                   1.   Category 1: Individual or family who lacks a fixed, regular, and adequate
                        nighttime residence, meaning:
                           i.   Has a primary nighttime residence that is a public or private place not
                                designed for or ordinarily used as a regular sleeping accommodation for



  For purposes of programs such as the Emergency Solutions Grants and Continuum of Care Programs, section 605
of the Violence Against Women Act Reauthorization Act of 2022 (VAWA 2022) amended section 103(b) of the
McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act to require HUD to consider as homeless “any individual or family
who— (1) is experiencing trauma or a lack of safety related to, or fleeing or attempting to flee, domestic violence,
dating violence, sexual assault, stalking, or other dangerous, traumatic, or life-threatening conditions related to the
violence against the individual or a family member in the individual's or family's current housing situation, including
where the health and safety of children are jeopardized; (2) has no other safe residence; and (3) lacks the resources
to obtain other safe permanent housing.” Rulemaking will be needed to require Emergency Solutions Grants (ESG)
recipients and subrecipients, Continuums of Care (CoCs), and CoC Program recipients and subrecipients to make
corresponding changes to the applicable written standards, coordinated entry policies, and documentation policies
used to qualify individual and families as homeless under the CoC Program. That said, because HUD must
recognize as “homeless” families and individuals who meet the new statutory criteria in section 103(b) of the
McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act as of October 1, 2022, ESG and CoC recipients may implement the new
definition prior to HUD rulemaking, provided that ESG recipients and CoCs update the relevant written standards
and policies as needed to reflect the new statutory criteria. For further information, please see “The Violence
Against Women Act Reauthorization Act of 2022: Overview of Applicability to HUD Programs,” which HUD
published in the Federal Register on January 4, 2023.”
                  human beings, including a car, park, abandoned building, bus or train
                  station, airport, or camping ground;
            il.   Is living in a publicly or privately operated shelter designated to provide
                  temporary living arrangements (including congregate shelters,
                  transitional housing, and hotels and motels paid for by charitable
                  organizations or by federal, state, and local government programs); or
            il. Is exiting an institution where the individual or family resided for 90
                days or less and who resided in an emergency shelter or place not meant
                for human habitation immediately before entering that institution.
   2.   Category 2: Individual or family who will imminently lose their primary
        nighttime residence, provided that:
            1.    Residence will be lost within 14 days of the date of application for
                  homeless assistance;
            il. No subsequent residence has been identified; and
            il. The individual or family lacks the resources or support networks needed
                to obtain other permanent housing.
   3.   Category 3: Unaccompanied youth under 25 years of age, or families with
        children and youth, who do not otherwise qualify as homeless under this
        definition, but who:
            1.    Are defined as homeless under the other listed federal statutes;
            il.   Have not had a lease, ownership interest, or occupancy agreement in
                permanent housing during the 60 days prior to the homeless assistance
                application;
            il. Have experienced persistent instability as measured by two moves or
                more during the 60-day period immediately preceding the date of
                applying for homeless assistance; and
            1V. Can be expected to continue in such status for an extended period of
                time due to certain special needs or barriers.
   4.   Category 4: Any individual or family who:
            1.  Is fleeing, or is attempting to flee, domestic violence, dating violence,
                  sexual assault, stalking, or other dangerous or life-threatening
                  conditions that relate to violence against the individual or a family
                  member, including a child, that has either taken place within the
                  individual's or family's primary nighttime residence or has made the
                  individual or family afraid to return to their primary nighttime
                residence;
            il. Has no other residence; and
            il. Lacks the resources or support networks to obtain other permanent
                housing.
Chronic Homelessness —
   1.   A homeless individual with a disability, as defined in section 401(9) of
        the McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act (42 U.S.C. 11360(9)), is an
        individual who:
            1. Lives in a place not meant for human habitation, a safe haven, or in
                an emergency shelter; and
                         ii.Has been homeless continuously for at least 12 months or on at least 4
                            separate occasions in the last 3 years, as long as the combined occasions
                            equal at least 12 months and each break in homelessness separating the
                            occasions included at least 7 consecutive nights of not living as
                            described in paragraph 1(1).
               2. An individual who has been residing in an institutional care facility, including a
                   jail, substance abuse or mental health treatment facility, hospital, or other
                   similar facility, for fewer than 90 days and met all of the criteria in the
                   preceding bullets of this definition before entering that facility; or
               3. A family with an adult head of household (or if there is no adult in the family, a
                   minor head of household*) who meets all of the criteria in paragraphs 1 and 2
                   including a family whose composition has fluctuated while the head of
                   household has been homeless.
       e   Centralized or Coordinated Assessment System (CE system)— The definition of
           Centralized or Coordinated Assessment is found at 24 CFR 578.3, 24 CFR 578.7(a)(8)
           details the responsibilities of the CoC to establish and operate this required system. In
           addition to the definition and responsibilities established in the Rule, HUD posted on
           its website, CPD-17-01: Notice Establishing Additional Requirements for a Continuum
           of Care Centralized or Coordinated Assessment System, establishing additional
           requirements related to the development and use of a centralized or coordinated entry
           assessment system. These systems help communities assess the needs of program
           participants and effectively match individuals and families experiencing homelessness
           with the most appropriate resources available to address their supportive service and
           housing needs. CoCs may use planning costs to design and plan for the implementation
           of a centralized or coordinated assessment system; however, once the system is
           established and operating, the costs of operating it are not eligible planning costs.
           CoCs must operate the system with CoC Program funds, other funds, or a combination
           of the two.
       e   Continuum of Care (CoC) (24 CFR 578.3) — The group organized to carry out the
           responsibilities required under this part and that is composed of representatives of
           organizations, including nonprofit homeless providers, victim service providers, faith-
           based organizations, governments, businesses, advocates, public housing agencies,
           school districts, social service providers, mental health agencies, hospitals, universities,
           affordable housing developers, law enforcement, organizations that serve homeless and
           formerly homeless veterans, and homeless and formerly homeless persons to the extent
           these groups are represented within the geographic area and are available to
           participate.
       e   Continuum of Care Program (24 CFR part 578) — Promotes a community-wide
           commitment toward the goal of ending homelessness; to provide funding for efforts by
           nonprofit providers, states, Indian Tribes or tribally designated housing entities (as
           defined in section 4 of the Native American Housing Assistance and Self
           Determination Act of 1996 (25 U.S.C. 4103) (TDHEs)), and local governments to



> An individual who is a minor under the age of 18 who has been emancipated to act on his/her own behalf,
including the ability to execute a contract or lease under state law. See 24 CFR § 5.504(b).
            quickly rehouse homeless individuals, families, persons fleeing domestic violence,
            dating violence, sexual assault, and stalking, and youth while minimizing the trauma
            and dislocation caused by homelessness; to promote access to and effective utilization
            of mainstream programs by homeless individuals and families, and to optimize self-
            sufficiency among those experiencing homelessness.
       e    Disability — The inability to engage in any substantial gainful activity by reason of any
            medically determinable physical or mental impairment which can be expected to result
            in death or which has lasted or can be expected to last for a continuous period of not
            less than 12 months; or in the case of an individual who has attained the age of 55 and
            is blind, the inability by reason of such blindness to engage in substantial gainful
            activity requiring skills or abilities comparable to those of any gainful activity in which
            they have previously engaged with some regularity and over a substantial period of
            time.’
       e    Emergency Solutions Grant (ESG) (24 CFR part 576)— A formula grant program that
            provides funding to cities, urban counties, territories, and states for street outreach,
            emergency shelter, homelessness prevention, and rapid-rehousing.
       e    Family — A person or group of persons, as determined by the PHA consistent with 24
            CFR 5.403, approved to reside in a unit with assistance under the program. The term
            “family” used in EHV/HCV context always includes a family that is comprised of a
            single individual as well as a group of persons under the HCV program regulations at
            24 CFR 982.4.
       e    Homeless Management Information System (HMIS) — means the information system
            designated by the Continuum of Care to comply with the HUD's data collection,
            management, and reporting standards and used to collect client-level data and data on
            the provision of housing and services to homeless individuals and families and persons
            at-risk of homelessness.
       e    Housing for Persons with HIV/AIDS CHOPWA)- The only federal program dedicated
            to the housing needs of people living with HIV/AIDS. Under the HOPWA Program,
            HUD makes grants to local communities, States and nonprofit organizations for
            projects that benefit low-income persons living with HIV/AIDS and their families.
       e    House America— A partnership between HUD and The U.S. Interagency Council on
            Homelessness (USICH) with mayors, local government leaders, tribal nation leaders,
            and governors that utilize the American Rescue Plan (ARP) to address homelessness.
       e    Household — Includes everyone who lives in the unit, including foster children/adults
            and live-in aides. Household members are included when determining unit size, but are
            not considered family members, and have no rights to the public housing unit or
            Housing Choice Voucher if there are no remaining family members.
       e    Housing First— A model of housing assistance that prioritizes rapid placement and
            stability in permanent housing in which admission does not have preconditions (such
            as sobriety or a minimum income threshold) and in which housing assistance is not
            conditioned upon participation in services.

“42 USC § 423(d)(1)(A). For consistency with fair housing requirements, see The Fair Housing Act, 42 U.S.C.
3602(h) (defining a person with a disability as an individual who has “(1) a physical or mental impairment which
substantially limits one or more of such person’s major life activities, (2) a record of having such an impairment, or
(3) being regarded as having such an impairment, but such term does not include current, illegal use of or addiction
to a controlled substance (as defined in section 802 of Title 21).”
     e     Moving On — A strategy that enables individuals and families who are able and want
           to move on from Permanent Supportive Housing (PSH) to do so by providing them
           with sustainable, affordable housing options through mainstream systems, as well as
           the services and resources necessary to maintain housing stability.
     e     Permanent Supportive Housing (PSH) — As it relates to project-based vouchers,
           permanent housing in which supportive services are provided to assist homeless
           persons or families, in which at least one person has a disability, to live independently.

5.       Definition of Homeless for the Purpose of Completing Line 4c on Form HUD-50058:
         For all new admissions, PHAs must determine whether an individual or family was
         homeless at admission, and this information must be reported on line 4c on Form HUD-
         50058. Note that while a PHA may adopt its own definition of the term homeless for
         purposes of a PHA-adopted waiting list preference, PHAs must use the definition
         provided in Section 4 above for purposes of reporting whether a new admission is
         homeless on the Form HUD-50058. The Homeless Emergency Assistance and Rapid
         Transition to Housing Act of 2009 (HEARTH Act) amended the McKinney Vento Act
         definition of homeless for HUD’s homeless assistance programs, and on December 5,
         2011, HUD published its Final Rule implementing this definition.

         HUD previously adopted only a portion of this definition for the purpose of reporting on
         Form HUD-50058 (categories 1 and 4). This Notice supersedes the definition of
         homeless family found in the Form HUD-50058 guide. As of this Notice, “Homeless at
         admission” in Section 4 is to be filled out as follows.

         When using Form HUD-50058 for either the Emergency Housing Vouchers (PIH Notice
         2021-15) or Stability Vouchers (PIH Notice 2022-24), PHAs should mark yes only if the
         applicant meets criteria in category 1, 2, or 3 of the homeless definition in 24 CFR 578.3.
         For any other Housing Choice Voucher, PHAs should mark yes only if the applicant
         meets the criteria in category 1, 2, 3, or 4 of the homeless definition in 24 CFR 578.3 or
         the criteria in section 103(b) of the McKinney Vento Homeless Assistance Act, as
         amended 42 U.S.C §11302(b).

         For additional information on the Form HUD-50058, please see the Form HUD-50058
         Instruction Booklet.

6.       Homelessness
         Reporting on the Form 50058: The Form HUD-50058 and Form HUD-
         50058 MTW modules allow HUD to obtain information about participants in the Public
         Housing and HCV programs, including the homeless status of persons entering the
         program. The accuracy and reliability of this information is critical to tracking the
         homelessness system’s collective progress towards ending homelessness. However,
         based on a HUD review of PIC reporting on line 4c, some PHAs are not reporting this
         field accurately, or are reporting “no” for all applicants, whether they are homeless or
         not. It is of particular importance for PHAs to record the homeless status of individuals
         receiving Veterans Affairs Supportive Housing (HUD-VASH), Family Unification
         Program (FUP), Foster Youth to Independence Initiative (FYI), EHV,        Mainstream, and
         Non-elderly Disabled (NED), as these special purpose vouchers serve a high percentage
         of people meeting the updated homeless definition (and in the case of HUD-VASH, is
         statutorily required to meet the definition of homeless and for FUP-Youth and FYI, must
         meet the definition of homeless or at-risk of homelessness).             For all new admissions to
         Public Housing, HCV program, and all special purpose vouchers, PHAs must determine
         whether an individual or family was homeless at admission using the definition detailed
         in Section 4 above, and this information must be reported on line 4c on Form HUD-
         50058. HUD does not require PHAs to collect documentation or third-party verification
         of any kind to verify an applicant’s homelessness status for the purpose of reporting on
         line 4c. Verbal self-verification by the applicant that any of the above criteria are true is
         sufficient.

         To aid PHAs in accurately reporting a new admission’s homelessness status on line 4c of
         Form HUD-50058, the PHA may find the following list of questions helpful. If the
         answer to any of the following questions is yes regarding the family’s current living
         situation, the PHA would mark “Y” on line 4c of the Form HUD-50058                     (homeless at
         admission).

         1.   Are you currently living in a car, on the street, or another place not meant for human
              habitation?
         2.   Are you currently living in an emergency shelter, transitional housing, Safe Haven’,
              or a hotel/motel paid for by a charitable organization or by federal, state, or local
              government programs for low-income individuals?
         3.   Are you exiting an institution, including a hospital, substance abuse or mental health
              treatment facility, or jail/prison, where you stayed for 90 days or less? If so, were
              you living in an emergency shelter or place not meant for human habitation
              immediately before entering that institution?
         4.   Will you be losing your primary nighttime residence within the next 14 days, with no
              subsequent residence identified and no resources or support networks to obtain other
              permanent housing?
         5.   Are you an unaccompanied youth under 25 years of age, who does not otherwise
              qualify as homeless under the HUD definition, but who is considered to be
              experiencing homelessness under the definition of another federal statute®, have not
              had a lease, ownership interest or occupancy agreement in permanent housing in the
              past 60 days, have experienced persistent instability (2 or more moves in the past 60
              days), and can be expected to continue the above instability because of various
              barriers, including chronic disabilities, chronic physical or behavioral issues, histories
              of domestic violence or child abuse and neglect, or two or more barriers to
              employment?
         6.   Are you experiencing trauma or a lack of safety related to, or fleeing or attempting to
              flee, domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, stalking, human trafficking or
              other dangerous, traumatic, or life-threatening conditions related to the violence
              against you or a family member in your current housing situation?


> A Safe Haven is a form of supportive housing that serves hard-to-reach homeless persons with severe mental
illness who are on the street and have been unable or unwilling to participate in housing or supportive services.
© Other federal definitions of homelessness include those used by the McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act
(42 U.S.C. § 11434(a)(2)) and the Runaway and Homeless Youth Act (42 U.S.C. § 5732a)).
            Example 1: A family that lost their home because the family was no longer able to
            make the mortgage payments and is living in their car would qualify as homeless.
            Example 2: An individual that had previously lived in an emergency shelter and was
            admitted to the hospital for a 5-day stay would qualify as homeless.
            Example 3: An individual being released from prison after a 3-year incarceration
            would not qualify as homeless based on the length of incarceration.
            Example 4: An individual that is residing in a home with their abuser, both of whom
            are on the lease, and does not have sufficient resources to leave the home and obtain
            housing independently would qualify as homeless.

         PHAs are encouraged to partner with a CoC or other homeless services organization to
         assist with documenting the homelessness status of applicants. In particular, partnerships
         may be valuable for determining whether individuals and families qualify under
         categories 2 and 3 of the homeless definition, since the documentation requirements for
         these categories are time-sensitive (e.g., losing housing within the next 14 days). This
         partnership between the PHA and other organization could be simply to verify the
         family’s homelessness status or could be more robust in which the PHA accepts referrals
         from the CoC’s CE System. This more robust partnership is discussed further in Section
         7 of this Notice.

         PHAs must follow the verification requirements established in their written policies to
         verify homelessness status for a preference, which may include reliance on verification
         from partnering organizations such as CoCs.

    7.   Partnering and Working Collaboratively with CoCs: As demonstrated by the
         implementation of the Emergency Housing Voucher program, a partnership between the
         CoC and the PHA is a critical part of a community-wide effort to end homelessness.
         CoCs manage federal resources to assist individuals and families experiencing
         homelessness, while PHAs provide stable, long-term housing and housing subsidies
         which can help end the cycle of homelessness. HUD strongly encourages PHAs and
         CoCs to proactively engage in partnerships, since the communities that have been most
         successful in working toward ending homelessness are those where PHAs form direct
         partnerships with the local CoC, homeless service providers, and other agencies.

         Partnerships between PHAs and CoCs allow the organizations to leverage their resources
         to better serve individuals and families experiencing homelessness. For example, a PHA
         and CoC may partner to create a PSH project in which the PHA provides a tenant-based
         or project-based voucher, while the CoC may be able to provide or coordinate the
         accompanying supportive services in accordance with program requirements. Other
         examples involve the creation of a Rapid Rehousing (RRH) project where supportive
         services are provided through the CoC program or ESG funds, while housing subsidies
         are supplied through an HCV or a Public Housing unit. Note that when funds are
         provided by both the CoC and PHA, there is a prohibition on duplication of subsidies.’


7 24 CER § 982.352(c)
        In any partnership, CoCs and PHAs must follow the rules of the respective program that
        is being supported, including rules regarding admission to the program such as waiting
        list requirements and existing PHA preferences. CPD Notice 2017-01 generally provides
        for all admissions to CoC and ESG programs to go through the CoC’s CE system, while
        PHAs, with the exception of special admissions, are required to select participants from
        their waiting lists. For these resources to be leveraged, a PHA could establish a waiting
        list preference for referrals from the CoC, which would, in turn, refer clients from the CE
        system for the PHA resource. PHAs may choose to prioritize certain categories of
        homelessness, in accordance with the PHA’s Admission and Continued Occupancy Plan
        (ACOP) or PHA Administrative plan when accepting referrals from the CoC for the
        PHA’s waiting list, depending on identified local needs and racial equity considerations.®

        Relationships between CoCs and PHAs can benefit both organizations. By working
        together, the organizations can help each other in a multitude of ways including by:
                   Sharing best practices
                   Identifying and prioritizing people experiencing homelessness for assistance
                   Aiding in locating a unit, accessing additional services, etc.
                   Providing documentation for verification purposes
                   Sharing information on the physical location of people experiencing homelessness to
                   ensure services can be provided
            e      Providing case management assistance to households when applying to PHA
                   programs, including assistance with securing vital documents, and understanding
                   relevant program requirements
                   o Providing housing search assistance
                   o   Serving as a liaison between the PHA, family, and owner
                   o   Identifying and recruiting of landlords for HCV programs

        PHAs and CoCs are encouraged to establish strong partnerships, as this enables PHAs to
        access larger networks of different homeless service providers throughout their
        community. A larger PHA provider network ensures that vulnerable individuals and
        families admitted to Public Housing or HCV programs are offered the supportive services
        necessary to remain stably housed and compliant with the family obligations and other
        requirements of the program. PHAs and CoCs can use both formal and informal
        approaches to build relationships, including:
            e      Participating in a Moving On Program strategy (see Section 13 of this Notice)
            e      Establishing Memorandums of Understanding (MOU) to detail specific roles and
                   responsibilities of the partnership and leverage combined resources to create PSH and
                   RRH (building off existing EHV MOUs as appropriate)
            e      Becoming members of the CoC, including PHA leadership holding a seat on the CoC
                   Board and participation from CoC leadership on the PHA board
            e      PHAs participating in the CoC’s HMIS and in the CoC’s regular meetings, including
                   ongoing case conference and prioritization meetings


824 CFR § 960.206 for Public Housing, 24 CFR § 982.207 for the HCV program, and 24 CFR § 983.251(c)(3) for
the PBV program.


                                                     10
          e   Providing training to PHA staff on the local strategic plan to end homelessness and the
              various supportive programs that may be available to Public Housing residents and
              HCV participants
          e   Providing training to CoC staff to ensure they understand how to best support the
              clients/participants navigating the HCV and Public Housing application process
          e   Engaging with other organizations that serve underserved communities (including
              individuals who belong to communities of color, such as Black and African American,
              Hispanic and Latino, Native American, Alaska Native and Indigenous, Asian
              American, Native Hawaiian and Pacific Islander, Middle Eastern, and North African
              persons; individuals who belong to communities that face discrimination based on sex,
              sexual orientation, and gender identity; and individuals with disabilities) to exchange
              ideas about outreach and assessment processes that improve equitable outcomes
          e   Identifying which other systems interact with the homelessness system. Start a
              committee with those community partners to address cross-system disparities
          e   Expanding opportunities for people of different races/ethnicities who have lived
              experience of homelessness to provide expert advice and opinions on policy,
              procedures, and services delivery. Consider mechanisms to compensate community
              partners


8.   Characteristics of an Effective CE Process:              The July 31, 2012, CoC Program interim
     rule requires CoCs to establish and operate “a centralized or coordinated assessment
     system that provides an initial, comprehensive assessment of the needs of individuals
     and families for housing and services with the intention of matching the homeless
     individual or family with the most appropriate resources.” Prior to coordinated entry
     (CE), limited housing resources were distributed separately by each housing provider
     and the most vulnerable households were not always prioritized for subsidies or PSH
     units.

     A CE system is a centralized approach to assessing the needs, vulnerability level, and
     program eligibility of people experiencing homelessness and linking them to available
     housing programs in the community using a standardized access, assessment,
     prioritization, and referral process. With the exception of ESG-funded victim service
     providers, HUD requires all communities funded through its ESG or CoC program to
     implement a centralized or coordinated intake and assessment system. In many
     communities, Veterans Administration (VA) and Health and Human Services (HHS)
     funded programs partner with the CE to provide access to their units or subsidies. Each
     CE system is unique, giving CoCs flexibility to design processes and priorities that fit
     their local needs. HUD strongly encourages PHAs to participate in the CE system in
     their area by establishing a mechanism for referrals once an assessment has been made by
     the CoC.

     As one of the largest providers of affordable housing in their communities, PHAs can play
     a critical role in the CE process. HUD encourages PHAs to connect with their local CoCs
     to   understand     their   local   CE   design   and   operation   (processes,   tools,   policies,   and
     procedures).      A typical process would likely include the following steps:


                                                       11
e   Outreach — CoCs must conduct outreach in a variety of ways to homeless providers,
    shelters, and community partners, including human trafficking, domestic violence,
    and sexual assault providers, to ensure equal access to housing based on need and
    eligibility of homeless households. CoCs must also affirmatively market their
    housing and supportive services to eligible persons regardless of race, color,
    religion, sex (including gender identity and sexual orientation), disability, familial
    status (children under age 18, including pregnancy or seeking legal custody), or
    national origin who are least likely to apply in the absence of special outreach (see
    24 CFR 578.93(c)(1));
e   Access - A household experiencing homelessness requests help at one or multiple
    designated access points (e.g., emergency shelter(s), call line, or intake center(s));
e   Assessment — A CoC staff member completes a standardized assessment and
    identifies which services and housing programs may be the best fit for a program
    participant;
e   Prioritization — Policies documenting the prioritization process must align with
    existing CoC Program and ESG Program written standards established under HUD
    regulations 24 CFR 578(a)(9) and 24 CFR 576.400(e). The CoC’s coordinated entry
    policies and procedures must describe the factors and assessment information with
    which prioritization decisions are made for all homeless assistance in the CoC.
    Based on a local prioritization process, if the household meets program criteria and
    is a good candidate to receive long-term housing assistance, CoC staff prioritize the
    household for that type of assistance. Communities are always encouraged to
    evaluate and adjust their prioritization policies based on evolving information and
    circumstances, including new or improved data (to include potential disparate
    impacts by race/ethnicity), changing needs and priorities, and available resources;
e   Referral/Placement - CoC staff refer eligible households to the PHA or other
    housing provider intake staff for documentation review and placement.

The structure and operations of a CE system will vary depending on many factors,
including the size of the community it serves and the length of its history in building a
CE process. HUD does not identify a specific assessment tool or process that CoCs
should use for CE, and CoCs can choose to use different assessment tools for specific
sub-populations. According to CPD Notice 2017-01, “the coordinated entry process may,
but is not required to include separate access points and variations in assessment
processes to the extent necessary to meet the needs of the following five populations: (1)
adults without children; (2) adults accompanied by children; (3) unaccompanied youth;
(4) households fleeing domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, stalking, or
other dangerous or life-threatening conditions (including human trafficking); and (5)
persons at-risk of homelessness.”

A PHA can participate in their local CoC’s CE system by accepting CE system referrals
of people experiencing homelessness who are eligible for and in need of the housing
programs they offer, including HCV, PBVs, Public Housing, Mainstream Vouchers,
NED Vouchers, FUP, FYI, Housing for Persons with HIV/AIDS          (HOPWA), or PSH-
funded through the CoC and supported by HCV.       PHAs can also provide housing support




                                         12
         through EHVs; however, EHVs require a direct referral from the CoC.’                PHAs can also
         use the CoC’s CE system to identify households that may be eligible for any limited
         preference they have for people experiencing homelessness in their community. While
         all referrals for HUD-VASH must come directly from the PHA’s partnering VA facility
         or designated service provider (DSP), VA facilities are encouraged to become connected
         with their local CE system.'°

         A PHA may establish a preference for families referred from the CE process in the
         community.'! This may be a general preference or the PHA may choose to limit the
         number of vouchers/public housing units available under this preference.'* Please note
         that this preference is somewhat different from a homeless preference since applicants
         would need to be referred from the CE rather than applying directly to the PHA. See
         section 11 of this Notice for further information on establishing a waiting list preference
         for referrals from a CE system.

         For more information on additional CE best practices, see the following resource
         developed by a HUD funded TA provider: PHA Strategies to Assist People
         Experiencing Homelessness Guidebook: Using Coordinated Entry to Identify People
         Experiencing Homelessness for Housing Assistance.

    9.   Pairing Data from the Form 50058 with HMIS Data: The Homeless Management
         Information System (HMIS) is a local information technology system used by CoCs to
         comply with the data collection and reporting requirements of the CoC Program interim
         rule found at 24 CFR 578. It is a locally administered system used to record and analyze
         data on program participants on the provision of housing and services for individuals and
         families who are homeless or at-risk of homelessness.!°           Further, HUD     and other federal
         partners use aggregate data from HMIS to better inform homeless policy and decision
         making. Note that client-level data in HMIS is only visible at the local level and must be
         aggregated when reported to HUD.

         HMIS can be used to generate reports, assess programs, and process intake and referral
         information in some CE systems. The system is a valuable tool and can be used by CoCs
         to make data-driven decisions, increase access to housing resources for families
         experiencing homelessness, and evaluate efforts at advancing racial equity. To further
         enhance the analytical capabilities of both PHAs and CoCs, these organizations can
         implement data sharing agreements to share disaggregated data, facilitated in part through
         joint Releases of Information (ROIs).        These agreements allow PHAs to link their Form
         50058 data with the CoC’s HMIS systems, and vice versa, enabling both organizations to
         understand and analyze the individual paths taken by homeless families through the

? Per PIH Notice 2021-15, Congress provided HUD with broad waiver authority through the American Rescue Plan
Act that permitted HUD to establish this alternative requirement for EHV. In the absence of that authority, this
alternative requirement would be impermissible.
10 VA Participation in Coordinated Entry Guidance (hudexchange.info
| See 24 CFR § 960.206 for Public Housing, 24 CFR § 982.207 for the HCV program, and 24 CFR § 983.251(c)(3)
for the PBV program.
2 Td.
'S HUD Exchange HMIS Data Standards - This resource was developed by a HUD funded TA provider.


                                                        13
        system of homelessness.

        CoCs often have no visibility into the outcomes of families they refer to PHAs, including
        application approval, voucher issuance, leasing up, their time in the program, or when
        they exit the program.     However, CoCs, PHAs, and their partners can establish data
        sharing agreements’ to better understand family outcomes in order to create and
        coordinate strategies that support equitable access to programs and improved outcomes
        for the families they serve.

        For example, if a large number of families are receiving vouchers, but only a small
        number of those families successfully lease up, it may indicate a need for support in
        finding units, completing landlord applications, or getting paperwork returned to the
        PHA. Or, if families do successfully lease up but are frequently terminated within 1-2
        years, it may indicate a need for increased support throughout their time within the
        program. Both examples highlight instances where access to data can lead to a greater
        understanding of the path through homelessness, enabling PHAs and CoCs to coordinate
        the application of additional resources most needed by the people experiencing
        homelessness in their communities. Viewing these disaggregated data can also help
        determine disparities in lease-up by race/ethnicity to examine any racial equity concerns.

        CoCs and PHAs are required to create policies and procedures regarding how data is
        collected, used, stored, and disclosed across the homeless services system. These policies
        must comply with the requirement to protect clients’ personally identifying information
        (PIT) and should follow the guiding principle to only share the minimum amount of data
        necessary to achieve the purpose. CoCs and PHAs must be transparent in the data
        collection process and articulate the policies to clients in a way that they understand, and
        clients must be protected from denial of services they would otherwise qualify for if they
        do not consent to data collection or sharing. In instances where information collection is
        required by law, CoCs and PHAs are not required to seek consent.

    10. Waiting List Management: PHA waiting lists can be a barrier to individuals and
        families experiencing homelessness trying to access the Public Housing and HCV
        programs.’ When waiting lists are long or closed, an individual or family who lacks
        stable housing and reliable contact information may not be able to be contacted when
        they come to the top of the waiting list or when waiting lists are purged, especially if it
        has been months or years since the application was submitted. Additionally, when PHAs
        reopen waiting lists for short periods of time, people experiencing homelessness may be
        excluded from the application process due to a lack of information about the eligibility to
        apply.

        PHAs may establish strong outreach and intake strategies through partnerships with key
        CoC leadership and service providers within the CoC such as emergency shelter staff, CE
        staff, and housing navigators. PHAs may also alter policies and procedures to:

4 This resource was developed by a HUD funded TA provider.
'S While HUD-VASH is included in this guidance among other special purpose voucher programs, there are several
HUD-VASH policies, including waiting list management, that are unique to HUD-VASH. HUD-VASH operating
requirements (86 FR 53207) supersede all guidance in this notice.


                                                      14
          e    Simplify the application process for Public Housing or HCVs, including steps
               such as:
                    o Develop a universal application with partner PHAs in the region
                    o Minimize the length and number of questions used to accurately determine
                        program eligibility and to meet regulatory requirements, providing a balance
                        between collecting all necessary information and ensuring that the
                        application process is clear and accessible
                    o Provide multiple ways to access and submit an application as appropriate,
                        including to ensure a PHA meets its statutory obligation to make
                        information accessible to people with disabilities and people with limited
                        English proficiency (LEP). For example, PHAs must take appropriate steps
                        to ensure effective communication with individuals with disabilities through
                        the use of auxiliary aids and services whether the application is electronic or
                        in hard copy. PHAs must be able to process applications to accommodate
                        individuals who are unable to access an electronic form. Otherwise, they
                        must offer a reasonable accommodation, or alternative application processes
                        for those populations. They must also take appropriate steps to ensure that
                        applications are meaningful access by individuals with Limited English
                        Proficiency (LEP) populations by translating such materials into languages
                        other than English.
          e    Engage with partner organizations to help homeless households gather necessary
               information and documents, and ensure that requirements are explained in clear,
               plain language and available in multiple languages as needed
          e    Strengthen the process for contacting applicants on their waiting list, providing
               multiple forms of communication to reduce barriers for applicants without a
               permanent address (e.g., contacting applicants via email, text, or phone)
          e    Implement liberal reinstatement policies when applicants are removed from the
               waiting list because of non-responsiveness
          e    Allow updates to address information via multiple methods, including by mail,
               email, and online forms
          e    Establish flexible intake and briefing schedules
                   o Provide a window of time for appointments
                   o    Allow for remote briefing opportunities!®
          e    Establish nondiscriminatory preferences in admissions policies for persons
               experiencing homelessness, or a subset of such persons (e.g., chronically
               homeless, homeless veterans, homeless identified as most vulnerable through
               community-based assessment strategies, etc.). See Section 11 of this Notice.
          e    Establish admissions preferences for victims of domestic violence, dating
               violence, sexual assault, stalking, and human trafficking.
          e    Revise criminal record and substance use policies to ensure that they are not
               overly restrictive and that they do not discriminate in violation of the Fair Housing
               Act or other civil rights authorities, based on the requirements of the individual
               program (e.g., HCV vs. EHV). Additional best practices can be found in HUD’s
               Implementation of the Office of General Counsel’s Guidance on Application of


16 PTH Notice 2020-32


                                                    15
              Fair Housing Act Standards to the Use of Criminal Records by Providers of
              Housing and Real Estate-Related Transactions Memo (2022 Criminal Records
              Memo
          e   Implement flexible policies for rental history for those individuals and families
              without a consistent or steady rental history
          e   Amend the HCV Administrative Plan to provide longer initial search terms if
              required by rental market conditions, and simplify processes for requesting search
              extensions consistent with the terms of the administrative plan.

        For more guidance on waiting list and applications management, please see the
        following resource developed by a HUD funded TA Provider: PHA Strategies to Assist
        People Experiencing Homelessness Guidebook.             As a reminder to PHAs, all actions
        taken in association with the application and intake process must comply with all
        applicable fair housing and civil rights laws, including the Violence Against Women
        Act. See 24 CFR 5.105(a) and 24 CFR Part 5, subpart L.

    11. Homeless Admissions Preference: A PHA’s greatest tool for increasing program
        access for individuals and families experiencing homelessness is establishing a
        preference in the Admission and Continued Occupancy Plan (ACOP) for public housing
        and the Administrative Plan for HCV. The adoption of preferences is at the discretion of
        the PHA. HUD regulations!’ authorize PHAs to establish certain local preferences in
        PHA policies. The PHA has the discretion to establish other preferences not addressed in
        program regulations provided they are based on local housing needs and priorities,
        including preferences for families who are homeless or living in substandard housing. If
        adopting the preference constitutes a significant amendment to the PHA Plan as defined
        by the PHA, the PHA must comply with the amendment provisions of 24 CFR 903.21,
        including soliciting public comment and consulting with the resident advisory board.

        This Section describes the criteria that may be considered when establishing
        preferences for homeless individuals or families. For a detailed discussion of best
        practices for operating waiting lists and establishing preferences for people
        experiencing homelessness, please also see the following resource developed by a HUD
        funded TA Provider: PHA Strategies to Assist People Experiencing Homelessness
        Guidebook.

        a) Assessing local housing needs. PHAs should understand the unique circumstances
        impacting people experiencing homelessness in their communities. A PHA’s system of
        local preferences must be based on local housing needs and priorities by using
        generally accepted data sources and information obtained through the PHA Plan public
        comment process.'* HUD encourages PHAs to work collaboratively with CoCs, health
        care providers, social service providers, homeless services providers, disability
        organizations, organizations serving victims of domestic violence, dating violence,
        stalking, sexual assault, or human trafficking, and local offices of government and
        community organizations to establish a system of preferences based on local housing

17 24 CFR § 960.206 for Public Housing, 24 CFR § 982.207 for HCV, and 24 CFR § 983.251(c)(3) for PBV.
18.24 CFR § 960.206(a)(1) for Public Housing and 24 CFR §982.207(a)(2) for HCV


                                                      16
        needs collectively identified by the community.       For example, PHAs may look to their
        Community Plan to End Homelessness, Consolidated Plans, HIV/AIDS Housing Plan
        and/or data from their jurisdiction’s CoC HMIS to identify whether and to what extent
        there is need for a homeless preference. For more information on these products, visit
        the following resources developed by HUD funded TA Providers: Coordinated
        Community Plan, Consolidated Plans, Housing Opportunities for Persons with AIDS
        (HOPWA) Housing Plan, and HMIS Community Examples.

        b) Identifying and addressing racial equity in the PHA’s preference system. It is
        important that PHAs use the resources highlighted in sub-section a) above to identify,
        understand, and take the necessary action to address racial disparities in their
        communities, particularly when establishing and applying homeless admissions
        preferences. Black, Hispanic, and American Indian and Alaskan Natives represent 29%
        of the total U.S. population but accounted for over 60% of the homeless population in
        2020.'° These trends highlight the disproportionate impact on Black, Latino, and
        Indigenous and Native American persons, Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders and
        other persons of color and the need for PHAs to understand the demographics and
        particular circumstances faced by the people they serve in their communities. PHAs
        may utilize the following (developed by a HUD funded TA provider) CoC Analysis
        Toolto examine racial disparities in the numbers of individuals or families
        experiencing homelessness in the local community or those who obtain and maintain
        permanent housing. Using this information, PHAs may want to consult with their CoC
        and other community partners to determine changes to current preference policies that
        target needs, vulnerabilities, and barriers disproportionately faced by Black, Latino, and
        Indigenous and Native American persons, Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders and
        other persons of color, which may help address racial equity concerns. Notably, any
        such policy changes must not target race, national origin, or any other characteristic
        protected under fair housing and civil rights laws.

        c) Applying and Limiting Preferences. HCV, PBV, and Public Housing regulations
        allow PHAs to establish waiting list preferences.*”? The PHA may establish a general
        preference for people experiencing homelessness or may create a more narrowly
        defined or limited preference. PHAs may also limit the number of applicants that may
        qualify for a particular preference.”!

        PHAs may create a preference or limited preference specifically for people who are
        referred by a partnering homeless service organization or consortium of organizations
        such as the CE System established by the CoC. Establishing a preference for clients
        referred by the CE system helps ensure that the housing options for families
        experiencing homelessness are prioritized for those who most need long-term housing
        support. When a PHA establishes a preference for clients referred from a CE system,
        the PHA should work closely with the organization in charge of the CE system to
        ensure that any referral agencies understand the criteria for admissions set by the PHA

19 9020 Annual Homeless Assessment Report (AHAR) to Congress
70 24 CFR § 982.206 for Public Housing, 24 CFR § 982.207 for HCV, and 24 CFR § 983.251 for PBV
7124 CFR § 982.206(a)(2) for Public Housing and 24 CFR § 982.207(a)(3) for HCV



                                                     17
        during the initiation of the partnership. This will minimize the number of ineligible
        families that are referred, leading to time and resource savings, as well as reducing
        potential delays faced by eligible families awaiting referral.

        PHAs may also choose to create a general or limited preference for families
        experiencing homelessness, including preferences limited to families with children,
        veterans, or other particular subgroups of families experiencing homelessness, provided
        that the preference reflects local housing needs and is compliant with Fair Housing
        rules. A PHA may also create a preference for individuals and families participating in
        a Moving On strategy, discussed in Section 13 of this Notice. These individuals and
        families are people that were previously homeless prior to entry into the PSH program
        but who no longer need that level of supportive services and are now transitioning from
        PSH units. While these persons would not be considered homeless for reporting
        purposes on the Form HUD-50058, creating such as a “Moving On” preference can
        contribute significantly to the community’s overall efforts to end homelessness by
        freeing up units for currently homeless families and individuals with disabilities who
        need housing combined with services.

        d) Opening waiting lists and public notice. If a PHA does not have enough
        applicants on its waiting list who qualify for a specific preference, the PHA may open
        its waiting list strictly to people to whom the preference applies. The notification
        process, as well as the preferences themselves, must comply with HUD fair housing
        and civil rights requirements, such as adopting suitable means to assure that the notice
        reaches eligible individuals with disabilities and those with limited English proficiency
        (LEP). HCV program regulations require the public notice to appear in a local
        newspaper of general circulation, minority media, and other suitable means.”” These
        public notice practices are strongly encouraged in the Public Housing Program.

        Once an adequate number of persons experiencing homelessness meeting the
        preference have been placed on the waiting list, the PHA may choose to keep the
        waiting list open only for the population qualified for the preference (1.e., continue to
        accept applications only from applicants that qualify for the preference), while keeping
        it closed for all other applicants. This can be particularly helpful if the PHA preference
        is for referrals from partner agencies since it will allow the agencies to continue
        sending referrals when more resources are available through the PHA. HUD
        encourages PHAs to keep their websites up to date regarding whether the waiting list is
        open or closed, who may currently apply for assistance, and specific information
        regarding the application process. PHAs may also want to share waiting list news with
        CoC and other community partners.

        e) Verifying preference eligibility. As described in Section 6 above, while HUD does
        not require PHAs to collect documentation or third-party verification to verify an
        applicant’s homelessness status for the purpose of reporting on line 4c, PHAs must
        follow the verification requirements established in their written policies to verify
        homelessness status for a preference. If a PHA adopts a preference or limited

2.24 CFR § 982.206


                                                 18
        preference for people experiencing homelessness, or for a particular subset of this
        population, the PHA may require the individual or family to provide documentation
        indicating that they qualify for the preference. Alternatively, when a PHA establishes a
        partnership for referrals from a homeless service organization, they may allow the
        partnering organization to verify the individual’s or family’s preference qualification by
        providing supporting documentation before the individual or family is referred to the
        PHA.

        f) Public Housing property designations pertaining to preference. For Public
        Housing developments with an active designation by HUD for a specific population,
        this designation remains in effect despite the adoption of the new preference. For
        example, if the property is a designated elderly property, then the homeless preference
        would not supersede this designation. Any qualified applicant benefiting from the
        homeless preference would need to meet both criteria, 1.e., experiencing homelessness
        and be part of a HUD-defined elderly family by 24 CFR 5.403. PHAs are reminded that
        PBV projects are not designated for specific populations, and therefore this paragraph is
        inapplicable to PBV.

        g) Ensuring Fair Housing compliance. PHAs must ensure that any waiting list
        preference would not have the purpose or effect of excluding other eligible families
        from the program because of any characteristic protected by federal fair housing and
        civil rights laws, including, for example, the Fair Housing Act (42 U.S.C. 3601 et seq.).
        Protected characteristics under the Fair Housing Act include: race, color, national
        origin, religion, sex (including sexual orientation and gender identity), disability, or
        familial status (children under age 18, including pregnancy or seeking legal custody).
        The PHA must also ensure that the preference would not have the purpose or effect of
        creating, increasing, or perpetuating segregation. PHAs must ensure that the adoption
        of a homeless preference and the opening of the waiting list, including site-based
        waiting lists open only to homeless families and individuals that qualify for the
        preference, is done in a manner that is consistent with all fair housing and civil rights
        laws and affirmatively furthers fair housing.

        h) Residency preference. PHAs that have a residency preference as allowed under the
        regulations’ are encouraged to include in their definition of the term “residence”
        shelters, other dwelling places, and unsheltered locations where homeless people may
        be living or sleeping. PHAs may also consider the circumstances leading to a family’s
        current dwelling place when defining residency for homeless applicants. For example,
        in some communities, there may be a lack of suitable shelters in the community
        covered by the PHA’s residency preference forcing the family or individual to seek
        shelter in another community. If an applicant family or individual resides in a shelter
        located outside of the area covered by the PHA’s residency preference, the PHA may
        establish policies considering the applicant’s previous residency and circumstances.
        PHAs with a residency preference may need to change their definition of residency in
        their policies for the purpose of allowing such flexibility. The preference cannot have
        an unjustified discriminatory effect on a group of persons with certain characteristics

73.24 CFR § 960.206(b) and 24 CFR § 982.207(b)(1)


                                                    19
         protected under fair housing and civil rights laws, including race, color, national origin,
         sex (including sexual orientation and gender identity), religion, disability, or familial
         status (children under age 18, including pregnancy or seeking legal custody). See (g)
         above.

    12. Admission and Termination of Assistance Policies Regarding Criminal Activity, and
        Substance Use: Incarceration and homelessness are highly interrelated, as the
        difficulties of reintegrating into the community increase the risk of homelessness for
        returning citizens, and homelessness in turn increases the risk for subsequent re-
         incarceration.    On June 23, 2021, HUD issued a letter to PHAs, CoCs, Multifamily
         Owners, and HUD Grantees, outlining steps HUD has taken to meet the housing needs of
         returning citizens and to reduce barriers to housing among people with criminal records,
         and noting that addressing reentry housing needs also further advances equity and
         reverses systemic racism, given the racial disparities evident in the criminal justice
         system. This letter strongly encouraged PHAs to work with their Continuum of Care
         (CoC) partners to ensure that the housing needs of individuals who are at-risk of
         homelessness after leaving prisons or jails were met. On April 12, 2022, HUD issued a
         directive to its principal staff, directing all relevant HUD program offices to identify all
         existing HUD regulations, guidance documents, and other policies and sub-regulatory
         documents (including model leases and other agreements) that may pose barriers to
         housing for persons with criminal histories or their families and propose updates and
         amendments to make HUD’s programs as inclusive as possible. PHAs wishing to serve
         more people experiencing homelessness may consider amending their discretionary
         admissions policies where possible. However, PHAs must adhere to policies mandating
         prohibition of admission and termination of assistance regarding certain criminal
         activities and illegal drug use, described further in this section. PHAs are also reminded
         that the Violence Against Women Act (VAWA, 34 U.S.C. § 12471 et seg.) and HUD’s
         VAWA tule establish specific protections in regard to criminal activity related to
         domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, or stalking. For example, an applicant
         for assistance or tenant assisted under a covered housing program may not be denied
         admission to, denied assistance under, terminated from participation in, or evicted from
         the housing on the basis or as a direct result of the fact that the applicant or tenant is or
         has been a survivor of domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, or stalking, if
         the applicant or tenant otherwise qualifies for admission, assistance, participation, or
         occupancy.”

         In June 2015, HUD published PIH Notice 2015-19 to inform PHAs and owners of
         federally assisted housing that arrest records may not be the sole basis for denying
         admission, terminating assistance, or evicting tenants, to remind PHAs and owners that
         HUD does not require the adoption of “one-strike” policies, and to remind them of their
         obligation to safeguard the due process rights of applicants and tenants. In April 2016,


4 See PIH Notice 2017-08 - Section 7, which provides guidance on HUD’s 2016 VAWA rule implementing
VAWA’s housing protections. In 2022, VAWA was further amended to provide additional housing protections,
including a new prohibition against penalizing homeowners, housing applicants, or housing landlords, tenants,
residents, occupants, or guests based on their requests for assistance or based on criminal activity of which they are a
victim or otherwise not at fault.


                                                           20
        HUD’s Office of General Counsel (OGC) published Office of General Counsel Guidance
        on Application of Fair Housing Act Standards to the Use of Criminal Records by
        Providers of Housing and Real Estate-Related Transactions (2016 Guidance) to remind
        housing providers that while having a criminal record is not a protected characteristic
        under the Fair Housing Act, criminal history-based restrictions on housing opportunities
        violate the Act if the housing provider intentionally discriminates in using criminal
        history information, or, without justification, their burden falls more often on renters or
        other housing market participants of one race or national origin over another (.e.,
        discriminatory effects liability).    As described above, since 2021, HUD has issued further
        guidance and an internal directive to address how HUD and its program participants can
        meet the housing needs of returning citizens and reduce barriers to housing among people
        with criminal records. In June 2022, HUD supplemented the 2016 Guidance with a
        memorandum to its Office of Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity (FHEO) and its
        grantees (2022 Criminal Records Memo).             In the 2022 Criminal Records Memo, HUD
        reviewed the principles outlined in the 2016 Guidance and provided tips and best
        practices related to the use of criminal background screening for fair housing
        investigators and housing providers.

        a) Admissions Policies: Under federal law and HUD regulations for both the HCV and
        Public Housing programs, PHAs are required to adopt screening policies that absolutely
        prohibit admission for certain types of conduct. For other types of conduct, PHAs have
        discretion to allow admission (or prohibit admission) and may consider all relevant
        circumstances.    This discretion is limited by, and must be exercised consistent with, fair
        housing and nondiscrimination requirements.

          e    Mandatory Prohibition of Admission:            If an applicant household includes a
               member subject to the following two absolute prohibitions,” that household must be
              prohibited from admission:
                o Applicants with a household member that has ever been convicted for
                    manufacture or production of methamphetamine on the premises of federally
                    assisted housing
                o Applicants with a household member that is subject to a lifetime registration
                    requirement under a State sex offender registration program

          e    Potentially Mandatory Prohibition of Admission: Under certain circumstances,
               it may be mandatory to prohibit admissions to certain applicant households.”° For
               example, a PHA must prohibit admission to an applicant for three years from the
               date of eviction if a household member has been evicted from federally assisted
               housing for drug-related criminal activity unless the PHA determines that the
               evicted household member who engaged in such activity has successfully
               completed a supervised drug rehabilitation program approved by the PHA or the


°5 24 CFR § 982.553(a)(2)(i) and 24 CFR § 982.553(a)(1)(ii)(C) for HCV, and 24 CFR § 960.204(a)(4) and 24 CFR
§ 960.204(a)(3) for Public Housing
6 24 CFR § 982.553(a)(1)(i), 24 CFR § 982.553(a)(1)Gi)(A), 24 CFR § 982.553(a)(1)(ii)(B), and 24 CFR §
982.553(a)(3) for HCV, and 24 CFR § 960.204(a)(1), 24 CFR § 960.204(a)(2)(), 24 CFR § 960.204(a)(2)(ii), and
24 CFR § 960.204(b) for Public Housing


                                                      21
               circumstances leading to the eviction no longer exist (e.g., the household member
               that engaged in drug-related criminal activity is no longer part of the household).”’

               Additionally, PHAs are required to establish standards that prohibit admission for
               any household with a member who is currently engaged in the illegal use of a
               controlled substance or where the PHA determines it has reasonable cause to
               believe that the household member’s pattern of illegal use of a controlled substance
               or pattern of abuse of alcohol may interfere with the health, safety, or right to
               peaceful enjoyment of the premises by other residents.”®

              Discretion to Prohibit Admission: Where the HCV or Public Housing applicants’
              conduct or activities falls outside the scope of the statutorily mandated prohibitions,
              PHAs may have discretion whether to admit or deny admissions to these
              individuals. PHAs must balance the safety of the families they serve with potential
              barriers to vulnerable populations. PHAs also must ensure that they use their
              discretion in a manner that is consistent with regulations for the specific program, as
              well as fair housing and civil rights laws. For example, in a manner consistent with
              the PHA's policies, procedures and practices under the regulations for the public
              housing program at 24 CFR 960.203(d), consideration shall be given to the time,
              nature, and extent of the applicant's conduct (including the seriousness of the
              offense), and consideration may also be given to other factors which might indicate
              a reasonable probability of favorable future conduct.

              It is important for PHAs to understand the damage that denial of admission can have
              on a family and that discretionary admissions policies can be a barrier for vulnerable
              populations, including people experiencing homelessness, and can result in
              discrimination against protected classes. PHAs wishing to serve more people
              experiencing homelessness may consider reviewing their discretionary policies to
              determine what changes can be made to remove barriers. For example, to increase
              access for vulnerable populations and to avoid potential fair housing liability, PHAs
              should, in a manner consistent with the PHA's policies, procedures and practices
              under 24 CFR 960.203(b):
                    o Conduct an individualized assessment of each applicant’s case that considers
                       relevant mitigating information instead of automatically denying them based
                       on conviction history
                    o Eliminate policies that deny assistance to all individuals with past
                       evictions for any type of criminal activity
                    o Eliminate policies that deny assistance to all individuals on probation or
                       parole
                   o   For drug-related criminal activity, consider whether the household member
                       is participating in or has successfully completed a drug rehabilitation
                       program, or has otherwise been rehabilitated successfully


2724 CFR § 982.553(a)(1)(i), 24 CFR § 982.553(a)(1)(ii)(A), 24 CFR § 982.553(a)(1)(ii)(B), and 24 CFR §
982.553(a)(3) for HCV, and 24 CFR § 960.204(a)(1), 24 CFR § 960.204(a)(2)(i), 24 CFR § 960.204(a)(2)(ii), and
24 CFR § 960.204(b) for Public Housing
78 42 USC 13661(b), 24 CFR § 960.204(a)(2) (public housing), and 24 CFR § 982.553(a)(1)(ii) (HCV).


                                                       22
                   o   Ensure applicants are notified that in accordance with Section 504 of the
                       Rehabilitation Act (24 CFR Part 8), the Fair Housing Act (24 CFR Part
                       100) and the Americans with Disabilities Act (28 CFR Part 35), people
                       with disabilities may be eligible for reasonable accommodations.

                 The following best practices are also recommended to PHAs that seek to avoid
                 fair housing liability when screening applicants or tenants:
                   o Reduce the look-back period for criminal convictions considered during the
                       screening process based on when the conduct occurred and/or the type of
                       conduct
                   o   Screen only for the mandatory requirements (described above)
                   o   Eliminate “one-strike” policies for individuals with a criminal record
                   o   Limit denials related to current illegal drug use by redefining “current use”
                       to mean no more than the previous three months prior to the application
                       date.
                   o   Have a written criminal background screening policy that is compliant
                       with federal, state, and local nondiscrimination laws and made available to
                       all applicants
                   o   Avoid the use of third-party screening companies that utilize algorithms
                       that may contain racial or other prohibited bias in their design, have not
                       been shown to reliably predict risk, may produce inaccurate information
                       about the applicant, or make the decision for the housing provider (rather
                       than providing information to the housing provider to make its own
                       determination).
                   o   Before making an adverse decision related to an applicant’s or tenant’s
                       criminal involvement, provide the applicant or tenant with the criminal
                       record, indicate which specific part of the record may form the basis of an
                       adverse decision, and give the applicant or tenant the opportunity to
                       dispute the information, correct inaccurate information, the relevancy of
                       the record, and/ or explain extenuating circumstances related to that
                       record.”


        b) Program Termination and Eviction Policies: A PHA’s discretionary termination
        policies play an important role in ensuring that once homeless families are housed, they
        remain housed and can help break the cycle of homelessness that many families
        experience. Careful consideration is required while developing and enforcing
        termination policies, as termination of assistance and eviction may imminently or
        immediately lead to future episodes of homelessness and should be avoided if possible.
        PHAs may also want to look to their CoC partners and other partnering organizations to
        determine what role other service providers can play in eviction prevention, particularly
        in providing supportive services that may help prevent or address specific issues that
        may put a family at risk of termination.


°° PHAs are required to undertake these actions when proposing denial or termination per 24 CFR § 982.553(d) and
24 CFR § 960.204(c).


                                                       23
         A key consideration for PHAs when establishing and revising termination policies is to
         understand that federal law and HUD regulations provide specific instances where a PHA
         must terminate assistance or evict a family and provide the PHA with broad discretion to
         consider individual family circumstances. The termination standards for both the Public
         Housing and HCV Programs are different from the prescribed admissions standards in
         that they allow, but do not require termination for certain activities.°°            In certain
         instances, PHAs have discretion when determining whether or not to terminate program
         assistance and are allowed to consider relevant circumstances surrounding the activities.*!
         Further, HUD does not require PHAs to adopt rules that require automatic termination
         any time a household member engages in criminal activity, and having such rules may
         violate laws such as the Fair Housing Act, Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, and
         VAWA.”

         All discretionary admission and program termination policies must be applied to all
         applicants and participants broadly. In other words, a PHA may not have a certain set
         of admission/termination policies that apply specifically to a certain population, such as
         the homeless population, which are different than the admission/termination policies
         for all other applicants and participants, unless there is express legal authority to do so
         (e.g., HUD-VASH program).

         PHAs must also comply with the protections for victims/ survivors of domestic violence,
         dating violence, sexual assault, or stalking under VAWA and HUD’s VAWA rule. For
         example, 24 CFR 5.2005(c) states that an incident of actual or threatened domestic
         violence, dating violence, sexual assault, or stalking will not be construed as a serious or
         repeated violation of the lease by the victim/survivor or threatened victim of the domestic
         violence, dating violence, sexual assault, or stalking, or as good cause to terminate the
         assistance, tenancy or occupancy rights of the victim or threatened victim.                Additionally,
         24 CFR 5.2005(b) prohibits a tenant from being denied admission, evicted, or have their
         assistance terminated solely because of criminal activity relating to domestic violence,
         dating violence, sexual assault, or stalking, if they are the victim and a household
         member or guest engaged in the criminal activity.

         c) Consideration of Circumstances Regarding Admissions and
         Terminations/Evictions: PHAs should carefully consider the circumstances in which
         any conduct has occurred. For instance, defining criminal activity to focus on activities
         that pose threats to the safety and security of other residents can help ensure compliance
         with fair housing and civil rights requirements. The Public Housing regulations at 24
         CFR 960.203(a) and 24 CFR 966.4(1)(5)(vii)(B) and the HCV program regulation at 24
         CFR 982.552(c)(2) indicate that individual consideration of factors may be a basis for a
         PHA’s decision to admit or refrain from terminating assistance.               For example,        a PHA

© Sept. 24, 1999, Memorandum from Gail W. Laster, General Counsel, to William C. Apgar, Assistant Secretary of
Housing/Federal Housing Commissioner, and Harold Lucas, Assistant Secretary for Public and Indian Housing, on
“Medical use of marijuana in public housing” [Laster Memorandum]
3! HUD regulations outline the limited instances where denial of admission or termination of assistance is required
in the public housing, Housing Choice Voucher programs. See 24 CFR Part 5, subpart I; Part 960, subpart B; Part
966, subpart A; Part 982, subpart L.
32.24 CFR § 966.4(1) for Public Housing and 24 CFR § 982.55 for HCV.


                                                          24
            may establish a policy for the HCV program to consider all relevant circumstances such
            as the seriousness of the case, the extent of participation or culpability of individual
            family members, mitigating circumstances related to the disability of a family member,
            and the effects of denial or termination of assistance on other family members who were
            not involved in the action before denying admission or terminating assistance to a
            family.**

            In public housing, in the event of receipt of unfavorable information about an applicant,
            consideration must be given to the time, nature, and extent of the applicant’s conduct
            (including the seriousness of the offense).** Consideration should be given to factors
            which might indicate a reasonable probability of favorable future conduct, including
            evidence of rehabilitation, and the applicant’s willingness to participate in social
            services.*°

            The PHA may impose, as a condition of admittance or continued assistance for other
            family members, a requirement that family members who participated in or were culpable
            for the action will not reside in the unit. The PHA may permit the other members of a
            participant family to receive or continue receiving assistance, once the conditions have
            been met.*° PHAs are prohibited from denying admission or terminating assistance based
            on the fact that a family has experienced homelessness in the past or at the time of
            admission.

            In both the HCV and Public Housing Programs, in determining whether to deny
            admission or terminate assistance for illegal use of drugs or alcohol abuse by a household
            member who is no longer engaged in such behavior, the PHA should consider whether
            such household member is participating in or has successfully completed a supervised
            drug or alcohol rehabilitation program or has otherwise been rehabilitated successfully.*”

            Further, for both the HCV and Public Housing Programs, PIH Notice 2015-19 states that
            PHAs may consider all circumstances relevant to the admission or eviction decision,
            including but not limited to:
                e The seriousness of the offending action
                e The effect that eviction of the entire household would have on family members
                    not involved in the criminal activity
                e The extent to which the leaseholder has taken all steps to prevent or mitigate the
                    criminal activity.

            Before a PHA denies admission to an applicant or terminates the assistance of a
            participant based on the criminal conviction of a household member or guest, consistent
            with their policies, PHAs should conduct an individualized assessment to determine
            whether denial of admission or termination is mandatory under the circumstances, or in

33.24 CFR    § 982.552(c)(2)(i) for HCV
34.94 CFR    § 960.203(d)
35.24 CFR    § 960.203(d)
36 94 CFR    § 982.552(c)(2)(ii) for HCV and § 960.203(c)(3)(i) for Public Housing
372.4 CFR    § 960.203(d)


                                                           25
              cases where it is permissive, whether the criminal activity will threaten others’ health,
              safety, or right to peaceful enjoyment of the premises. A record of an arrest alone may
              not be the basis for a denial of admission or termination of assistance, though PHAs
              may make an adverse decision based on the conduct underlying the arrest if the conduct
              indicates that the individual is not suitable for tenancy and the PHA has sufficient
              evidence other than the arrest itself that the individual engaged in the conduct.
              Although conviction records are more reliable evidence that an individual engaged in
              certain criminal conduct, PHAs must still make a determination that a specific
              individual’s criminal conviction record will threaten the health, safety, or right to
              peaceful enjoyment of the premises using the criteria above. Additionally, a PHA may
              not deny admission or terminate assistance for this criminal activity if it directly relates
              to VAWA violence/ abuse and the tenant or certain affiliated individuals of the tenant
              is the victim/ survivor or threatened victim.®    Except in cases in which an informal
              hearing is not required*’, PHAs must give applicants or participants a hearing or review
              of the circumstances prior to any determination being made.”

              For both the HCV and Public Housing Programs, the PHA decision regarding denial of
              admission or termination of assistance is subject to reasonable accommodation
              requirements in accordance with Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, the Fair
              Housing Act, Title II of the Americans with Disabilities Act, and their implementing
              regulations at 24 CFR Part 8, 24 CFR Part 100, and 28 CFR Part 35, respectively.
              Because the PHA may not necessarily be aware of a person’s disability, all denial of
              admission and termination correspondence should include information about the right to
              request a reasonable accommodation and how to request a reasonable accommodation.
              The PHA must also provide a Notice of Occupancy Rights Under the Violence Against
              Women Act with each denial and termination.*!

              HUD encourages PHAs to review their termination and eviction policies considering
              their discretionary authority. PHAs should review these policies in light of the guidance
              provided in PIH Notice 2015-19 on the use of arrest records and protections for the due
              process rights of applicants and participants as well as HUD OGC's 2016 guidance.
              HUD recommends that PHAs work with homeless service providers to establish
              discretionary termination and eviction policies best suited to the community and to
              develop partnerships that can implement effective eviction prevention strategies. HUD
              encourages PHAs to review the 2022 Criminal Records Memo for tips and best practices
              for establishing policies that comply with fair housing and civil rights laws.

        13. Moving On Strategies:        Moving On (sometimes called Moving Up, Move Up, Move
              On, or FLOW)      enables individuals and families who are able and want to move on from
              PSH. PSH generally targets the most vulnerable individuals and families and combines
              affordable housing with intensive supportive services. PSH is not time-limited, but over
              time, some program participants reach a point where they no longer need or want


38.24   CFR    § 5.2005(b)(2)
3° 24   CFR    § 982.555(b)
0.24    CFR    § 982.555(a)
“1.24   CFR    § 5.2005(a)(2)


                                                        26
   intensive services. However, in most cases the need for financial housing assistance
   remains a prohibitive barrier to leaving PSH. Moving On helps tenants overcome these
   barriers by providing an affordable housing option and short-term services and resources
   that support program participants during and shortly after their move to a greater level of
   independence.

   PHAs play a fundamental role in Moving On, providing access to affordable housing
   through PHA programs that enable program participants to move on as tenants, which
   allows more individuals and families to access the housing options best suited for their
   situations. Moving On efforts include a broad range of options based on local context,
   needs, and resources. This frees up units and intensive services that can then be offered
   to the most vulnerable people experiencing homelessness. Moving On provides optimal
   outcomes for current PSH program participants, as well as the entire homeless system, as
   it supports growth, independence, and choice for current program participants. For more
   information, see the following resource, developed by    a HUD funded TA Provider: PHA
   Moving On How-To Guide.

14. Service Providers as a Resource in Continued Occupancy: Social service providers,
    homeless service providers, and other community programs are important resources in
    ensuring housing stability, including compliance with program and family obligations
    and other program requirements, for homeless individuals and families newly admitted to
    the program.

   Many PHAs develop either formal or informal relationships with local community
   organizations, including public and nonprofit homeless service providers as well as city
   or county departments of health and human services and mental health, to help provide
   services to people experiencing homelessness. These agencies can help families to retain
   their assistance by offering supportive services (see Section 15 of this Notice for a
   discussion of PBV and supportive services), food assistance, basic education,
   employment and vocational training, transportation assistance, financial planning, life
   skills classes, substance abuse services, mental and physical health care, and parenting
   and childcare services. PHAs may establish working relationships or consider entering
   into service agreements with the service providers to provide greater access to services
   for tenants. The PHA may consider making available an empty office space or
   community space for the service provider to offer voluntary services to the residents.

15. Project-Based Vouchers: The PBV program offers a flexible tool PHAs can use to meet
    the affordable housing needs of their local community, including providing the
    opportunity to partner with homeless service providers and other program partners to
    offer permanent affordable housing and access to supportive services to individuals and
    families who are experiencing homelessness. In particular, PHAs may use PBVs in units
    specifically made available to house individuals and families experiencing homelessness,
    pair PBV units with voluntary supportive services and establish waiting list preferences
    in the PHA Administrative Plan to ensure families experiencing homelessness are
    assisted as quickly as possible in PBV units. A PHA’s use of PBVs is subject to the PBV




                                            27
        program rules,” which include certain flexibilities that may facilitate PBV use for
        individuals and families experiencing homelessness.

            «Program Cap: PBV program requirements generally limit the number of units that
            PHAs may project-base to up to 20 percent of their Consolidated Annual
            Contributions Contract (ACC) authorized units. However, PHAs may project-base an
            additional 10 percent of their ACC authorized units above this program limit,
            provided these units fall into one of the eligible exception categories outlined in PIH_
            Notice 2017-21, Attachment D.

             a)   Units Made Available to House Individuals and Families Experiencing
                  Homelessness: An exception is made for units specifically made available to
                  house individuals and families who meet the definition of homeless under Section
                  103 of the McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act (42 U.S.C. 11302) and
                  contained in the Continuum of Care Interim Rule at 24 CFR 578.3. While all
                  PBVs may house homeless individuals and families, units contracted pursuant to
                  this program cap exception category are specifically for homeless individuals and
                  families.

             b)   Units Made Available to House Veterans:            An exception is made for units
                  specifically made available to house veterans, which could include veterans
                  experiencing homelessness.

             c)   Units Providing Supportive Services: An exception is made for units
                  specifically made available to persons with disabilities or elderly, which could
                  include persons with disabilities or elderly that were experiencing homelessness.

             d)   Units Located in a Census Tract with a Poverty Rate of 20 percent or less:
                  An exception is made for unit located in a census tract with a poverty rate of 20
                  percent or less. In addition to increasing the number of units a PHA may project-
                  base, this exception may use to increase family choice for individuals and families
                  experiencing homelessness.

             e)   Units Made Available to Foster Youth Utilizing FUP FYI Awards: An
                  exception is made for units specifically made available to foster youth eligible for
                  a FUP or FYI voucher award, which could include foster youth experiencing
                  homelessness.

            e Project Cap: The project cap for the PBV program generally provides that PHAs
            may not provide project-based assistance to more than the greater of 25 units or 25
            percent of the of units in a project as outlined in PIH Notice 2017-21, Attachment E.
            However, certain units are excepted or not subject to the cap as explained in Notice
            PIH 2017-21 Attachment E and F. These exceptions may increase access to PBVs for
            individuals and families experiencing homelessness:


42 24 CFR Part 983 and provisions implemented at 82 FR 5458 (Jan. 18, 2017), 82 FR 32461   (Jul. 14, 2017)



                                                       28
              a)   Units exclusively serving elderly families: A PHA is not limited with respect to
                   the number of units in a project it can make available to elderly families. While it
                   is not necessary that an entire project or building within the project be made
                   available for the exclusive use of elderly families, a PHA may project-base 100
                   percent of the units in such project. This may increase opportunities for elderly
                   families experiencing homelessness.

              b) Units housing households eligible for supportive services: Dwelling units
                 that are exclusively made available to “households eligible for supportive
                 services” that are made available to the assisted residents of the project are
                 excepted from the project cap.

                   To implement the exception, the PHA must include in its Administrative Plan the
                   type of services offered to families and the extent to which such services will be
                   provided. For the exception to apply to a unit, the project must make supportive
                   services available to all assisted families in the project, and the family must be
                   eligible for one or more of the services. A PHA may not require supportive
                   services as a condition of living in an excepted unit.? While the supportive
                   services do not need to be provided by the owner or onsite, services must be
                   reasonably available to the families receiving PBV assistance in the project and
                   designed to help the families in the project achieve self-sufficiency or live in the
                   community as independently as possible.

                   PBV projects that offer supportive services, including supportive services offered
                   as part of a project cap exception, are an important form of PSH that combines
                   affordable housing assistance with voluntary supportive services. PHAs and
                   owners are encouraged to offer supportive services in connection with all PBV
                   units, even where no project cap exception is used. The PHA or owner may enter
                   into an MOU or other such agreement with a homeless services provider or other
                   program partner to provide these supportive services, which may be designed to
                   assist individuals and families with building independent living and tenancy
                   skills, connect to community-based and culturally specific health care, treatment,
                   or job service, and address chronic health problems, mental illness, or trauma.

                   HUD encourages PHAs to consider how the structure of their supportive
                   services package may best support individuals and families that experienced
                   homelessness maintain their PBV tenancy. In the case of a family that chooses to
                   participate in the supportive services, as described by the PHA in the
                   Administrative Plan, and successfully completes the supportive services objective,
                   as defined by the PHA in its Administrative Plan, the unit will continue to be an
                   excepted unit under this category for as long as the family resides in the unit.


‘8 There are two exceptions to this. First, certain projects with HAP contract effective dates prior to April 18, 2017,
are subject to rules on PBVs housing families participating in supportive services. See Notice PIH 2017-21 Att. E §
6 for information. Second, PBV units using HUD-VASH vouchers are subject to requirements on participation in
case management. See 86 FR 53207 (Sept. 27, 2021) for information.


                                                           29
             c)   Units in a census tract with a poverty rate of 20 percent or less: Another
                  strategy for increasing the number of units available to individuals and families
                  experiencing homelessness is to locate units in a project within a census tract with
                  a poverty rate of 20 percent. Such units are subject to a higher (40%) cap. This
                  strategy also increases family choice.

    16. PBV Waiting List Administration and Preferences: The PHA may use a separate
        waiting list for admission to PBV units in individual projects or buildings (or for sets of
        such units), use a single waiting list for the PHA’s entire PBV program, merge the PBV
        waiting list with a waiting list for another tenant-based or project-based housing program,
        or may use the same waiting list for both tenant-based and PBV assistance.“* If the PHA
        chooses to use a separate waiting list for admission to PBV units, the PHA must offer to
        place applicants who are listed on the waiting list for tenant-based assistance on the
        waiting list for PBV in accordance with 24 CFR 983.251(c)(2).                The PHA must select
        families from the waiting list in accordance with the PHA’s Administrative Plan.

        The PHA may also adopt a different set of admissions preferences for each separate
        waiting list and may do so in consultation with the CoC and other community partners.
        The preferences offered by a PHA depend on local housing needs and may include a
        preference for housing that is intended for a particular population or for families who
        qualify for voluntary services, including disability-specific services, offered in
        conjunction with the housing. In the case of PBV units under a project cap exception,
        PHAs must give preference to families qualifying for the units. Assisted families who
        receive housing because of a preference for families who qualify for services can receive
        voluntary services from a service provider of their choosing or choose not to participate
        in services at all.*°

        A PHA that wishes to partner with a homeless service provider to project-base vouchers
        may consider creating a separate waiting list for the project and may offer a preference
        for individuals or families who are homeless, individuals or families who qualify for
        voluntary services, including disability-related services, offered in conjunction with
         assisted units at the project, or individuals or families referred through the local CE
        System. Any such preference must be consistent with the PHA plan and all applicable
        Federal nondiscrimination and civil rights statutes and requirements.

    17. Paperwork Reduction Act:            The information collection requirements contained in this
        document have been submitted to the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) under
        the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995 (44 U.S.C. 3501-3520) and assigned OMB control
        number 2577-0083. In accordance with the Paperwork Reduction Act, HUD may not
        conduct or sponsor, and a person is not required to respond to, a collection of information
        unless the collection displays a currently valid OMB control number.



“4 24 CER § 983.251(c)(2)-(4)
45 See 82 FR 5458, 5469-5471 (Jan. 18, 2017) for information on preferences for families who qualify for voluntary
services and PIH Notice 2017-21 Appx. II for information on PBV preferences generally.


                                                        30
18. Information Contact: Inquiries about this Notice should be directed to
   publichousingpolicyquestions @hud.gov for Public Housing, vouchernotice    @hud.gov for
   Housing Choice Vouchers, and SNAPSinfo@hud.gov for CPD.




    Richard J. Monocchio                            Claudette Fernandez
    Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary            General Deputy Assistant Secretary
    For Public and Indian Housing                   For Community Planning and
                                                    Development




                                           31
