WATER PROJECT
  GRANTS AND
     LOANS

                        New center:pivot in Wallowa County




 SCORING
 CRITERIA

 OCTOBER 2025


                                  Piping in Deschutes County




 OREGON



 >>—
 WATER RESOURCES
 DEPARTMENT
                   >                                   4
                   Ingtreafa water transfer in Klamath County
TABLE OF CONTENTS

Document Purpose




                                                          WW
Overview of Application Scoring




                                                          W
Application Review Process




                                                          SF
Scoring Scale Used in Evaluation of Public Benefits




                                                          U
Public Benefit Questions and Application Tips




                                                          Dn
  Category 1. Economic benefits




                                                          n
  Category 2. Environmental benefits




                                                          oO
  Category 3. Social or Cultural benefits                12
Preference Points and Total Points Available             15




                                            Questions?
  Please contact us at:

  OWRD.Grants@water.oregon.gov
  (503) 979-9160
  Visit: owrd.info/wpgl




October 2025
Document         Purpose

The scoring criteria for applications to the Water Projects Grants and Loans funding opportunity is based
solely on the public benefits a project is likely to achieve. This document provides an overview of each
public benefit category, describes how the Technical Review Team (TRT) evaluates and scores public
benefits, and provides recommendations for the type of information applicants should include in their
application.


Overview of Application Scoring
Projects selected for funding are those most likely to
achieve significant public benefits. Applicants must
clearly describe and explain the anticipated changes in
                                                                                     Environmental
conditions that will result in public benefits as part of their
project application.

The TRT evaluates public benefits in three categories:
economic, environmental, and social/cultural.                             Social/                Economic
                                                                          Cultural

To be eligible for funding, a project must receive a
minimum score of five in each of these three
categories. However, because this is a competitive
funding opportunity with limited resources, meeting the minimum score does not guarantee funding.
Projects are ranked based on the overall strength of their public benefits.

When describing public benefits, applicants should:
    e    Provide aclear comparison of conditions before and after project implementation.
    e    Demonstrate the extent to which the project is expected to improve those conditions and provide
        a public benefit.
    e   Quantify public benefits and provide supporting evidence whenever possible.

The TRT will consider public benefits that are directly tied to the tasks and project scope outlined in the
application, and the likelihood of achieving those benefits.

Speculative public benefits associated with future phases, unrelated activities, or past work will not be
scored and should not be included in the application.

Each of the three categories contains six specific public benefit criteria, for a total of 18 possible public
benefits. Projects are not required to address all six benefits within a category, but they must
demonstrate at least one benefit in each category to be eligible. All three categories are weighted equally
in the evaluation process.

It is neither expected nor likely that any single project will address all 18 public benefit criteria.




October 2025                                                                                                    3
Application Review Process


                                             Application

  1      Applicants submit Water Project Grants and Loan (WPGL) application by due date.
         OWRD reviews applications for completeness and eligibility. OWRD      notifies
         applicants of completeness and eligibility determination.

                             Public Comment     Period on Applications

  2      OWRD posts complete applications on the WPGL website for a 30-day public
         comment period and contacts affected Tribes.


                                       Application Evaluation

         A multi-agency Technical Review Team (TRT) evaluates the applications based on
         the economic, environmental, and social/cultural public benefits the project
         would achieve and reviews the public comments received.
         The TRT meets to discuss and score applications and determines a project ranking
         and funding recommendation.

                     Public Comment     Period on Funding Recommendations

   {     OWRD posts the TRT funding recommendations on the WPGL website for a public
         comment period.
         Final public comment is accepted at the Water Resources Commission meeting
         before funding decisions.

                                          Funding Decision

         OWRD   staff present the TRT funding recommendation, and any public comments
         received to the Water Resources Commission for a funding decision.
  5      When making a funding decision, the Water Resources Commission
         (Commission) considers:
             1) the public benefits as evaluated by the TRT;
             2) public comments received on the TRT ranking; and
             3) funding projects of diverse sizes, types and geographic locations.

                                           Funding Awards

  5      OWRD   enters into grant agreements with award recipients.




October 2025
Scoring Scale Used in Evaluation of Public Benefits

Each of the public benefits will be scored according to the scale described below.

 Exceptional public benefit: 10 points

   e   The project is likely to achieve benefits of an exceptionally high standard or quality.
   e   The outcomes are very significant, measurable, and represent a Key or critical
       advancement.
   e   The application includes supporting information and evidence describing the anticipated
       change in conditions as a result of the project.
   e   The application includes all necessary information to document a high likelihood of
       success to achieve the public benefit.

 High public benefit: 5 points

   e   The project is likely to achieve public benefits meeting a high standard of quality.
   e   The outcomes are significant or represent an important advancement.
   e   The application includes supporting information and evidence describing the anticipated
       change in conditions as a result of the project.
   e   The application includes sufficient information to achieve the anticipated public benefit.

 Medium    public benefit: 3 points

   e   The project is likely to achieve moderate public benefit.
   e   The outcomes are likely to achieve an improvement in conditions.
   e   The application includes supporting information and evidence describing the anticipated
       change in conditions as a result of the project.

 Minor public benefit: 1 point

   e   The project may achieve minor public benefits.

 No benefit: 0 points

   e   The project is not likely to achieve a public benefit.
   e   Theclaims of public benefits are unsupported.
   e   No positive or negative impact related to the public benefit. No change.

 Minor negative impact or detriment: -1 point

   e   The project may have a minor negative effect or impact to this category.

 Medium    negative impact or detriment: -3 points

   e   The project is likely to cause moderate harm and have a negative impact to this category.




October 2025                                                                                        5
Public Benefit Questions and Application Tips

Category 1. Economic benefits

The evaluation of economic benefits of a project is based on the change in economic conditions expected
to result from the project as demonstrated in the application.


1a. Does the project create or retain jobs?

Job creation means the project would result in new jobs. Retention means the project would prevent the
loss of jobs. Job creation and retention benefits may include direct effects within the organization that
owns or operates the project, or it may include indirect effects on retail customers or consumers of the
project.    Temporary     jobs   resulting from the project will not receive as high of a score as permanent jobs.

Application tip: Quantify the number and identify the type of jobs to be created or retained as a result of
the project. Describe the value of the increase or retention of jobs to the local economy.

                                      Exceptional increases in the creation or retention of permanent jobs
     Exceptional: 10 pts              which provide key or critical benefit in the geographic area or employment
                                      sector
                                      Increases in the creation or retention of permanent
                                                                                       jobs which provide an
            High: 5 pts               important benefit in the geographic area or employment sector
           Medium: 3 pts              Moderate    increase in the creation or retention of permanent jobs, or
                                      seasonal   jobs important to the geographic area or employment sector
            Minor: 1 pt               Minor increase in jobs,    temporary   jobs,   or job retention.
                                      The project is not likely to achieve new jobs      or impact   job retention OR
       No benefit: 0 pts
                                      benefit claims are unsupported
    Minor detriment: -1 pt            Potential for   minor job losses
 Medium detriment: -3 pts             Moderate job losses or a decrease in jobs is likely


1b. Does the project increase economic activity?

Economic activity is associated with the production, distribution, and consumption of goods and
services. Such economic activity could occur within one or more entities/businesses and includes an
increase in production, gross sales, or net revenue compared to the year preceding project completion.                  It
also includes but is not limited to the arrival of new firms, renewed contracts, and increased orders.


Application tip: /nclude information citing economic development plans or other economic activity
which would be made possible or supported by the proposed project. If the proposed project protects or
maintains current economic activity, demonstrate the degree to which economic activity would decline if
the proposed project were not completed and why.


                                      Exceptional (five or more years) increase in long-term economic activity of
     Exceptional: 10 pts
                                      vital, or key importance are likely to occur
                                      Increases in long-term economic activity with the potential to support
            High: 5 pts                          ee
               b    P                 future activity important to the area/sector
           Medium: 3 pts              Moderate (one to four years) increase in economic activity
            Minor: 1 pt               Minor, short-term (less than one year) increase in economic activity
October 2025
                                  Increased economic activity not likely to occur, OR benefit claims are
      No benefit: 0 pts
                                  unsupported
   Minor detriment: -1 pt           Potential for minor losses or decreases in economic activity
 Medium detriment: -3 pts        | Moderate losses or decreases in economic activity are likely


1c. Does the project result in increases in efficiency or innovation?

Increase in efficiency means the project would make improvements in performance or functionality
resulting in less effort or waste. Increase in innovation means that new, creative solutions and ideas
would be implemented. Examples of increases in efficiency and innovation include water system
efficiencies such as system redundancy (back-up, inter-ties), eliminating leakage, innovative production
techniques, energy savings (e.g., the energy required to move, treat, or heat water), and time savings.


     Exceptional: 10 pts          Exceptional increase in efficiency and innovation
           High: 5 pts            High Increases in efficiency or innovation
       Medium: 3 pts              Moderate increases in performance
           Minor: 1 pt            Minor   increases
                                  Increased efficiency or innovation not likely OR benefit claims are
      No benefit: 0 pts
                                  unsupported
   Minor detriment: -1 pt         Potential for minor decreases in efficiency or innovation
 Medium detriment: -3 pts        | Moderate decreases in efficiency or innovation are likely


1d. Does the project result in enhancement of infrastructure, farmland, public
resource lands, industrial lands, commercial lands or lands having other key uses?

Enhancement of infrastructure, including municipal infrastructure, farmland, public resource lands,
industrial lands, commercial lands and other lands means that the value, effectiveness, or reliability of
such infrastructure or lands would increase as a result of project implementation. This includes an
increase in the re-sale or rental value of the land or improvements, including: maintained, repaired, or
upgraded infrastructure; maintained or buffered riparian areas; and maintained or improved soils.

    Exceptional: 10 pts          Exceptional enhancements of infrastructure or land
           High: 5 pts           High quality of enhancements to infrastructure or land
       Medium: 3 pts             Moderate enhancements
           Minor: 1 pt           Minor enhancements
      No benefit: 0 pts          Enhancements not likely, OR benefit claims are unsupported
                                  Potential that infrastructure or lands will be degraded or removed from
   Minor   detriment:    -1 pt            .           .          .
                                 productive uses (minor negative change)
   Medium detriment: -3          Infrastructure or lands that are degraded or removed from productive uses
               pts               (moderate negative change)


1e. Does the project result in enhancement of the economic value associated with:
tourism, recreation, fishing (recreational or commercial), fisheries involving native
fish of cultural significance to Indian tribes, or other economic values resulting from
restoring or protecting water instream?


October 2025                                                                                                 7
Examples of enhancement of these economic values include increases in: daily park fees, tour guide
revenues, boat or gear rentals, fishing licenses, or hospitality and lodging.


                               Exceptional increased value of tourism, recreation, fishing, fisheries
                               involving native fish of cultural significance to Indian tribes, or other
     Exceptional: 10 pts                                                               ;          ;
                               economic values resulting from restoring or protecting water instream are
                               likely
         High: 5 pts           A high quality of increased value is likely
       Medium: 3 pts           Moderate increased value
         Minor: 1 pt           Minor increased value
      No benefit: 0 pts        Enhanced values not likely, OR benefit claims are unsupported
                               Potential for minor decreases in the economic value of tourism,
                               recreation, fishing, fisheries involving native fish of cultural significance to
   Minor detriment: -1 pt
                               Indian tribes, or other economic values resulting from restoring or
                               protecting water instream
                               Moderate decreases in the economic value of tourism, recreation, fishing,
                               fisheries involving native fish of cultural significance to Indian tribes, or
 Medium detriment: -3 pts
                               other economic values resulting from restoring or protecting water
                               instream


1f. Does the project result in increases in irrigated land for agriculture? (which may
include increasing irrigated acres, agricultural economic value, or productivity of
irrigated land)

Increases in irrigated land for agriculture mean that the numbers of acres (acreage) to be irrigated after
project completion would be greater than what could previously be irrigated, or that the agricultural
economic value or productivity of current irrigated land would increase. Acreage can include lands that
were never historically in production or lands that were historically in production but were taken out of
production as a result of insufficient water supply.


Application tip: Highlight the amount of land currently in production in the area, identify the quantity of
additional acreage to be irrigated, and calculate the percentage increase in irrigated acreage that would
result from the project. Cite scientific articles, reports, or studies and estimate the percentage increase in
irrigated crop’s economic value or productivity.


                               Exceptional increase in irrigated acreage, or agricultural economic value
     Exceptional: 10 pts
                               or productivity
                               High increase in irrigated acreage, or agricultural economic value or
         High: 5 pts
                               productivity
            ;                  Moderate increase in irrigated acreage or agricultural economic value or
       Medium: 3 pts                    .
                               productivity
         Minor: 1 pt           Minor   increase
                               Increased irrigated land or increased value or productivity not likely, OR
      No benefit: 0 pts
                               benefit claims are unsupported
                               Potential for minor decreases in agricultural economic value or
   Minor detriment: -1 pt
                               productivity or irrigated land for agriculture



October 2025                                                                                                      8
                               Moderate decreases irrigated land for agriculture or agricultural economic
 Medium detriment: -3 pts      value, or productivity are likely

Category 2. Environmental benefits

The evaluation of the environmental benefits of a project is based on the change in environmental
conditions expected to result from the project as demonstrated in the application.


2a. Does the project result in measurable improvements in protected streamflows?

Protected streamflow means water that remains in or is released into the natural channel and is legally
protected by the State in order to achieve one or more of the following:
    (A) Supports the natural hydrograph;
    (B) Improves floodplain function;
    (C) Supports state- or federally-listed sensitive, threatened or endangered fish species;
    (D) Supports native fish species of cultural importance to Indian tribes; or
    (E) Supports riparian habitat important for wildlife.


Application tip: To score in this category an application must describe the legal means by which water
would be protected by the State, as well as the quality, timing, duration, or other value this streamflow
would contribute. The application must also describe how the legally protected water will achieve (A)
through (E) listed above (e.g., how water transferred instream through the Allocation of Conserved Water
will support, enhance, or improve riparian habitat for wildlife and the extent to which that water will
achieve that benefit).

Identifying which water rights will be protected instream will provide clarifying information for the
evaluation.


                               Project water (or equivalent volume) is legally protected instream by the
     Exceptional: 10 pts       State and streamflow supports exceptional achievement in each criteria (A)
                               through (E)
                               Project water (or equivalent volume) is legally protected instream by the
           High: 5 pts         State and streamflow supports achievements of a high quality ina
                               combination of criteria (A) through (E)
                               Project water (or equivalent volume) is legally protected instream by the
          Medium: 3 pts        State and streamflow supports moderate achievement in a combination of
                               (A) through (E)
                               Project water (or equivalent volume) is legally protected instream by the
           Minor: 1 pt         State and streamflow supports minor achievement in a combination of (A)
                               through (E)
                               Improvements in protected streamflow unlikely, OR streamflow would not
      N            fit: O pt
          0 benefit: 0 pts     be legally protected by the State, OR benefit claims are unsupported
   Minor detriment: -1 pt      Potential minor decreases to protected streamflow
                            Moderate decreases protected streamflow (e.g., proposes to reverse an
 Medium detriment: -3 pts | .
                            instream lease)




October 2025                                                                                                9
2b. Does the project result in water conservation?

Water conservation is reducing water use to achieve the same outcomes by modifying the technology or
method of diverting, transporting, applying, or recovering water.

Application tip: /dentify the quantity of water reduction, by comparing what water would be needed to
accomplish the task after project completion with what was previously used to achieve the same task.


     Exceptional: 10 pts      40 percent or more reduction in water use to achieve the same outcomes
         High: 5 pts          21-40 percent reduction in water use to achieve the same outcomes
       Medium: 3 pts          11-20 percent reduction
         Minor: 1 pt          Minor (<10 percent) reduction
      No benefit: 0 pts       Water conservation not likely, OR claims are unsupported
                              Potential for additional water used to achieve the same outcomes (é.g.,
   Minor detriment: -1 pt
                              sacrificing water efficiency for energy/pumping efficiency)
                              Additional water used to achieve the same outcomes (e.g., sacrificing
 Medium detriment: -3 pts
                              water efficiency for energy/pumping efficiency)


2c. Does the project result in measurable improvement in groundwater levels that
enhance environmental conditions in groundwater restricted areas or other areas?

Measurable improvement in groundwater levels mean that groundwater declines would be reduced or
eliminated and/or groundwater levels would increase. Stabilization or improvement in groundwater levels
could come from aquifer storage and recovery, artificial recharge projects, natural recharge, or
discontinued / reduced groundwater use.

Application tip: Cite and use quantitative measurements to indicate current levels, and method and
frequency that improvements would be measured. If applicable, indicate if these improvements would
occur in a groundwater restricted area.


     Exceptional: 10 pts      Exceptional improvement in groundwater levels
         High: 5 pts          High quality of improvement
       Medium: 3 pts          Moderate improvement
         Minor: 1 pt          Minor improvement to groundwater levels
                              Improved groundwater levels not likely, OR benefit claims are
      No benefit: 0 pts
                              unsupported
   Minor detriment: -1 pt     Potential for minor groundwater declines
 Medium detriment: -3 pts     Moderate groundwater declines are likely


2d. Does the project result in measurable improvement in the quality of surface
water or groundwater?

Water quality parameters include but are not limited to: temperature, dissolved oxygen, contaminated
sediments, toxic substances, bacteria, or nutrients. Improvements could result from a higher quality of
water discharged to surface water or injected into groundwater, from increased flow, from treatment or
filtration of water already in the environment, or removal of a Known contaminant.


October 2025                                                                                              10
Application tip: Any improvement must be measurable or quantifiable. One must be able to measure or
determine the change in quality before and after project implementation. Cite and use currently available
baseline water quality data. Include a water quality monitoring proposal for the post project completion
period.

     Exceptional: 10 pts       Exceptional, measurable improvement in water quality
         High: 5 pts           High quality of measurable improvement
       Medium: 3 pts           Moderate, measurable improvement
         Minor: 1 pt           Minor improvement
      No benefit: 0 pts        Improved water quality not likely, OR benefit claims are unsupported
   Minor detriment: -1 pt      Potential minor negative impacts to water quality
 Medium detriment: -3 pts    | Moderate negative impacts to water quality are likely


2e. Does the project increase ecosystem resiliency to climate change impacts?

Ecosystem resiliency to climate change means increasing the ecosystems ability to adapt to changes in
climate or positively respond to the impacts of climate change. This includes: increasing streamflow
during critical months, increasing natural storage (e.g., wetlands, upland meadows), decreasing water
temperature during critical months, protecting or enhancing cold-water habitat, restoring floodplain
connectivity and backwater habitats, restoring stream buffers, decreasing coastal erosion and
inundation, or decreasing risk of drought, fire occurrence (not fire response), plant disease, or invasive
species outbreak. This public benefit is centered on ecosystem resilience, not community resilience.
Improvements to a community’s resilience to climate change should be addressed in the social/cultural
benefit category.

                               Exceptional improvements in multiple areas in ecosystem resiliency to
     Exceptional: 10 pts       climate change
         High: 5 pts           High quality improvements in ecosystem     resiliency to climate change
       Medium: 3 pts           Moderate improvements
         Minor: 1 pt           Minor improvements
                               Improvements in ecosystem resiliency to climate change not likely, OR
      No benefit: 0 pts        benefit claims are unsupported
   Minor detriment: -1 pt      Minor decreases in ecosystem resiliency to climate change may occur
                               Moderate decreases in ecosystem resiliency to climate change are
 Medium detriment: -3 pts
                               expected


2f. Does the project result in improvements that address one or more limiting
ecological factors in the project watershed?

A limiting ecological factor is an environmental condition that limits the growth, abundance, or
distribution of an organism or a population of organisms in the project watershed. Cite the limiting
ecological factor(s) in your application and how the project may result in improvements.

Examples of limiting factors may include, but are not limited to, barriers to fish passage, lack of high
quality habitat for sensitive, threatened and endangered species, low water quality, or low streamflow.




October 2025                                                                                                 11
Application tip: To score in this category an application must include   citation of public reports, peer
reviewed scientific studies, or other substantiating documentation from a state or federal agency to verify
the limiting ecological factor’s presence in the watershed.


                               Exceptional progress towards removing limiting ecological factors or
     Exceptional: 10 pts
                               making improvements which address multiple limiting ecological factors
                               Important progress making improvements of a high quality which address
         High: 5 pts           limiting ecological factors
       Medium: 3 pts           Moderate progress which address some limiting ecological factors
         Minor: 1 pt           Minor progress which address some limiting ecological factors
                               Not likely to address limiting ecological factors in the project watershed,
      No benefit: 0 pts        OR documentation verifying limiting ecological factor not included, OR
                               benefit claims are unsupported
                               Potential minor worsening of some    limiting ecological factors in the
   Minor detriment: -1 pt
                               project watershed
 Medium detriment: -3 pts      Exacerbates limiting ecological factors in the project watershed


Category 3. Social or Cultural benefits

The evaluation of the social/cultural benefits of a project is based on the change in social or cultural
conditions expected to result from the project as demonstrated in the application.


3a. Does the project promote public health, public safety, and local food systems?

This public benefit includes: protection of drinking water sources, repair of septic systems/field,
maintenance and repair of other water infrastructure, treatment and protection of drinking water itself,
improved emergency response and advisory systems (e.g., WARN network, fish consumption advisories,
water contact advisories, etc.), improved or protected water quality for human consumption and human
contact (e.g., removal or prevention of toxics, contaminants of concern, bacteria), and the promotion of
self-reliant and resilient food networks that connect food producers and food consumers in the same
geographic region.


                               Exceptional promotion of public health, public safety or local food
     Exceptional: 10 pts       systems vital to the community
                               High quality of promotion of public health, public safety or local food
         High: 5 pts           systems

       Medium: 3 pts           Moderate promotion
         Minor: 1 pt           Minor promotion of public health, public safety or local food systems
                               Promotion of public health, public safety or local food systems not likely,
      No benefit: 0 pts
                               OR benefit claims are unsupported
                               Potential for minor negative impact to public health, public safety, or local
   Minor detriment: -1 pt
                               food systems
 Medium detriment: -3 pts      Degrades public health, public safety or local food systems


3b. Does the project result in measurable improvements in conditions for Oregon’s
environmental justice communities (e.g., minority or low-income communities,

October 2025                                                                                                 12
economically distressed rural communities, tribal communities, or other
communities traditionally underrepresented in public processes)?

Environmental justice communities in Oregon are minority or low-income communities, economically
distressed rural communities, tribal communities, or other communities traditionally underrepresented
in public processes. Engagement could include outreach efforts to listen and involve environmental
justice communities, solicit feedback on conditions in need of improvement, or communicate project
description and anticipated outcomes.

Application tip: /dentify which of those communities would benefit from the project and quantify these
benefits. Demonstrate that project-siting decisions have been examined and approved by affected
landowners and affected environmental justice communities.


                              Exceptional measurable improvements in conditions for environmental
     Exceptional: 10 pts      justice communities, and environmental justice communities were
                              engaged in the process of developing projects
                               Improvements are of a high quality and environmental justice
         High: 5 pts           communities were consulted or provided meaningful opportunity to
                               engage
                              Moderate improvements and environmental        justice communities were
       Medium: 3 pts          provided meaningful opportunity to engage
         Minor: 1 pt          Minor improvements
      No benefit: 0 pts        Improved conditions not likely, OR benefit claims are unsupported
                               Likely to result in minor detriment in conditions for environmental    justice
   Minor detriment: -1 pt                wy:
                               communities
 Medium detriment: -3 pts    | Worse conditions for environmental    justice communities are likely


3c. Does the project promote recreation and scenic values?

Recreation and scenic values include recreational fishing, motorized boating, non-motorized boating,
and other forms of water-based recreation, swimming, fishing, hunting, wildlife viewing, sightseeing,
hiking, photography, and aesthetic values. To promote those values means the project would improve
the quality of or access to the examples identified.

Application tip: Evidence to support this benefit can be provided in the form of qualitative information,
which may include interviews, professional opinion, or surveys.


            ;                  Exceptional   promotion of recreation or scenic values, improving access
     Exceptional: 10 pts            P   .  P                                              P     6
                               and quality
         High: 5 pts          High quality of promotion, improving access and quality
       Medium: 3 pts          Moderate promotion, improving access or quality
         Minor: 1 pt          Minor promotion
                ;              Benefit to recreation and scenic values not likely, OR benefit claims are
      No benefit: 0 pts
                               unsupported
   Minor detriment: -1 pt      Potential to detract from recreation and scenic values (minor detraction)
 Medium detriment: -3 pts    | Moderate detractions from recreation and scenic values



October 2025                                                                                                    13
3d. Does this project contribute to the body of scientific data publicly available in
this state?

Contributing to the body of scientific data means collecting new scientific information and making it
available to the public. For example, data could be collected from water quality or habitat monitoring;
groundwater studies or other investigations; new stream gages; or new monitoring wells. Contributions
could also come from conducting a Seasonally Varying Flow analysis. Collection of scientific data is not
sufficient to achieve this public benefit---the data must be made publicly available.

Application tip: Describe the equipment and/or methods that would be used and whether the data
would be made available to the public. Note how this data supplies new information of particular
significance to the project area.


                                      Exceptional contributions of new data to the body of scientific data
     E xceptitional: l: 1010 pts
                               pt     public‘ ly avail: able iin the state
           High: 5 pts                High quality of data contributions
        Medium: 3 pts                 Moderate contributions
           Minor: 1 pt                Minor contributions
                                      Contributions are unlikely or would occur regardless of the project, OR
       No benefit: 0 pts
                                      benefit claims are unsupported
    Minor detriment: -1 pt            Not applicable
  Medium detriment: -3 pts          | Not applicable


3e. Does this project promote state or local priorities, including but not limited to
the restoration and protection of native fish species of cultural significance to
Indian tribes?

A state or local priority is one that is identified in a plan, strategy, or study such as Oregon’s Integrated
Water Resources Strategy, a place-based integrated water resources plan, the Oregon Plan for Salmon
and Watersheds, state and local water quality plans, species and habitat conservation or recovery
plans/strategies, forestry plans, regional solutions priorities, local economic development plans, state or
local hazard mitigation plans, etc. The Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife maintains a list of native
fish species: http://www.dfw.state.or.us/fish/crp/freshwater.asp.


     Exceptional: 10 pts             Exceptional role supporting a state and local priority
          High: 5 pts                High quality role in supporting a state or local priority
        Medium: 3 pts                Moderate role
          Minor: 1 pt                Minor role
      No benefit: 0 pts              No promotion of state or local priorities, OR benefit claims are
                                     unsupported
   Minor detriment: -1 pt            May be counter to state or local priorities
 Medium detriment: -3 pts           | Runs counter to state or local priorities


3f. Does this project promote collaborative basin planning efforts, including but not
limited to efforts under Oregon’s Integrated Water Resources Strategy?


October 2025                                                                                                    14
Collaborative basin planning efforts incorporate public processes that are transparent and inclusive of
diverse interests.

Application tip: Demonstration of a collaborative planning effort may include publicly noticed meetings,
posting agendas and decisions so they were publicly available, the inclusion of multiple types of water
users represented in the process (e.g., instream interests, agricultural, municipal, domestic and
industrial users), evidence that the project is supported by the community, and evidence that the projec t
was identified in a Place-Based Integrated Water Resources Plan or another collaboratively developed
strategic plan.


                                Project was identified in a collaboratively developed plan that is
        Exceptional: 10 pts     supported by all basin interests and where the public had meaningful
                                opportunities to engage
                                Project was identified by a collaborative group that includes
            High: 5 pts         representation of multiple interests, where the public had meaningful
                                opportunities to provide input
          Medium: 3 pts         The project promotes the goals of a collaborative basin planning effort
            Minor: 1 pt          An effort was made to engage and elicit input from the public
         No benefit: 0 pts      No change/impact, OR benefit claims are unsupported
                                Stakeholders with differing perspectives and/or the public (as
   Minor detriment: -1 pt       appropriate) were not consulted about the project and did not have
                                opportunities to provide input

 Medi       triment: -3 -3 Ptspt | Stakeholders
   edium detriment:
                                                   with differing perspectives and/or the public (as
                                   appropria; te) were excluded during project development

Preference           Points and Total Points Available

A proposed project can receive up to 20 additional preference points. These points are not added to the
public benefit category (economic, environmental, social/cultural) but are listed as “Other” in the
evaluation summaries.


    e     For projects that propose to legally protect water instream, the score from question 2a will be
          doubled, for up to 10 additional points.


    e     For projects that include partnerships and collaboration, the score from question 3f will be
          doubled, for up to 10 additional points.

An application could score up to 60 points in each of the economic, environmental, and social/cultural
public benefit categories. With the addition of the 20 preference points, there is a maximum           public
benefit score of 200 points.



 Economic Public Benefits                              5                                    60
 Environmental Public Benefits                         5                                    60
 Social/Cultural Public Benefits                       5                                    60
 Preference Points                                    N/A                                   20
 TOTAL                                                N/A                                   200


October 2025                                                                                                    15
