                                                                                                                                HOUSING CHOICE VOUCHER
                                                                                                                                    PROGRAM GUIDEBOOK




 Eligibility Determination and
 Denial of Assistance
Contents
TL.         Chapter OVErVIOW ..........cccceceeceeceeeeeeeeceeceeceeseesensesaesansausaaasaassasssseseeseeseeeeeeeeesessessesseseaseeaesaesaasassssesssesseees 3

2. Overview of Eligibility Factors and Requirements at AAMISSION ............:::::s::sesseessessseseeeeeeeeeeneeeeeeeeeeeess 3

      2.1       — Eligibility Factors for AAMISSION.........ccccccccccceceeeessseseeeeeeeeeeceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseseeeeaananseeeseeseeseeeseeeeeesesseaes 3

      2.2          Screening and Other Requirements at AAMISSION ........ccccccceeeeeeeecessessesseeeeeeeeeseeeeeeneeeeseeesseseses 4

3. Family Eligibility REQUIFEMENTS ..........c.cccceeceeceeceeeeeeeeeeeeesesesseeeeeeseeeeeeeeeeeeeeseseeseseseegeanseeseeeseeeeeneeseeessssseaes 4

A. INCOME LIN IS..                ee ee cence cece cece ee eee eee ee eee eee eee eee ee eee eee ee eee eee eee eae aee ea eee eee eaaaee eee eae ae enna eee ee eae eee eae ene eeaeeeeeeaeeees 5

      A.1          INCOME Targeting .......cccccccceceseesseeeeeeeeeeeseeseeeeeeeeceseeeseseeaneeeeeeeseeseeeseseeeeesseseeaeeanseeseeeeeseeeeeseeeseessses 6

      A.2          Applying INCOME LIMItS .............cccceeeeseee eee eeeeeeeeeeeeeesseeseeaeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeesessegsseseeaeeaeseeeseeeeeeseseeeseesesees 7

5. Restrictions On Student ELQibility .......                                ce eecceecescsssesseseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseseeseseseeaaeaeseeeeeeseeeeeeeeeesessssesssenseeeses f

      5.1       — Prohibition on Assistance to NONCitiZeNn StuCent .........eecceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee
                                                                                     eee eeseeeeeeeeaaeeeeeeeeaeeeeeeaes 8

6. Student INCOME ELIiDILity .......... cesses                                 eee eeeeeeceeeeesseseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseseeeeseseeaueaneeeeseeseeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeseessanseeenees 8

1. CIRIZENSNIP StAtUS ......ccccccceeceeceeceeceeceecesaeeasesssssssssesseeseeseeseeeeeneeesenseeceesesceaeeacesaesausausaassasssesseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeensees 9

      7.1          Documentation of Citizenship or IMMiIgration StatuS...........cccccsesseeeseceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeessssssssseeeeeeees 10

      7.2      ~~ Verification of Eligible IMMigration Status .......cccecceceeeeceessssesesseeeeeeeeeseeeeeeeeseessssseseeeneeeenees 11

      7.3          Prorating Assistance for Mixed Famili€S .........cccccccccceecceccecesssesssseeeeenseeeeeeseeeeeeeeseeessssessneseeeeees 12

      7.4          Delay, Denial, or Termination Of ASSISTANCE............::::2::s::ss:ssseeeeeceeeeeeeeeeeceeseeseeseeseeseeseaeesaesaees 13

8. Compliance with Verification REQUIFEMENHS ........ccccccccscsssssssssssssssssssssssssssesseeseeeceeeeeeeeeeseseesseeseesesaesaees 14

9. Disclosure of Social SeCurity NUMDESS .......ccccceesesseseeseeeeeeceeeeeeeeeeesessseseeeeanseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeesesessssesesensensnees 14

      9.1          SSN Disclosure Requirements for Applicant Famili@s ..............::::sssssssssssssseeseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeess 14

      9.2       SSN Disclosure Requirements for New Household Members Added to a Participant
      (O10s\—1 010) (6 eee                                                         eee                                                                                                        15

      9.3          Acceptable DOCUMENTATION ...0...........cceceeceeeeeeeeeeneeeeeeceeceeceeceeseneeeaesaeeauaaassseseseeseeseeeeeeeeeeneeeeeess 16


Eligibility Determination and Denial of Assistance
November 2019
                                                                                                                        HOUSING CHOICE VOUCHER
                                                                                                                            PROGRAM GUIDEBOOK

1O. BaCkSroUNd SCrECNING........ccccccccccceceseseseeeeeneeneeeeceeseeeseeeeeeseseseeeueanseeeseeseeseeeseseeeesesesenansanseeeseeeeeesenees 16

      10.1       Criminal Background SCreeCning.........ccccccccccceeceeeeeceseeseseseeceeaeeeeeseeseeeeeeeeeeesseseseeeeeanseeseeeseeenenees 16

      10.2       Additional PHA Discretionary AdAMiSSION CYit€sia ...........ccccccescseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeessseseeeeeanseeeseeseeeeeeees 18

11.        EIV System Searches at ACMISSION .........c:cccccccceceeceeeeeceeeeseseseeeeeaneeeeseeseeseeeseeeseseeseseseeaneansnseseeeeeesenees 19

      11.1       Existing Tenant Search and Avoiding Duplicate SUDSIGY.........cccccccececeecessssseesesereeseeeeeeeeeeeeeees 19

      11.2       HUD-52675 Debts Owed to PHAS and TerminatiOns...........ccceeeecceeceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaeeeeeeeneeeeneeaes 20

      11.3       120-day review Of INCOME REPOMt........                            ce ccscccceceeceeceeeeseseseeceeeeeeeeseeeeeeeeeeeeesesesesseeenanseeeseeeeeeeenees 20

12. Notifications to FAMily ........cccccccecccecesssssseeeeeeeeeeeeeceeseeeeeeeeseseseseeeeeanseeeeeeseeseeeseseecsssseseeenansanseeeseneneesenees 20

      12.1       EMe@rgency Contact .......cccccccccccecesssssseseeeneeneeeeeeeeeeseeseseeseseseeeeeaeeeeeseeseeeeeseeeesseeseesnananseeeeenseneeesess 20

      12.2       Notification REQUIPFEMENKS........cccccccecceeceeceeceesecceecesaeeansassssssessessseesceeeeeeeeeeeeeseseeesessesseesensesaesanes 20

      12.3       Effective Communication and Limited English Proficiency REQUIrEMENTS.........c:ccccceeeeeeees 21

13. Denial Of ASSISTANCE...                    see eeeceeeeeeee eee cee eee eet eee eee eaaee eee eee eee tages eee eaaaee eee aeaeeeeagae eee eaaee ee eeaaeeeeseaaeeeeneeeeeenees 21

      13.1       TIMING Of DENIAL oo.                  eee ccecececeseessssseeneeneeeeceeeeeeeeeeseesssgeeeeeaeseeeseeseeeseseeeeseseseeeeanseeseenseeenenees 21

      13.2       NOM-CISCIIIMINATION ..... eee eeeeetee cence eee eee eee eee eee eee eee eee eee eaaee eee eee aeeeeaaaeeeeeaaeeeee eases se saaeeeeeeeeaeeeneeaes 21

      13.3       Consideration Of CirCUMStANCeS ..0.....eececeeeeeceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee
                                                               eee eeneeeeessaeeeeenaaeeeeeeasaeeeeeeaaeeeeeeeeaeeeneeaes 22

14. Chapter GIOSSALY ......cccccccccceceeceeeeeeeeceesesseeceeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeeeseseeeseseeeeeanseeeeeeseeseeeseseeeeeeesseseeansanseeeseeeneesenees 23

Exhibit 1:           Non-citizen Rule - Summary of Documentation REquireMent ..........:scscssseesereeeeeeeeeenenees 24


Changes from previous version

                    Description of Change                                                                                                        Date Change Made
      3             Text under the “Student status” subheading changed from “The                                                                 November 2019
                    household must meet additional eligibility criteria if the head, co-
                    head, or spouse is a full-time student or a non-citizen student.”
                    Changed to “Students of higher education that do not live with
                    their parents must meet additional eligibility criteria.”
      6             Capitalized “OR” under Income Limits to highlight that the family                                                            November 2019
                    must be very low income OR low income and meet one of the
                    criteria listed below.

      7             Corrected text changing “time as admission” to “time of                                                                      November 2019
                    admission”

      12            Moved “Compliance with Verification Requirements” to section 8.                                                              November 2019
      19            Removed from the list of additional PHA discretionary admission                                                              November 2019
                    criteria: “If a family participating in the FSS program fails to
                    comply, without good cause, with the family’s FSS contract of
                    participation.”


Eligibility Determination and Denial of Assistance
November 2019
                                                                             HOUSING CHOICE VOUCHER HY         =
                                                                                 PROGRAM GUIDEBOOK


1. Chapter Overview
This chapter outlines the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development’s (HUD) eligibility requirements
for participation in the Housing Choice Voucher (HCV) program and provides guidance to Public Housing
Authorities (PHAs) in establishing additional criteria for admission. PHAs should strive for objectivity and
consistency when applying these criteria to evaluate the eligibility of families who apply for assistance. PHAs
must?! provide families applying for assistance the opportunity to explain their circumstances, furnish
additional information if required, and receive an explanation of the basis for any decision regarding their
eligibility.
As with all areas of program administration, when determining family eligibility PHAS must2 comply with all
Federal, State, and local nondiscrimination laws, and with rules and regulations governing fair housing and
equal opportunity in housing and employment. See the Fair Housing Requirements chapter for more
information.



2. Overview of Eligibility Factors and Requirements at
Admission
There are four factors that PHAs must’ consider when determining eligibility for the HCV program. In addition
to the eligibility factors, there are screenings that the PHA must4 conduct that may result in denial of
assistance. Each factor is summarized below and then discussed further in a corresponding subsection.
Before denying assistance for any criteria, the PHA should review Section 12, Denial of Assistance, to ensure
compliance with the Violence Against Women       Act (VAWA) and other nondiscrimination      requirements.


2.1     Eligibility Factors for Admission
Family eligibility requirements: The household must® meet HUD’s definition of a “family”. HUD’s definition of
“family” is provided in Section 3, Family Eligibility Requirements.
Income limits: The household's annual income must® not exceed the applicable income limit as established by
HUD in the jurisdiction where the family leases a unit. This requirement only applies at the time of admission
and is further described in Section 4, Income Limits.
Student status: Students of higher education that do not live with their parents must’ meet additional
eligibility criteria. Detailed requirements are explained in Section 5, Restrictions on Student Eligibility.
Citizenship status: The applicant family must® have eligible immigration status with supporting
documentation. Citizenship status only needs to be verified once at the time of admission for each household




124 CFR § 982.554
224 CFR § 1.4; 982.552(c)(2); 982.202(b)(3); 5.105(a)
324 CFR § 982.201
424 CFR § 5.216; § 5.905; § 5.903
5 24 CFR § 982.201(a)
6 24 CFR § 982.201(b)
724 CFR § 5.612; 5.522
8 24 CFR § 982.201(a)



Eligibility Determination and Denial of Assistance
November 2019
                                                                         HOUSING CHOICE VOUCHER
                                                                             PROGRAM GUIDEBOOK




member. Information on how to verify citizenship and immigration status and calculate assistance for families
that include ineligible noncitizens is provided in Section 7, Citizenship Status.


2.2        Screening and Other Requirements at Admission
Disclosure of Social Security Numbers and compliance with verification requirements. The household must?
sign consent forms and provide requested verification materials to allow the PHA to verify the household’s
information. The applicant must° also disclose and document the SSNs of all family members (with a few
exceptions described in Section 8, Disclosure of Social Security Numbers). SSNs only need to be verified once
per household        member.
Background screening. The PHA must1! conduct background screenings to ensure no member of the
household is subject to a lifetime sex offender registration requirement. All adult household members must?2
sign a criminal background consent form to authorize the PHA to conduct background screenings. PHAs may
establish additional nondiscriminatory criteria for admission. If the PHA chooses to establish additional
criteria, the standards must!3 be applied consistently and be listed in the PHAs’ administrative plan. Details
on which other types of activity may result in denial of assistance and the PHAs options for setting additional
criteria are discussed in Section 9, Background Screening.
Enterprise Income Verification (EIV) system searches. PHAs must11 use HUD’s EIV system to search for all
household members using the Existing Tenant Search and all adult household members in the Search for
Former Tenant. All adult household members must also sign the HUD-52675. The PHA may be required to
deny assistance to household members who are already receiving assistance from another program or who
owe an outstanding debt to another PHA. More information on the required searches and interpreting the
results is provided in Section 10, EIV Searches at Admission.



3. Family Eligibility Requirements
Each applicant for assistance under the HCV program must14 meet HUD’s definition of family. A family
includes15, but is not limited to, regardless of marital status, actual or perceived sexual orientation, or gender
identity, the following:
1)    Asingle person, who may be an elderly person, displaced person, disabled person, near-elderly person, or
      any other single person;
2)    A group of persons residing together, and such group includes, but is not limited to:
      a)   A family with or without children.   A child temporarily absent from the home due to placement in foster
           care must!® be considered in determining family composition and size. A family that consists of a
           pregnant woman only, and no other persons, must?’ be treated as a two-person family.




9 24 CFR § 5.230; § 982.551(b); § 5.233
1024 CFR § 5.216(h)(1); 24 CFR § 982.551(b)(3)
1 24 CFR § 5.905(a)(1)
'2 24 CFR § 5.903(b)(1)
1324 CFR § 982.54(d)(4)(i)
'4 24 CFR § 5.233; PIH Notice 2018-18 Administrative Guidance for Effective and Mandated      Use of the Enterprise
Income Verification (EIV) System, pg. 3
'5 24 CFR § 5.403; 42 USC 1437a(b)(3)
16 24 CFR § 5.403 Family(2)(i)
'7 24 CFR § 982.402(b)(5)


Eligibility Determination and Denial of Assistance
November      2019
                                                                                HOUSING CHOICE VOUCHER
                                                                                    PROGRAM GUIDEBOOK




    b)   An elderly family, which is defined as a family whose head, co-head, spouse, or sole member is at least
         62 years of age. It may include two or more persons, each of whom are at least 62, living together; or
         one or more persons who are at least 62 living with one or more live-in aides.
    c)   Anear-elderly family, which is defined as a family whose head, co-head, spouse, or sole member is at
         least 50 years of age but below the age of 62; or two or more persons, each of whom are between the
         ages of 50 and 62, living together; or one or more persons who are between the ages of 50 and 62
         living with one or more live-in aides.
    d)   Adisabled family, which means a family whose head, co-head, spouse, or sole member, is a person
         with disabilities; or two or more persons with disabilities living together; or one or more persons with
         disabilities living with one or more live-in aides.
         i)   A person with disabilities means a person who:
                (1) Has a disability as defined in 42 U.S.C.     § 423(d)(1);
                (2)   Has a physical, mental or emotional impairment that is expected to be of long-continued and
                      indefinite duration, substantially impedes his or her ability to live independently, and is of such
                      a nature that ability to live independently could be improved by more suitable housing
                      conditions; or
                (3) Has a developmental disability as defined in 42 U.S.C.         § 15002(8) (formerly codified in 42
                    U.S.C. § 6001).
         it)    Important considerations:
                (1) The meaning of a person with disabilities does not exclude persons who have the disease of
                      acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) or any conditions arising from the etiologic agent
                    for AIDS.
                (2) The meaning of a person with disabilities does not include a person whose disability is based
                    solely on any drug or alcohol dependence (for eligibility purposes).
                (3) A person who qualifies as a person with disabilities also qualifies as an individual with
                      handicaps, as defined in 24 C.F.R.    § 8.3, for purposes of reasonable accommodation and
                    program accessibility for persons with disabilities.
                (4) The terms disability and a person with disabilities are used in two contexts - for civil rights
                    protections, and for program eligibility purposes. Each use has specific definitions.
                    (a) When used in context of protection from discrimination or improving the accessibility of
                        housing, the civil rights-related definitions apply (see 24 CFR § 8.3; 24 CFR § 100.201; 28
                            CFR §§ 35.104,108).
                      (b)   When used in the context of eligibility under the HCV program, the program eligibility
                            definitions apply
    e)   Adisplaced family, which is a family in which each member or the sole member is a person displaced
         by governmental action, or whose dwelling has been extensively damaged or destroyed as a result of a
         disaster declared or otherwise formally recognized under Federal disaster relief laws.
    f)   Aremaining member of a tenant family, which is a family member of an assisted tenant family who
         remains in the unit when other members of the family have left the unit.



4. Income                   Limits
HUD establishes income limits by family size for the area in which each PHA is located.             These income limits
are used to determine the family’s eligibility for the program and are published annually in             a HUD   Notice and
are generally effective on the date of publication.        The income limits are available on HUD USER website.




Eligibility Determination and Denial of Assistance
November       2019
                                                                         HOUSING CHOICE VOUCHER
                                                                             PROGRAM GUIDEBOOK




To be eligible for the program, a family must#8 be either very low income (generally 50% of area median
income); OR low-income (generally 80% of area median income) and meet one of the following additional
criteria:
       e    Continuously assisted under the public housing, housing choice voucher, project-based      rental
            assistance, or other housing program under the Housing Act of 1937. Non-purchasing households in
            the following homeownership programs: HOPE 1, HOPE 2, or other HUD-assisted         multifamily home
            ownership programs covered under 24 CFR § 284.173;
       e    Displaced as a result of the prepayment of a mortgage or voluntary termination of a mortgage
            insurance contract on “eligible low-income housing,” as defined in 24 CFR § 248.101. Note that
            these displaced families are also eligible if they have moderate income (between 80 and 95 percent
            of median area income).
       e    <Acriterion set by the PHA to address essential local housing needs. For example, a PHA may
            administer its HCV program in a jurisdiction that offers locally-funded assisted housing to low-income
            families. The PHA may include a policy in its administrative plan stating the low-income limit will be
            applied when determining income eligibility for families transitioning from locally-funded assisted
            housing.


4.1.        Income Targeting
Each PHA must?2 ensure that 75 percent of its admissions in each PHA fiscal year are families whose incomes
are at or below the extremely low-income (ELI) limit (See definition below).2° Less than 75 percent of ELI
permitted with HUD approval, in accordance with PHA Plan and additional circumstances described in
982.201(b)(2)(ii)(A)-(D). The Waiting List and Tenant Selection chapter contains rules pertaining to “targeting”
of assistance to extremely low-income families.



                                      Definition of Extremely Low Income

            Extremely low-income refers to families whose incomes meet the very low-
            income threshold (50% of area median income) and do not exceed the higher
            of the federal poverty line or 30% of area median income. This definition
            became effective on July 1, 2014, ensuring working families living in areas
            where the federal poverty line exceeds 30% of area median income will meet
            the ELI income targeting requirements.

            PHAs do not need to determine the ELI limit for their local area. HUD publishes
            the ELI limits annually on HUD USER.




18 24 CFR § 982.201(b)(1)
'9 24 CFR § 982.201(b)(2)
2024 CFR § 5.603; Federal Register Notice 79 FR 35940, HUD Implementation of Fiscal Year 2014 Appropriations
Provisions on Public Housing Agency Consortia, Biennial Inspections, Extremely Low-Income Definition and Utility
Allowances, July 1, 2014.



Eligibility Determination and Denial of Assistance
November      2019
                                                                         HOUSING CHOICE VOUCHER
                                                                             PROGRAM GUIDEBOOK




4.2       Applying Income Limits
Annual Income is compared to the applicable income limit to determine eligibility. A family’s income must?! be
within the income limits for the PHA’s jurisdiction at the time the family receives a voucher to search for
housing. In addition, the family, when it is first admitted, must select a unit in an area in which the family
meets the income limit for the housing choice voucher program. Income limits apply only at the time of
admission and are not a factor in ongoing program eligibility.


A PHA with more than one set of income limits within its jurisdiction must22 use the highest income limit within
its jurisdiction when determining initial household eligibility. However, a family whose income is above the
limits in one or more areas of that PHA’s jurisdiction may lease only in an area where the family is income
eligible when it executes its first lease assisted under the voucher program. Similarly, a family exercising
portability when first admitted to the program must lease in an area where it is within the eligibility income
limit.


To determine which applicants qualify as continuously assisted, the PHA must?’ establish policies concerning
whether and to what extent a brief interruption between assistance under one of these programs and
admission to the voucher program will be considered to break continuity of assistance under the 1937
Housing Act.



5. Restrictions on Student Eligibility
Students at institutions of higher education who will not reside with their parents must24 meet additional
eligibility criteria. These rules apply regardless of whether the student is considered a full-time or a part-time
student.
Assistance shall only be provided to students who are otherwise eligible for the program and meet at least one
of the following criteria. The student:
          Is 24 years of age or older;
          Is a veteran;
          Is married;
          Has a dependent child;
          Is a person with disabilities (as defined in Section 3 of this Chapter) who was receiving HCV assistance
          as of November 30, 2005; or
          Is a graduate or professional student; or
      e   Is individually income eligible and the student’s parents are individually or jointly income eligible; or
      e   Is an independent student, defined as:
               a)   The individual is 24 years of age or older by December 31 of the award year;



21 24 CFR § 982.201(d)
22 24 CFR § 982.201(b)(4)
23 24 CFR § 982.201(d)(2)
2474 CFR § 5.612; Eligibility of Independent Students for Assisted Housing Under Section 8 of the U.S. Housing
Act of 1937; Supplementary Guidance (71 FR 18145, April 10, 2006); Eligibility of Independent Students for
Assisted Housing Under Section 8 of the U.S. Housing Act of 1937; Additional Supplementary Guidance (FR 5969-
N-01, September 21, 2016)



Eligibility Determination and Denial of Assistance
November    2019
                                                                           HOUSING CHOICE VOUCHER
                                                                               PROGRAM GUIDEBOOK




               b)    The individual is an orphan, in foster care, or a ward of the court or was an orphan, in foster
                     care or a ward of the court at any time when the individual was 13 years of age or older;
               c)    The individual is, or was immediately prior to attaining the age of majority, an emancipated
                     minor or in legal guardianship as determined by a court of competent jurisdiction in the
                     individual's state of legal residence.
      e    Or, is classified as a Vulnerable Youth. A student meets HUD's definition of Vulnerable Youth when the
           individual has been verified during the school year in which the application is submitted as either an
           “unaccompanied youth” who also falls within the definition of “homeless children and youths” (as
           such terms are defined in Section 725 of the McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act), or as
           unaccompanied youth (as defined in Section 725 of the McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act),
           who are at risk of homelessness and self-supporting, by:
               a)    Alocal educational agency homeless liaison, designated pursuant to the McKinney-Vento
                     Homeless Assistance Act;
               b)    The director of a program funded under the Runaway and Homeless Youth Act or designee of
                     the director;
               c)    The director of a program funded under subtitle B of title IV of the McKinney-Vento Homeless
                   Assistance Act or a designee of the director or
                d) A financial aid administrator.
      e    Or, the individual is a student for whom a financial aid administrator makes a documented
           determination of independence by reason of other unusual circumstances.
For purposes of the student eligibility restrictions, the term “parents” means the biological or adoptive
parents, or guardians (e.g., stepparents, grandparents, aunt/uncle, godparents, etc.), or such other definition
as may be adopted in the PHA’s administrative plan.


5.1        Prohibition on Assistance to Noncitizen Students
Noncitizen students, even those with eligible immigration status for purposes of HUD’s financial assistance,
are not eligible to receive housing assistance.25
A noncitizen student is a bona fide student who:
      e    Is pursuing a course of study in this country;
      e    Has a residence in another country outside of the United States that the person has no intention of
           abandoning; and
      e    Is admitted to this country temporarily, solely for the purpose of studying.
When      a noncitizen student is accompanied      by a noncitizen spouse and/or noncitizen minor children, those
family members are also ineligible for assistance. If the noncitizen student and noncitizen spouse have citizen
children, the whole family is still ineligible for assistance. However, if a non-citizen student has a citizen
spouse, the citizen spouse and children if any, would be eligible for assistance. In that case, assistance would
be prorated to ensure that assistance goes only to those family members with eligible immigration status.



6. Student Income Eligibility
If an individual is enrolled as a student at an institution of higher education, is under the age of 24, nota
veteran, not married, is not a person with disabilities who was receiving assistance on November 30, 2005,
and does not have a dependent child, in order to be eligible for assistance, the student must be individually



25 24 CFR 5.522; 42 USC 1436a(c)(2)(A)

Eligibility Determination and Denial of Assistance
November      2019
                                                                          HOUSING CHOICE VOUCHER
                                                                              PROGRAM GUIDEBOOK




eligible to receive assistance and the student’s parents (the parents individually or jointly) must be income
eligible to receive assistance unless the student can demonstrate his or her independence from parents with
the guidance in the Supplementary Guidance Notice published in the April 10, 2006 Federal Register (71 FR

                           PHA Options: Verification of Parent Income Eligibility
        The PHA may establish its own procedure for verifying parental income eligibility. For example,
        PHAs could require a signed income certification from the parents with a penalty of perjury
        statement, or the PHA may also choose to request supporting documentation of parental income
        such as tax returns, award letters, or paystubs.
        PHAs may adopt and implement the following criteria for determining whether to obtain the
        declaration and certification of income from parents, individually or jointly.
            e     If the student’s parents are married and living with each other, obtain the declaration and
                  certification of income from each parent.
            e     If the student’s parent is widowed or single, obtain the declaration and certification of
                  income from that parent.
            e     If the student’s parents are divorced or separated, obtain the declaration and certification
                 of income from each parent.
        If the student has been living with one of his or her parents and has not had contact with or does
        not know where to contact his or her other parent, obtain from the student a certification under
        penalty of perjury, addressing the circumstances (including a statement that the student has not
        received financial assistance from the parent) and obtain from the parent whom the student has
        been living or has contact with the declaration and certification of income.




7. Citizenship Status
Eligibility for Federal housing assistance is limited2° to U.S. citizens and noncitizens who have eligible
immigration status.     Families in which all members are U.S. citizens or have eligible immigration status are
eligible for housing assistance.2’ Families in which at least one member is a U.S. citizen or has eligible
immigration status may also be eligible for pro-rated assistance. A family in which some family members have
eligible immigration status, and some do not contend eligible immigration status, is called a mixed family.
Mixed families receive prorated assistance based on the percentage of family members who qualify for
assistance.22
An individual who is not a U.S. citizen or national who is a resident of the U.S. and has any of the following
immigration statuses is eligible for assistance:29
    e   Anon-citizen lawfully admitted for permanent residence as an immigrant (includes special agricultural
        workers granted lawful temporary resident status and noncitizens that indicate they have satisfactory
        immigration status, such as VAWA self-petitioners, whose verification of eligibility or appeal of a
        determination as to permanent residence is pending with DHS).
    e   Anon-citizen who entered the United States before 1/1/72 (or such later date as enacted by law) and:



2624 CFR § 5.506(a)
2724 CFR § 5.506(b)
28 24 CFR § 5.516(b)
29 Section 214 of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1980, as amended (42 U.S.C. 1436a(a))


Eligibility Determination and Denial of Assistance
November   2019
                                                                            HOUSING CHOICE VOUCHER
                                                                                PROGRAM GUIDEBOOK




              o    Has continuously maintained      residence in the U.S.   since then; and
              o    Is not ineligible for citizenship, but who is deemed to be lawfully admitted for permanent
                   residence as a result of an exercise of discretion by the Attorney General.
      e   A non-citizen who is lawfully present in the United States as a result of:
              o    Refugee status, including:
                        1) Those granted Temporary Protective Status (TPS) under the Victims of Trafficking and
                            Violence Protection Act of 2000 (P.L. 106-386) (section 207 of the Immigration and
                           Nationality Act (INA)) - these families have a “T” visa; or
                      2)   The granting of asylum (which has not been terminated (section 208); or
                      3)   The granting of conditional entry (section 203 (a)(7)) prior to 4/1/80 because of
                           persecution of fear on account of race, religion, or political opinion, or because of
                           being uprooted     by catastrophic national calamity.
      e   Anon-citizen who is lawfully present in the United States as a result of an exercise of discretion by the
          Attorney General for emergent reasons or reasons deemed strictly in the public interest (Section
          221(d)(5)) (e.g., parole status).
      e   Anon-citizen who is lawfully present in the United States as a result of the Attorney General's’
          withholding deportation (section 243(h)) (threat to life or freedom).
      e   Anon-citizen lawfully admitted for temporary or permanent residence (245A) (amnesty granted).
      e   Analien who is lawfully residing in the United States and its territories and possessions under section
          141 of the Compacts of Free Association between the Government of the United States and the
          Governments of the Marshall Islands, the Federated States of Micronesia (48 U.S.C. 1901 note) and
          Palau (48 U.S.C. 1931 note) while the applicable section is in effect: Provided, That, within Guam any
          such alien shall not be entitled to a preference in receiving assistance under this Act over any United
          States citizen or national resident therein who is otherwise eligible for such assistance.


7.1       Documentation of Citizenship or Immigration Status
Each eligible household member (or the parent/guardian for household members under age 18) must®° sign a
declaration of their status. Eligible noncitizens must also provide supporting documentation as shown on
Exhibit 1 Non-Citizen Rule Summary of Documentation Requirements. Family members who do not sign a
declaration of their status or provide the required supporting documentation will be considered ineligible
noncitizens.


Documentation must?! be submitted by the time of the eligibility determination. Once documents have been
submitted and verified for an individual, citizenship documentation for that individual will not need to be
collected again. Household members who do not provide the required proof of citizenship or eligible
immigration status will be considered ineligible noncitizens.

7.1.1     Extensions
The PHA must?2 provide an extension of up to 30 days to submit evidence of eligible status if the family
submits the declaration of eligible immigration status and certifies that the family needs more time because
the required evidence is temporarily unavailable. To obtain an extension, the family must also certify that
prompt and diligent efforts will be undertaken to obtain the evidence.



30 24 CFR § 5.508(c)
31 24 CFR § 5.508(g)(1)
32 24 CFR § 5.508(h)(1) and (2)

Eligibility Determination and Denial of Assistance
November    2019
                                                                            HOUSING CHOICE VOUCHER
                                                                                PROGRAM GUIDEBOOK




Upon determining if the extension request meets the requirements, the PHA must$3 inform the family, in
writing, whether its request for a time extension has been granted or denied. If granted, the notice must state
the specific period of the extension. If the extension request is denied, the notice must explain the reasons
for the denial.


                                 Additional Documentation of Citizenship

      PHAs are permitted but not required to adopt policies requiring additional documentation to verify
      U.S. citizenship. If it is the PHA’s policy to require verification of citizenship, the PHA administrative
      plan must clearly state this policy.   The policy must be applied consistently to all applicants and ina
      nondiscriminatory manner.



7.2      Verification of Eligible Immigration Status
The PHA is required to verify eligible immigration status through the U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Service
(CIS). While the PHA may not admit any individual prior to receiving the required documentation described in
on Exhibit 1 Non-Citizen Rule Summary of Documentation Requirements, the PHA may elect to provide
assistance prior to completing the verification process.34

7.2.1    Primary Verification Method
The PHA must?® conduct primary verification of eligible immigration status through the CIS automated system,
Systematic Alien Verification for Entitlements (SAVE).

7.2.2 Secondary verification method
If the primary verification system does not confirm eligible immigration status, or if the primary verification
system verifies immigration status that is ineligible for assistance under a Section 214 covered program, the
PHA must?¢ attempt secondary verification,         a manual records check by CIS. The PHA must?’ submit a request
for secondary verification to CIS within 10 days of receiving results of the primary verification. To request
secondary verification, the PHA will forward photocopies of the original required documents with the form G-
845S Document Verification Request. or such other form specified by the.
If secondary verification fails, the PHA must?® notify the family in accordance with the notification
requirements described in Sections 7.4.1 and 11.2 of this chapter.

7.2.3    CIS Appeals Process
The PHA must? notify the family in writing if the secondary verification process does not confirm eligible
immigration status. The notice must indicate whether assistance will be delayed, denied, or terminated and
inform the family of the right to file an appeal with the CIS.



                     )
33 24 CFR § 5.508 (h)(3)

                   (
3424 CFR § 5.512 )
3° 24 CFR § 5.512(c )
36 24 CFR § 5.512( c)(2)
                      ) and (d)(1)
37 24 CFR § 5.512 ( d)(1)
38 24 CFR § 5.512 ( d)(3)
39 24 CFR § 5.512(d)
                  ( d)(3); 24 CFR § 5.514(d)


Eligibility Determination and Denial of Assistance
November    2019
                                                                       HOUSING CHOICE VOUCHER
                                                                           PROGRAM GUIDEBOOK




If the family wants to exercise its right of appeal with the CIS, the family must4° submit a written request for an
appeal to the CIS within 30 days of the date of the PHA notification. The family must also take the following
steps:
      e   Include with the appeal request a cover letter and any support documentation as well as a copy of the
          verification request form (CIS Form G-845S) which was submitted by the PHA for the secondary
          verification request;
      e   Provide the PHA with a copy of the request for appeal with the CIS and proof of mailing (e.g., USPS
          Certified Mail ©, a service that provides the sender with a mailing receipt); and
      e   Provide any additional documentation that the CIS may request.
Within 30 days the CIS must render its decision to the family and forward a copy to the PHA (or provide notice
of the reasons for any delay).


7.3       Prorating Assistance for Mixed Families
A mixed family is eligible for prorated assistance. “Prorated assistance” means the family will receive only a
portion of the subsidy for which a fully eligible family would qualify. The proration is calculated?>5 based on the
number of members who are citizens or have eligible immigration status and the total number of family
members.


This calculation is shown   below.



 STEPS                                                                          EXAMPLE
 Determine the Housing Assistance Payment (HAP), taking into                    HAP = $300
 consideration the income of all family members, for which the family
 would qualify regardless of the members’ eligibility status.

 Divide the number of eligible family members (citizens and those with | 3 eligible family members
 eligible immigration status) by the total number of family members
                                                                         +4 total family members

                                                                                ./5 proration percentage

 Multiply the HAP calculated in Step 1 by the proration percentage              $300 x .75
 calculated in Step 2 to determine the prorated total HAP for the family.       Prorated Total HAP =

                                                                                $225




40 24 CFR § 5.514(e)


Eligibility Determination and Denial of Assistance
November    2019
                                                                         HOUSING CHOICE VOUCHER
                                                                             PROGRAM GUIDEBOOK




7.4       Delay, Denial, or Termination of Assistance
The PHA must?! not delay, deny, or terminate assistance to an applicant or participant on the basis of
ineligible immigration status of a family member if any of the following circumstances apply:
      e   Atleast one person in the household     is a U.S. citizen or an eligible noncitizen who has been verified by
          CIS;
      e   The family has submitted the required documents to the PHA timely, but the primary and secondary
          verification processes has not been completed;42
      e   The family member whom the PHA has not determined eligible moves out of the household;4?
      e   The CIS appeals process has not been completed;44
      e   Assistance is prorated, and the family is not receiving assistance for the family member(s) whose
          eligible immigration status has not been verified; or
      e   Fora program participant, the informal hearing process is not complete.
      e   Assistance must*> be denied or terminated when:
      e   The family has not submitted the declaration of citizenship or eligible immigration status and
          appropriate documentation by the specified deadline or any extension;
      e   The family has submitted required documentation, but CIS primary and secondary verification do not
          verify immigration status and the family does not pursue CIS or PHA appeal:
      e   The family has submitted required documentation, but CIS primary and secondary verification do not
          verify immigration status, and CIS or PHA appeal is pursued     but decision(s) are rendered against the
          family; or
      e   The PHA determines that a family has knowingly permitted an ineligible person to live in the assisted
          unit.   In this case, the PHA must terminate assistance for at least 24 months.     This does not apply if
          the ineligibility of the ineligible individual at issue was considered in calculating any proration of
          assistance provided for the family.

7.4.1     Notification of Denial Due to Citizenship Status
When the PHA decides to deny or terminate assistance, the PHA must*¢ send a written notice to the
household which includes the following:
          A statement that financial assistance will be denied or terminated and the justification;
          Notification that the family may be eligible for prorated assistance if it is a mixed family;
          In the case of a currently assisted household, the procedures for requesting proration of assistance;
          The right to appeal the results of the secondary verification to the CIS and how to appeal; and
          The right to request an informal hearing from the PHA in lieu of or after a CIS appeal.


In the case of applicants, the notice may advise that assistance may not be delayed until the conclusion of the
CIS appeal process but may be delayed during the informal hearing process.



41 24 CFR § 5.514(a)
42 24 CFR § 5.514(b)
43 24 CFR § 5.514(b)
44 24 CFR § 5.514(b)
45 24 CFR § 5.508(h)
46 24 CFR § 5.512(d)


Eligibility Determination and Denial of Assistance
November     2019
                                                                           HOUSING CHOICE VOUCHER
                                                                               PROGRAM GUIDEBOOK




8. Compliance with Verification Requirements
Participant families are required4’ to provide information required by HUD and the PHA when           requested, and
to cooperate in efforts to verify the information provided. For applicant families, documents establishing
eligibility must48 be no more than 60 days old on the date of initial voucher issuance. Verification time limits
do not apply to permanent documents such as birth certificates and citizenship declaration forms. For more
information on the verification process, see the Verifications and Income Determination chapter.
The PHA must’? require all adult applicants and participants (age 18 and over, as well as heads, co-heads,
and spouses, regardless of age), to sign the HUD-9886 Authorization for the Release of Information/Privacy
Act Notice (form HUD-9886) as a condition for admission and continued assistance.            The form is valid for 15
months from the date of signature and must®° be signed at each regularly scheduled reexamination.
Once signed, the form provides authorization for the following:
      e   HUD and the PHA to obtain any information necessary from State Wage Information and Collection
          Agencies (SWICAs) to verify information provided at the time of application or recertification, this
          authorization includes accessing HUD’s Enterprise Income Verification System (EIV).
      e   HUD and the PHA to verify income information with previous and current employers that is pertinent to
          eligibility or level of assistance.
      e   HUD and the PHA to obtain information from financial institutions concerning unearned income.
      e   HUD to request income tax return information from the IRS and Social Security Administration (SSA) to
          verify income related to eligibility or level of assistance.



9. Disclosure of Social Security Numbers
The PHA must4* require applicants and program          participants to disclose and document the Social Security
Numbers (SSNs) of all family members as a condition of admission and continued assistance, except ineligible
noncitizens and as provided below.         This process occurs only one time for each family member,    unless a
family member has been issued a new SSN or the Social Security Administration has determined that a
previously disclosed SSN was invalid.


9.1       SSN Disclosure Requirements for Applicant Families
Since disclosure and documentation of SSNs is a condition of eligibility for the voucher program, an applicant
family cannot be admitted to the program         until the requirement is met.   While the PHA can extend time
allowed to meet this obligation at the intake stage, failure to disclose and document SSNs as required
ultimately results in denial of the family’s application. Applicant families that are otherwise eligible for the
program    but are awaiting SSN documentation        may retain their place on the waiting list but may not be
admitted until documentation of a valid SSN is submitted to the PHA. For participant families, a PHA may
provide the family an additional 90 days to disclose a SSN, consistent with 24 CFR 5.218(c)(2).




4724 CFR § 982.551(b), 5.216
48 24 CFR § 982.201(e)
49 24 CFR § 5.230
50 24 CFR § 5.230; Form HUD-9886



Eligibility Determination and Denial of Assistance
November     2019
                                                                        HOUSING CHOICE VOUCHER
                                                                            PROGRAM GUIDEBOOK




9.1.1    Children Under Age 6 Added to Applicant Families
If the applicant family adds a child under age 6 to their household within six months of voucher issuance, the
family may be admitted to the program before the SSN documentation is submitted. The family has 90 days
from the date of admission, which is the HAP contract effective date, to provide the required documentation to
the PHA. The PHA must allow one additional 90-day period if the applicant family experienced delays that were
out of its control.54

9.1.2 Section 8 Moderate Rehabilitation Single Room Occupancy (SRO) Program for
Homeless Individuals
PHAs may admit Section 8 Moderate Rehabilitation Single Room Occupancy (SRO) Program for Homeless
Individuals to the program    prior to receiving their SSN documentation.   The applicants must provide
documentation of their SSN within 90 calendar days.       PHAs may grant an additional 90-day extension.        PHAs
must terminate SRO      participants’ assistance if documentation   is not provided within these time limits.


9.2   SSN Disclosure Requirements for New Household Members Added to a
Participant Household

9.2.1    New Household Members Age 6 and Over or Under Age 6 Who Have an SSN
In order to add new household members over age 6 or new household members 6 and under who already
have an SSN to a participant household, the family must®2 disclose and document the new member’s SSN
before adding the new member to the assisted household. If a member, six years of age or older, does not
have an SSN, the member must®? obtain one (unless he or she is a non-contending family member). The
family must disclose and document the new member’s SSN prior to adding the new member to the assisted
household.

9.2.2    New Household Members Under Age 6 Who Do Not Have an SSN
When adding a new household member who is under six years of age and does not have a SSN (for example,
when adding a newborn child to the assisted household), the participant must®4 disclose and document the
SSN for the new member within 90 days of the child’s addition to the household. PHAs may grant a 90-day
extension if the failure to provide the information was beyond the family’s control (for example, if the delay
was due to delayed processing by the Social Security Administration (SSA), a natural disaster, or a death in the
family). A PHA must add the child to the assisted household pending submission of the SSN and the family
must receive all associated benefits and deductions. For submissions to the Inventory Management
System/Public and Indian Housing Information Center (IMS/PIC) system, PHAs must assign an “alternate ID”
to the child. PHAs must later replace the alternate ID with the child’s assigned SSN.




5124 CFR § 5.216(h)(3); PIH Notice 2016-05 Streamlining Administrative Regulations for Programs Administered by
Public Housing Agencies, pg. 4
92 24 CFR § 5.216(e)(2)(i)
9324 CFR § 5.216(a) and (b)
424 CFR § 5.216(e)(2)(ii)



Eligibility Determination and Denial of Assistance
November    2019
                                                                        HOUSING CHOICE VOUCHER
                                                                            PROGRAM GUIDEBOOK




9.3       Acceptable Documentation
PHAs must®*> accept any of the following as acceptable evidence of a family member’s or household            member’s
SSN:
      e   Anoriginal SSN card;
      e   An original document issued by the SSA that shows the person’s name and SSN (SSA award letter,
          Medicare card, etc.); or
      e   An original document issued by a federal, state, or local government agency that contains the name
          and SSN of the individual (unemployment insurance printout, welfare or Medicaid documents, etc.).
A PHA must®€ only reject these documents      if they are not original, they appear to be forged, or if the original
document is altered, mutilated or not legible.   In this case, the PHA must explain to the family why the
document is not acceptable and must request that the family provide alternative documentation.            A PHA must
not require only an original SSN card as acceptable documentation.
PHAs submit the SSN for each household member to HUD through the IMS/PIC system. PHAs must validate
the SSNs through EIV, which will generate an error message when any SSN does not match the SSA’s
database.
Once the individual’s identity verification status is classified as Verified, the PHA may, at its discretion, remove
and destroy the copy of the documentation of SSN. Paper documentation must be destroyed by either
shredding or burning. Electronic documentation must be destroyed by erasing or permanently deleting the file.
Additional guidance related to destruction of records is available in HUD     Handbook 2400.25,       Rev. 4: HUD
Information Technology Security Policy, dated August 2014.
For a participant family, the penalty for failure to disclose and document SSNs as required is termination of
assistance.     See the Terminations chapter for information on terminations.



10. Background Screening
PHAs are required®’ to conduct criminal background screenings to determine if any household member is
subject to a lifetime sex offender registration requirement for all states in which the household members are
known to have lived. PHAs are also required? to obtain a criminal background check at the request of the
owner. PHAs are also required to utilize the Debts Owed to PHAs & Terminations Report to identify any
previous evictions that are listed on HUD or the PHA’s required reasons for denial of admission.


10.1      Criminal Background Screening
PHAs must®? ask all household members to provide a list of the states in which they have lived and whether
their name appears on any lifetime sex offender registry. PHAS must conduct criminal background screenings
necessary to determine if each household member is subject to a lifetime sex offender registration. Law
enforcement agencies may charge a reasonable fee for providing the records to the PHA. Such charges must®°
not be passed along to the applicant family.



°° 24 CFR § 5.216(g)(1)
56 24 CFR § 5.216(h)(2)(i)
57 24 CFR § 5.856; § 5.905; PIH Notice 2012-28 State Registered Lifetime Sex Offenders in Federally Assisted
Housing
98 24 CFR § 5.903(d)(1)
5? PIH Notice 2012-28
69 PIH Notice 2009-39 Prohibition on Public Housing Agencies


Eligibility Determination and Denial of Assistance
November      2019
                                                                         HOUSING CHOICE VOUCHER
                                                                             PROGRAM GUIDEBOOK




10.1.1              Consent for Background Screening
PHAs must®! require that each adult member of the household provide a signed, written authorization for the
PHA to obtain criminal conviction records from the National Crime Information Center, police departments,
and other law enforcement agencies.


                            Procedures for Maintaining Confidentiality


    Because there are strict penalties for improper disclosure of criminal conviction
    records, the PHA must establish procedures aimed at maintaining confidentiality.
    For example, the PHA could designate one staff member to review all criminal
    records. This staff member would then provide documentation for the family
    file, stating that the household had passed or failed criminal background
    screening, without revealing any details from the record. Another approach
    would be to keep all criminal records separate from family files, preferably in a
    locked office or locked filing cabinet. The records would then be destroyed once
    their purpose has been served.


10.1.2              Information from Drug Abuse Treatment Facilities
PHAs may only deny admission to household members that are currently engaging in the use of illegal use of a
controlled substance. PHAs may require each person who applies for admission to sign one or more forms of
written consent authorizing the agency to receive information from a drug treatment facility to ascertain
whether the applicant is currently engaging in the use of illegal use of a controlled substance.

10.1.3              Records Retention and Confidentiality
Criminal records must®2 be maintained confidentially and may only be disclosed to persons with a job-related
need to know the contents. Criminal background results, including sex offender results must® not be shared
directly with the owner, and they must® be destroyed promptly once their purpose has been served. For
example, if the PHA decides to admit the family to the program, the records must be destroyed immediately. If
the PHA decides to deny admission based on the criminal conviction record, the record may be retained
during the period allowed for requesting an informal review, and until the review, if requested, has been
completed.    The record must then be destroyed      promptly.   The PHA must not retain criminal conviction records
for longer periods, even if the records are stored separately from the family’s file. Criminal background records
of sex offenders are subject to the rules governing other criminal conviction records. However, the PHA
must®    retain a record of the type of screening and the date screening was performed.




6124 CFR § 5.903(b
62 24 CFR § 5.905(c)(1)(i) and (ii); § 5.903(g)(1) and (2)
63 24 CFR § 5.905(
64 24 CFR § 5.905(       (iii); § 5.903(g)(3)
65 24 CFR § 982. 158(f)


Eligibility Determination and Denial of Assistance
November     2019
                                                                       HOUSING CHOICE VOUCHER
                                                                           PROGRAM GUIDEBOOK




10.1.4              Denial of Assistance for Criminal Activity
PHAs may deny admission based on criminal convictions or if the preponderance of evidence indicates that a
family member has engaged in such activity. PHAs are prohibited®® from denying admission solely based on
arrest records. If the PHA decides to deny admission based on a criminal conviction record, the PHA must®?
notify the family of the pending denial action and must give the family an opportunity to dispute the accuracy
and/or relevance of the record. A copy of the criminal conviction record must®® be provided to the head of
household and to the subject of the record (if different) at this time. If the family does not dispute the record,
or if the family disputes the record and the PHA does not agree, the regular denial notice is sent.
PHAs must®2 deny admission for the following specific types of criminal activity or alcohol abuse.     Denial is
required when:
    1)   A household member has been evicted from federally assisted housing within the last three years for
         drug-related criminal activity.
         e   The PHA may admit the family if it determines that the household member who engaged in the
             activity has been successfully rehabilitated, or the circumstances no longer exist (because, for
             example, the household member is dead or in prison)
    2)   The PHA determines that a household member is currently illegally using a controlled substance or
         such household member’s illegal use (or pattern of illegal use) of a controlled substance, or abuse (or
         pattern of abuse) of alcohol, is determined by the PHA to interfere with the health, safety, or right to
         peaceful enjoyment of the premises by other residents.     The PHA may consider whether such
         household member has taken steps to rehabilitate or has been rehabilitated and is no longer
         engaging in the illegal use of a controlled substance or abuse of alcohol.
         e    Note: An individual may also qualify as an individual with disabilities under Federal civil rights
              statutes, which prohibit discrimination against individuals with disabilities and include reasonable
              accommodation obligations.
    3)   Any household    member    has been convicted of the manufacture of methamphetamine on the premises
         of federally assisted housing.
    4)   Any household member is subject to a lifetime sex offender registration requirement.
         e    The PHA must check for sex offender registration in its own state and in any other state where the
              family has resided.   Use of a nationwide database such as www.nsopw.org is recommended.
PHAs may establish policies that are stricter than the regulatory requirements listed above, so long as those
policies do not discriminate in violation of civil rights laws. For example, PHA policies may call for denial of
admission if any household member has been convicted of methamphetamine production, regardless of
whether the activity took place in federally assisted housing. PHA policies may not be more lenient than those
specified above.


10.2     Additional PHA Discretionary Admission Criteria
PHAs must’? establish local policies concerning denial of assistance to applicants for the following reasons:
         e    The family has violated program obligations.
         e    Any family member evicted from federally assisted housing within the past 5 years.
         e    Any PHA has ever terminated assistance for any family member under the voucher program.



66 PIH Notice 2015-19
67 24 CFR § 5.903(f); § 5.905(d); § 982.553(d)(1)
68 24 CFR § 5.903(f)
69 24 CFR §982.553(a); § 982.552(b)
70 24 CFR §982.552(c)(1)

Eligibility Determination and Denial of Assistance
November     2019
                                                                      HOUSING CHOICE VOUCHER
                                                                          PROGRAM GUIDEBOOK




        e     Any member of the family has committed fraud, bribery, or any other corrupt or criminal act related
              to any federal housing program.
        e     The family currently owes rent or other amounts to the PHA or another PHA for amounts in
              connection with the HCV, moderate rehabilitation, or public housing programs.
        e     The family has not reimbursed any PHA for amounts paid to an owner under a HAP contract for
              rent, damages to the unit, or other amounts owed   by the family under the lease.
        e     The family has breached an agreement with the PHA to pay amounts owed to a PHA or amounts
              paid to an owner by a PHA.
        e     The family has engaged in or threatened abusive or violent behavior toward PHA personnel.



11.         EIV System Searches at Admission

                       PHA Options: Considerations for Screening Policies
 The minimum requirements for criminal background screenings and denial of assistance are
 outlined in this chapter. HUD has issued guidance encouraging PHAs to strike a balance between
 resident safety and the reentry needs of formerly incarcerated individuals and others with
 criminal history records. PHAs have broad discretion in setting their admission policies. HUD
 encourages PHAs to allow ex-offenders to rejoin their families when appropriate, and to consider
 other factors in their decisions such as rehabilitation and participation in social service programs.

 Related Resources:

 It Starts with Housing: Public Housing Agencies are Making Second Chances Real

 PIH Notice 2015-19: Guidance for Public Housing Agencies (PHAS) and Owners of Federally-
 Assisted Housing on Excluding the Use of Arrest Records in Housing Decisions

 FAQs: Excluding the Use of Arrest Records in Housing Decisions

 Letter from Shaun Donovan, Secretary, United States Department of Housing and Urban
 Development, to Public Housing Agency Directors, June 17, 2011



11.1    Existing Tenant Search and Avoiding Duplicate Subsidy
Prior to admission into the program, the PHA must’! search for each family member in the EIV Existing Tenant
Search. The search will show if any family member is currently assisted by another public housing agency.




” PIH Notice 2018-18



Eligibility Determination and Denial of Assistance
November     2019
                                                                         HOUSING CHOICE VOUCHER
                                                                             PROGRAM GUIDEBOOK




11.2     HUD-52675          Debts Owed      to PHAs and Terminations
All adult household members must?2 sign the HUD-52675. The form is only required to be signed by each
adult one time. The form notifies the adults that their debt and terminations information will be shared with
other PHAs and will be accessible by HUD staff, PHA staff, and contractors.
Prior to admission to the program, the PHA must search for each adult family member in the ElV Debts Owed
to PHAs and Terminations database. If any information on debts or terminations is returned by the search, the
PHA will determine if the offenses violate their admissions policies.


11.3     120-day review of Income Report
EIlV information is typically not available in EIV for applicant families. If information is not available at the time
of income determination, the PHA must review the family’s EIV Income Report 120 days after the New
Admission (action code 1) is processed to identify any unreported or underreported income sources. See and
Income Determination chapter for more information on how to identify these discrepancies.



12. Notifications to Family

12.1     Emergency Contact
PHA must’     notify the family of their right to provide an emergency contact and give the family an opportunity
to provide the emergency contact. PHAs may use HUD-92006, Supplement to Application for Federally
Assisted Housing, to meet this requirement. The family is not required to provide an emergency contact and
may choose to check the box at the bottom of the form “Check this box if you choose not to provide the
contact information.”


12.2     Notification Requirements
At the time an application is filed, the PHA must” notify all applicants for assistance about the rule restricting
assistance based on citizenship and immigration status and of the requirement to submit documentation of
eligible status or to elect not to claim eligible status. The PHA's notice must include the following:
    e    Astatement that financial assistance is contingent upon the appropriate submission and verification
         of documentation of citizenship or eligible immigration status.
    e    Adescription of the types of documentation required and time period for submission. (See Exhibit 1:
         Non-Citizen Rule - Summary of Documentation Requirements).
    e    Astatement that, as appropriate, assistance will be prorated, denied, or terminated, based on a final
         determination of ineligibility after all CIS appeals and, if requested, an informal hearing’> for
         participants or an informal review’ for applicants.




72724 CFR § 5.233; HUD-52675 Debts Owed to Public Housing Agencies and Terminations
® Section 644 of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1992 (Section 644)
7424 CFR § 5.508(f)(1)
7 24 CFR § 5.508(f) (2) (ii)
76 24 CFR § 5.508(f)(2) (iii)


Eligibility Determination and Denial of Assistance
November    2019
                                                                              HOUSING CHOICE VOUCHER
                                                                                  PROGRAM GUIDEBOOK




12.3        Effective Communication and Limited English Proficiency Requirements
All notifications and communications must ensure effective communication for persons with disabilities. PHAs
must provide appropriate auxiliary aids and services necessary to ensure effective communication, which
includes ensuring that information is provided in appropriate accessible formats as needed, e.g., Braille,
audio, large type, assistive listening devices, and sign language interpreters. PHAs must also take reasonable
steps to ensure meaningful access to their programs and activities to individuals with limited English
proficiency.     See HUD’s Final Guidance to Federal Financial Assistance Recipients: Title VI Prohibition Against
National Origin Discrimination Affecting Limited English Proficient Persons (LEP Guidance) (72 FR 2732). LEP
guidance and LEP information is available on HUD’s website.



13. Denial of Assistance
The information in this section applies generally to all denials of assistance. Specific requirements related to
denying assistance based on each of the factors discussed in the chapter are covered in the subsection for
each factor.


13.1    Timing of Denial
An applicant may be denied assistance under the HCV program only for violations of the program
requirements that are identified as grounds for denial of assistance.’’ Denial of assistance may include any
or all of the following:
            Denial of listing on the PHA waiting list;
            Denial or withdrawal of a voucher;
            Refusal to enter into    a HAP contract or approve a lease, and
            Refusal to process or provide assistance through portability.


13.2        Non-discrimination
All decisions to deny assistance are subject to civil rights and antidiscrimination laws such as the Fair Housing
Act, Title VI of the Civil Rights Act, Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act, Titles II or III of the Americans with
Disabilities Act, and the Violence Against Women Act (VAWA).78 Violence Against Women Act (VAWA) means
the Violence Against Women and Department of Justice Reauthorization Act of 2005 and the Violence Against
Women Reauthorization Act of 2013. The PHA must’? not deny admission solely based on certain family
characteristics, including families with children, families with unwed parents or children born out of wedlock,
families that receive public assistance, or whether the family decides to participate in the family self-
sufficiency program (FSS). The PHA is also prohibited®° from denying admission on the basis of any protected
class, including age, race, color, religion, sex, national origin, familial status, and disability. Consistent with
HUD’s Equal Access Rule, HUD-assisted and HUD-insured housing must be made available without regard to
actual or perceived sexual orientation, gender identity, or marital status.81



77 24 CFR    § 982.552(a)( 2)
78 24 CFR    § 982.552(c)( 2)(v)
79 24 CFR                   3)
             § 982.202(b)(3)(i),  (ii), (Vv)
89 24 CFR                   3)
             § 982.202(b)(3)(iii)  and (iv)
81 24 CFR § 5.105(a); PIH Notice 2014-20 (HA): Program Eligibility Regardless of Sexual Orientation, Gender
Identity or Marital Status as Required by HUD”s Equal Access Rule


Eligibility Determination and Denial of Assistance
November       2019
                                                                       HOUSING CHOICE VOUCHER
                                                                           PROGRAM GUIDEBOOK




For applicants with a disability,   a PHA must grant a reasonable accommodation     request made     by an applicant
unless it constitutes an undue financial and administrative burden, a fundamental alteration to the program,
or results in a direct threat that cannot be reduced or eliminated by another reasonable accommodation. This
includes, for example, a reasonable accommodation request made by an applicant who was denied admission
due to a previous eviction from housing assisted under the program for serious violation of the lease where
the tenant claims that the eviction or lease violation was related to that tenant’s disability. More information
on reasonable accommodations and fair housing requirements can be found in the Fair Housing
Requirements chapter.


If an applicant is otherwise eligible, admission to the program may not®2 be denied to the program on the
basis or as a direct result of the fact that the applicant is or has been a victim of domestic violence, dating
violence, sexual assault, or stalking. PHAs must®? notify applicants that protections are available to victims
under the Violence Against Women and Department of Justice Reauthorization Act of 2005 and the Violence
Against Women Reauthorization Act 2013, P. L. 113-4. See the Violence Against Women Act (VAWA) chapter
for information on VAWA requirements.


13.3        Consideration of Circumstances
In deciding whether to deny assistance because of action or failure to act by members of the family, PHAs
have discretion to consider any of the circumstances in each particular case. Circumstances could include,
for example, the seriousness of the case, the extent of participation or culpability of individual family
members, mitigating circumstances related to the disability of a family member, and the effects of denial or
termination of assistance on other family members who were not involved in the action or failure to act.84


However, PHAs must®> deny admission to lifetime registered sex offenders and persons convicted of
methamphetamine        production in assisted housing, without consideration of the circumstances.


The PHA's admission and termination actions must be consistent with fair housing and equal opportunity
provisions of 24 CFR 5.105, and with the requirements of 24 CFR part 5, subpart L (Protection for Victims of
Domestic Violence, Dating Violence, Sexual Assault, or Stalking).8¢ If the family includes a person with
disabilities, the PHA decision concerning such action is subject to consideration of reasonable
accommodation in accordance with part 8 of this title.87


When one household member causes the family to be ineligible, the PHA may choose to admit the family on
the condition that the household member does not reside with the family.




82 24 CFR    § 5.2005(b)
83 24 CFR    § 5.2005(a); The Violence Against Women Reauthorization Act of 2013
8424 CFR     § 982.552(c)(2)
85 24 CFR    § 5.856; § 982.553(a)(2); PIH Notice 2012-28
86 24 CFR    § 982.552(c)(2)(v)
87 24 CFR    § 982.552(c)(2) (iv)


Eligibility Determination and Denial of Assistance
November      2019
                                                                       HOUSING CHOICE VOUCHER
                                                                           PROGRAM GUIDEBOOK




                             PHA Options: Making a Decision to Deny Assistance


         In each instance before making a decision to deny HCV program assistance, PHA staff
         should consider the specific circumstances of the family under review and determine
         if denial is the best response.
         In some instances, the PHA may determine that the seriousness of the situation does
         not warrant denial. For example, a family whose previous assistance was terminated
         for failure to recertify may be evaluated differently than an applicant family who was
         terminated from public housing for wanton destruction of public housing property.
         Timing may also influence the judgment of PHA staff. A family that was terminated
         very recently for failure to recertify might be denied, while staff might determine
         that a family evicted from public housing 10 or 12 years ago for property destruction
         might be given more consideration, particularly if more recent evidence suggests a
         change in family behavior.
         Similarly, if damage caused by a family evicted 10 years ago was attributed to a
         teenager no longer living with the family, admission to the program might seem a
         reasonable decision.




14. Chapter Glossary
The following terms are used in this Chapter:
Admission is the point when the family becomes a participant in the program. The date used for this purpose
is the effective date of the first HAP contract for a family (first day of initial lease term) in the tenant-based
program.
Adult is a person who is 18 years of age or older or who has been convicted of a crime as an adult under any
Federal, State, or tribal law.
Applicant means a person or a family that has applied for housing assistance.
Child means a member of the family other than the family head or spouse who is under 18 years of age.
Citizen means a citizen or national of the United States.
Disabled family means a family whose head, co-head, spouse, or sole member          is a person with disabilities; or
two or more persons with disabilities; or one or more persons with disabilities living with one or more live-in
aides.
Displaced family is a family in which each member or the sole member is a person displaced by governmental
action, or whose dwelling has been extensively damaged      or destroyed as a result of a disaster declared or
otherwise formally recognized under federal disaster relief laws.




Eligibility Determination and Denial of Assistance
November    2019
                                                                         HOUSING CHOICE VOUCHER
                                                                             PROGRAM GUIDEBOOK




Elderly family is a family whose head, co-head, spouse, or sole member is at least 62 years of age; or two or
more persons, each of whom are at least 62, living together; or one or more persons who are at least 62 living
with one or more live-in aides.
Enterprise Income Verification (EIV) system is a web-based computer system that contains employment and
income information of individuals who participate in HUD     rental assistance programs.
Extremely low-income family refers to a very low income family whose income does not exceed the higher of
30 percent of the area median income or the federal poverty level.
Family is either a single person or a group of persons as defined in 24 C.F.R.      § 5.403.
Gender identity means the gender with which a person identifies, regardless of the sex assigned to that
person at birth and regardless of the person's perceived gender identity. Perceived gender identity means the
gender with which a person is perceived to identify based on that person's appearance, behavior, expression,
other gender related characteristics, or sex assigned to the individual at birth or identified in documents.
Household    means the family and the PHA approved     live-in aide.
Housing quality standards (HQS) are the HUD minimum quality standards for housing assisted under the HCV
program.
Law enforcement agency means the National Crime Information Center (NCIC), police departments, and other
law enforcement agencies that hold criminal conviction records.        (Note that the NCIC is a division of the
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI)).
Low income-limit is an income limit that HUD generally sets at 80 percent of the area median income.
Mixed family is a family that includes members who are citizens or have eligible immigration status and
members who do not contend to have eligible immigration status.
National means a person who owes permanent allegiance to the United States, for example, as a result of
birth in a United States territory or possession.
Noncitizen means a person who is neither a citizen nor national of the United States.
Temporary Protective Status (TPS) provides families with temporary immigration status to the United States.
Families that are granted TPS under the Victims of Trafficking and Violence Protection Act of 2000 (P.L. 106-
386) are provided with a “T” visa and are considered to have eligible immigration status under Section 207 of
the Immigration and Nationality Act (INA).   Families with a “T” visa are eligible for full housing assistance
Upfront Income Verification is the verification of income before or during a family reexamination, through an
independent source that systematically and uniformly maintains income information in computerized form for
a number of individuals.
Verification Hierarchy is the order of preference for methods of verifying information supplied by an applicant
or tenant family.
Very low-income limit is an income limit that HUD generally sets at 50 percent of the area median income.




Eligibility Determination and Denial of Assistance
November    2019
                                                                                     HOUSING CHOICE VOUCHER
                                                                                         PROGRAM GUIDEBOOK


Exhibit 1: Non-citizen Rule - Summary of Documentation
Requirements
                       STATUS                                                     DOCUMENTATION
                                                        Note: All documentation provided must be UNEXPIRED
 1) A citizen or national of the                     DECLARATION:       For each family member with this status, a declaration of
 United States                                       citizenship signed under penalty of perjury. For each adult, the
                                                     declaration must be signed by the adult.      For each child, the declaration
                                                     must be signed by an adult residing in the assisted dwelling unit who is
                                                     responsible for the child.

 2)     Anon-citizen claiming eligible
 immigration status who is 62 years                  AND: Proof of age
 of age.

 3) All other non-citizens claiming                  DECLARATION:       For each family member with this status, a declaration
 eligible immigration status.                        of eligible immigration status signed under penalty of perjury. Adults
                                                     must sign their own declarations. AND:


 Categories of eligible immigration status:          A verification form: For each adult, the adult must sign the form.        For
                                                     each child, an adult member of the       family residing in the unit who is
 a) Anon-citizen lawfully admitted for               responsible for the child must sign the form.
 permanent      residence as an immigrant
 (includes special    agricultural workers
                                                     The verification form must state that evidence of eligible immigration
 granted lawful temporary         resident status    status may be released by the PHA        to HUD and the CIS without
 and noncitizens that indicate they have
                                                     responsibility for the future use or transmission of the evidence by the
 satisfactory immigration status, such as            recipient. The form must also notify the signer of the possible release
 VAWA self-petitioners, whose verification of        of evidence of eligible immigration      status by HUD.   Such evidence
 eligibility or appeal of a determination as to
                                                     shall only be released by HUD to the CIS for the purpose of establishing
 permanent residence is pending with
                                                     eligibility for financial assistance.
 DHs).*°
                                                     AND:
 b) A non-citizen who entered the                    CIS Primary Verification of eligible immigration status must be
 United States before 1/1/72 (or                     conducted by the PHA through the CIS automated SAVE system. If this
 such later date as enacted by law)                  method fails to verify status, or, if the verification received indicates
 and:                                                ineligible immigration status, the PHA must request Secondary CIS
                                                     Verification within 10 days by sending to the local CIS Office
 i) Has continuously maintained residence            photocopies of CIS documents receiving (front and back) attached to
 in the U.S.    since then; and                      Form G-845S — Document Verification Request.
 ii) Is not ineligible for citizenship, but who is
 deemed to be lawfully admitted for                  AND:
 permanent residence as a result of an               The PHA must request and review an original CIS document of eligible
 exercise of discretion by the Attorney              immigration status and must        retain photocopies and return the original
 General.                                            to the individual.




Eligibility Determination and Denial of Assistance
November       2019
                                                                                  HOUSING CHOICE VOUCHER
                                                                                      PROGRAM GUIDEBOOK          PIA
                                                                                    DOCUMENTATION
                          STATUS                                         Note: All documents provided must be
                                                                                          UNEXPIRED
A) All other Non-citizens with eligible                       Acceptable Original CIS Document:
immigration status (continued)
a) A non-citizen who is lawfully present in the               e Form 1-551 “Permanent Resident Card”
United States as a result of:                                 e Form    1-94 Arrival-Departure Record annotated with one of the
le Refugee status, including those granted Temporary          following:
Protective Status (TPS) under the Victims of Trafficking      = “Admitted as a Refugee Pursuant to Section 207”
and Violence Protection Act of 2000 (P.L.     106-386)        = “Section 208” or “Asylum”
(section 207); or                                             = “Section 243(h)” or “Deportation stayed by Attorney General”
le The granting of asylum (which has not been                 => “Paroled Pursuant to 9 CFR Section 221 (d)(5) of the INS”
terminated (section 208); or                                  e Form I-94 Arrival-Departure Record with no annotation
fe The granting of conditional entry   (section 203 (a)(7))   accompanied by:
prior to 4/1/80 because of persecution of fear on             = A final court decision granting asylum (but only if no appeal is
account of race, religion, or political opinion, or           taken);
because of being uprooted by catastrophic national
                                                              = A letter froma DHS asylum officer granting asylum (if
calamity.
                                                              application is filed on or after 10/1/90) or from a DHS
b) A non-citizen who is lawfully present in the     United
                                                              district director granting asylum (application filed before
States as a result of an exercise of discretion by the        10/1/90);
Attorney General for emergent reasons or reasons              = A court decision granting withholding of deportation; or
deemed strictly in the public interest (section
                                                              = A letter from an asylum officer granting withholding or
221(d)(5)) (e.g., parole status).
                                                              deportation (if application filed on or after 10/1/90).
c)   Anon-citizen who is lawfully present in the   United
                                                              e Form |-9 Employment     Eligibility Verification annotated with:
States as a result of the Attorney General's’ withholding
                                                              = Acceptable document from List A or,
deportation (section 243(h)) (threat to life or freedom).
                                                              = Combination of one selection from List B and one selection
d) Anon-citizen lawfully admitted for temporary        or
                                                              from List C
permanent residence (245A) (amnesty        granted).
le) An alien who is lawfully resident in the United States    e Form |-360 VAWA Self-Petition
and its territories and possessions under section 141 of      e   Form |-130 Family-Based Visa Petition
the Compacts of Free Association between the                  e Form |-797 Notice of Action
Government of the United States and the Governments           e Areceipt issued by the DHS indicating that an application for
lof the Marshall Islands, the Federated States of             issuance of a replacement document in one of the above listed
Micronesia (48 U.S.C.   1901 note) and Palau (48 U.S.C.       categories has been made and the applicant’s entitlement to the
1931 note) while the applicable section is in effect:         document     has been verified; or
Provided, That, within Guam any such alien shall not be       e Other acceptable evidence.   If other documents are
entitled to a preference in receiving assistance under this determined by the DHS to constitute acceptable evidence of
Act over any United States citizen or national resident     eligible immigration status, they will be announced by notice
therein who is otherwise eligible for such assistance.        published in the Federal Register.




Eligibility Determination and Denial of Assistance
November     2019
