                                           4
                                       c        ECOnorthwest

       DATE:            July 9, 2025
       TO:              DLCD Housing Division
       FROM:            ECOnorthwest
       SUBJECT:         OHNA Rulemaking - Potential Compliance Pathways



      The Oregon Department of Land Conservation and Development (DLCD) is the state agency charged with
      leading a rulemaking process to develop what has been termed compliance pathways. DLCD has defined
      compliance pathways as rules that create required or optional assumptions or actions that Oregon cities must
      (or may) take to comply with state land use law while completing their Contextualized Housing Need (CHN)
      analysis and / or their Housing Production Strategy (HPS).

      To advance toward final rules, the state asked ECOnorthwest to bring forward relevant available data and
      analysis to inform the state’s decisions about compliance pathways for identifying key needs in the CHN and
      for action selection in the HPS that could support the state’s policy objectives for these efforts. The state
      asked ECOnorthwest to offer advice regarding whether the data are sufficient to support quantitative metrics
      in each compliance pathway and given data availability and the state’s desired policy outcomes, whether and
      how compliance pathways could be established.

      In early May, the state asked ECOnorthwest specific research questions (described in more detail later in the
      memorandum), and then later (on June 12), asked us to document our findings in this memorandum. The
      expectation of this undertaking was that ECO’s responses would help to advance discussions with
      stakeholders and support DLCD’s ongoing rulemaking effort. ECOnorthwest’s advice reflects the firm’s
      perspective, and not necessarily that of the state. Because the advice in this memo was developed without
      the benefit of valuable stakeholder perspectives, ECOnorthwest does not intend these to be adapted as-is into
      the rules. In fact, our advice generally offers DLCD options or considerations rather than clear conclusions,
      especially when the timeline and / or available data did not allow it.

      This memorandum will be provided to the Housing Actions Workgroup (HAWG) for discussion in July, and the
      state will then develop rules in the second half of 2025. We hope that ECOnorthwest’s advice will be helpful in
      advancing the rulemaking process and the state’s policy objectives.


      Organization of this Memo
      This memorandum outlines research questions posed to ECOnorthwest, outcomes of the analysis, and
      potential compliance pathway options for consideration as the state develops rules related to the
      Contextualized Housing Need (CHN, part 1) and Housing Production Strategies (HPS, part 2). Each part of the
      compliance pathway analysis is supported by a data appendix beginning on page 34.



W 4
 >
a       OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                           1
     Context: Policy Objectives and Types of CompllanCe PathwayS....sssssecsenenesnecenencncenescees 2
       Types of Compliance PathwayS............csccsccecceeseeeeeeceeeeeeeeneeneeeensaeeneanseecesaeeneanseecnsaesnensensneas 3

     Part 1: Contextualized Housing Needs Compliance Pathway                                                         ...s1scsccccecnsnscennsnssnnennsnnes 5
       CHN       Research Questions ..........cccccccceceeeeeeeeeceeeeeeeeseea
                                                      eens sa eoesnsaeoesneaeaeansneaeanseseansnseeansnseeanaees 5
       CHN       Research Approach .........cccccceceeceeeeeceeeeeeenneeeceeeeeeeeneaneesensaeeneaeseseeseeeneeseeansasseseeseenenees 5
       Unit Type Mix in the CHN ...........cceceececeeeeeeee
                                        eee eee eee eeneeeseeanseeeneeesaeansaesneaeseeaaseeeeseesnesneanseeenses 6
       Unit Size in the CHN. . . . . .c c ce e e                    eee eee ee ee eee ee eee eee ee eee ese ee nese eee esse eae eee sea eeeeneeeneseeeaeenenes 11
       Geographic Location in the CHN .............:ccceececeeeeeceeeeeeeeneeeeeeeesaeeneanseeeesaeeneansesensaesnensensneas 12
       Accessible Units in the CHN ............ccccceeeeeee
                                          ee ee eee eee ee ee seers ee esas aa sass esa sa esse saa sees easaasaes eens 17
       Affordable Homeownership                            in the CHN ............ccccceesececeeeeeeneeeeeeeeeeeenseeseeansanseeeeseesnseeeeeoesees 20

     Part 2: Housing Production Strategies                                    Comp llanCe PathwayyS ..1sscccccnecnscenencncennscnsenens 23
       HPS Research Questions ............ccccccceceececeeeeeeeneeeeeeneeeaeeneaeaecneaeaecnssasoesasasoesneaseesaeasoesaeneons 23
       HPS Analysis Approach ...........ccccsccecceeeeceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeeeanseeeesaeeneanseseesaeeneasseeanseeeneenseennsaees 23
       Summary of Key Findings ............ccsceeceeeeeceeeeeeeeeeeecnseeeneeeseeansaaseeeeseesnsaeeeseesneaneenseeenseesneaanes 25
       OHNA         HPS Compliance Pathway Concepts ..........:.:ccceeeeeeeeeeeeeceseeeeeeneeeceseeseesneeneesenseesneanees 29

     CHN RESCArCh APPOHlx a asssscenennececunnennucnscnnnnnecunusnecusnnnecusnsneausnansnuansnanusnssususssanunnags 34
       UNIt MIX 0.0.                               i rin     nr i ir i        ea    nares ane rseaeeeaneaesesese ese saan esa esaaesaaesaaaas 34
       OT       aS). eee                                                                                                                                        69
       Geographic LOCAtION............ccscceceeeseeeeeee
                                ences eeneeeceeceeeeeneeeseesasaasneaesneansaeeeseesnesneensnsenseeanennges 85
       Accessible Units .........cccceceeee eee cence ence ee eee eee sense eee sense eee ee eee eeeeeeeseeeneseeseeeneseeseeeneaeseneenennees 89
       Affordable             Homeowner Ship..........c.ccsceeeeeeeeeeceeeeeeeeneeneeeeeseeeneeeseecesaeeeeenseeaneaeseeeeseesnennseeenes 102

     HPS Re@SCarch APPCndlx. .isuscseccnennenenncnecnnnsnecununcecunnnsecusnsascusnscanunnnnscussnesunnasasuannsanens 113



     Context: Policy Objectives and Types of Compliance
     Pathways
     The state’s goal in developing compliance pathways and other rules to implement the OHNA is to achieve the
     policy objectives initially described in a December 2024 memorandum entitled Draft Policy Objectives for Safe
     Harbors and Minimum Requirements. These are reiterated below.




eS     OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                                                                  2
         OHNA Compliance Pathways Policy Objectives
             1.   Promote inclusive zoning to enable a diversity of housing options across:
                  ¢   Housing Types like ADUs, cottage clusters, quadplexes, and multi-unit homes
                  «   Housing Characteristics like multi-generational, accessible, and affordable homes of varying tenure types
                  «   Housing Locations like high opportunity areas in support of mixed income communities
                       i.        Access to high quality amenities including frequent transit access and community resources like
                                 recreation centers with youth and older adult programming, safe streets, parks with playgrounds
                                 and fields, and schools
                  Produce and retrofit homes in high opportunity areas that increase housing choice related to key
                  equity-driven needs:
                  «   Affordable housing for low-income, very low-income, and extremely low-income households
                       i.        With varying characteristics to meet specific community needs like homes with 3+ bedrooms, with
                                 multi-generational layouts and units, and that meet the needs of a diverse population
                  ¢   Accessible housing for individuals with disabilities and older adults to ensure disability needs are
                      accommodated and age-in place, caretaking, multi-generational living, and other needed services and
                      lifestyles are supported
                            i.    With characteristics that meet the standards of TypeA Units in the state building code for goals of
                                  accessibility and the standards of Type B Units in the state building code for goals of adaptability
                        ii.       With characteristics of different types and sizes of accessible units
                  «   Anti-displacement policies and policies that address past and current harms including:
                            i.    Ensuring housing production reflects the needs of historically underserved communities
                        ii.       Remove barriers to fair housing choice like current zoning or land use policies that perpetuate harm
                                  to underserved communities, such as addressing policies prohibiting certain housing types that
                                  increase housing choice or current design standards that negatively impact housing production in
                                  exclusionary neighborhoods.
                  Streamline housing development processes to reduce regulatory barriers, legal uncertainty, or lengthy
                  approval processes for residential or mixed-use applications including by amending hearing or noticing
                  requirements
                  Increase community capacity and resilience in support of equitable housing production by increasing
                  efficiency in the provision and maintenance of public facilities; investing in systems that support cooperation
                  across government agencies; incentivizing development patterns that mitigate risk including natural hazards,
                  climate-related disasters, and economic events; and strategically using staff time



        Types of Compliance Pathways
        DLCD has defined compliance pathways as rules that create required or optional assumptions or actions that
        Oregon cities must (or may) take to comply with state land use law while completing their Contextualized
        Housing Need (CHN) analysis and / or their Housing Production Strategy (HPS). DLCD introduced the concept
        of compliance pathways to the HAWG at the January 28th meeting. It shared the range of compliance
        pathways (including no action) in this slide.



    y
"
wr        OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                                            3
        Figure 1: Types of Potential Compliance Pathways

         Compliance       No DLCD Action    Guidance Only      Safe Harbor         Rebuttable         Minimum               Regulatory
         Pathway                                                                   Presumption        Compliance            Requirement
         Alternatives                                                                                 Standards

         Description      DLCD provides     Optional           Optional            Statute/rules       Statute/rules set    Statute/rule sets
                          no guidance or    guidance; no       implementation    — sets baseline;      baseline that        universal
                          supportforlocal  legalprotections | path; legal          local gov’t can     constitutes          requirement; no
                          implementation _ to local gov’t     protections to       rebut w/            compliance;          deviation on that
                                                              local gov’t          demonstration       cities can go        allowed
                                                                                                       above

         Previous         Single-Room       Accessory          Buildable Lands   | SB 1537             Middle Housing      | Clear&
         example          Occupancies       Dwelling Units     Safe Harbors        Adjustments w/    | Administrative       Objective
         Housing Policy                                        (OAR 660-024)       city-requested      Rules                Standards
                                                                                   exemptions




        When asking ECOnorthwest to conduct research to help it consider which compliance pathways might be
        most appropriate in the CHN and the HPS, DLCD was focused on Safe Harbors, Rebuttable Presumptions,
        Minimum Compliance Standards, and Regulatory Requirements. These options are considered throughout
        this memo. The state is already planning on providing guidance documents for how cities are to comply with
        Goal 10 and Goal 14 in housing and land use planning.




    y
"
wr        OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations
         Part 1: Contextualized Housing Needs Compliance
         Pathways

         CHN Research Questions
         The state asked ECOnorthwest to explore whether adding pre-approved or required assumptions to the CHN
         (CHN “compliance pathways”) might: (1) result in the selection of actions in local Housing Production
         Strategies that would lead to housing production that is more aligned with the state’s policy objectives, and /
         or (2) result in better analytical outcomes than a locally driven CHN might. The state was interested in
         understanding potential unintended negative outcomes and the implications across cities of different sizes or
         across different regions, and implications of establishing minimum requirements as opposed to safe harbors
         or other forms of compliance pathways. Specifically, ECO evaluated the following research questions:

             e    sit possible for the state to develop a reasonable quantitative assumption that can become the basis
                  for a compliance pathway in the CHN? Are data currently available at a statewide level sufficient/
                  defensible?
             e    Would a quantitative assumption result in improved outcomes, relative to potential unintended
                  consequences, in zoning or land use policies?
             e    Ifitis possible, what might the compliance pathways be for unit mix, accessible housing, unit size/
                  bedroom count, geographic location, and affordable homeownership?

         The state wanted to understand these questions across five dimensions of housing need in the CHN:

             1.   Unit type mix (e.g., detached single unit housing, middle housing, multi-unit housing)

             2.   Unit sizes (e.g., studios and 1-bedrooms, 2-3 bedrooms, or 4+ bedrooms)

             3.   Geographic location (i.e., high opportunity areas)

            4.    Accessibility (e.g., Type A and Type B units)

             5.   Affordable homeownership

         From the analysis, DLCD sought advice on which assumptions should be added to the CHN requirements and
         in which mechanism (safe harbors or minimum requirements), and alternative options when no clear path
         emerged.


         CHN Research Approach
         For each of the key needs identified above, ECOnorthwest provided analysis, visualizations, and
         documentation of data limitations, considering how results vary by city size and OHNA region and where
         results and patterns might be reliable as a basis for policymaking.



y    4

wr         OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                      5
       In addition, ECOnorthwest conducted a qualitative assessment of potential positive and negative outcomes
       that could occur (related to the policy objectives and other outcomes as applicable) as a result of setting
       compliance pathways for quantifying these needs, assuming jurisdictions will work toward these goals
       whether required or voluntarily. ECOnorthwest considered whether and how outcomes might differ
       depending on how a compliance pathway is set (e.g., at a high or low end of a range observed in the data).


       Unit Type Mix in the CHN
       The potential compliance pathway relating to unit mix in the CHN would be requiring or allowing cities to
       assume that a certain mix of housing types will meet their community’s housing needs.

       Summary of Key Findings
       DATA CONSIDERATIONS

           e   New housing production unit type mix varies substantially across individual cities, but there are
               trends at a regional level and by city size. (Based on SOCDS housing permit data because permitted
               and produced data by jurisdiction is not consistently available statewide at this time; see Figure 2 for
               details.)
                    o      Overall, over 60% of new housing production since 2015 in all regions except the Metro region
                           has been single-unit housing (including single-unit detached and townhouses). In the Metro
                           region only about a third of units have been single-unit in the same period. Excluding the City
                           of Portland, the rest of the cities in the Metro region have produced just over 50% single-unit
                           housing.
                    o      Inaggregate, small cities have a higher share of new units in single-unit structures than large
                           and metro cities (60.5% compared to 42.6%); however, the variation within these size
                           groupings is relatively large.




Wy 4
  >
wr       OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                            6
        Figure 2: New Housing Production by Unit Type by Geography
        Source: SOCDS


           100%




            75%




            50%




            25%




                0%
                        Portland     Metro         50k+       25-50k       10-25k         3-county   Willamette   Central    Outlying   25k+and    10-25k
                                      UGB        outside      outside      outside         Metro       Valley                 regions     Metro
                                     cities,      Metro        Metro        Metro                                           combined      cities
                                   excluding   —_ region       region       region
                                    Portland

                                               ©!   Multi-unit (including 2-4plex)   ~~    Single-unit (detached and attached)




                         ©)    Current data reliability is poor, especially for smaller cities. In addition, the SOCDS permit data
                               does not differentiate between single-unit detached and townhouses, whereas the housing
                               type groupings consider townhouses to be middle housing. Over time, as cities track housing
                               production by type more consistently and using relevant type definitions, local data will
                               improve.

            e        There are clear relationships between housing type and affordability, with single-unit detached
                     housing less likely to be affordable than other housing types.
                         ©)    Most (but not all) regulated affordable housing development has been multi-unit housing,
                               even in smaller cities and outside the Metro region. (Based on data provided by OHCS, see
                               Figure 35 and Figure 36 in CHN Research Appendix for details.)
                               New for-sale housing, which is overwhelmingly single-unit detached, is largely affordable only
                               to households earning over 120% of AMI, with a relatively small percentage affordable at 80-
                               120% of AMI. In aggregate, a larger percentage is affordable at 80-120% of AMI in medium
                               cities than in large and Metro cities, though there is high variability in the data. (Based on
                               analysis of sales transactions from Property Radar for homes built since 2018; see Figure 24,
                               Figure 25, Figure 26, and            Figure 27 in CHN Research Appendix for details.)
                               New market-rate multi-unit rental housing spans a wider range of affordability brackets
                               generally from 60-80% AMI to >120% AMI. There are bigger differences in affordability
                               distribution by region and city size, but data are sparse in more remote regions and small

    A
<
wr        OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                                                               T
                         cities making those estimates less reliable. (Based on data from CoStar for new apartments
                         built since 2018; see Figure 28 and Figure 29 in CHN Research Appendix for details.)
                         There is a clear pattern of greater affordability for existing multi-unit and manufactured
                         housing compared to single-unit detached housing. There is some evidence of a similar
                         pattern for newer housing where data is available; however, there is limited data availability
                         for less populous regions for newer housing. (Based on ACS data; see Figure 19 in CHN
                         Research Appendix for details.)
            e   Housing type is strongly associated with tenure due to a variety of factors.
                    ©)   On-going challenges with construction defect liability for condominium development make it
                         difficult to produce multi-unit ownership housing.
                         Property management efficiencies for rental housing make it easier to produce and manage
                         multi-unit rental housing compared to single-unit detached rentals. (While build-to-rent
                         models for single-unit detached housing are gaining traction nationally and there is evidence
                         of increasing institutional investment activity in single-unit housing, both represent a very
                         small share of single-unit detached housing.)
                         Correlation between income and tenure’ (and the relationships between housing type and
                         affordability noted above) mean that higher-income households, who are more likely to be
                         homeowners, are more likely to be able to afford to buy single-unit detached housing if that is
                         their preference.
                         Higher homeownership rates among older households* means that younger adults (roughly
                         ages 20-34) are a key driver of demand for rental housing. Housing preferences for younger
                         adults tend to lean towards lower maintenance responsibilities and more access to social
                         activities and amenities, which can align with multi-unit housing.

        POLICY AND IMPLEMENTATION CONSIDERATIONS

            e   Needed housing type mix is inherently subjective, reflecting a mix of preferences, constraints
                (including affordability and development viability), and policy priorities.
                    ©)   Individual household preferences often differ from what they can afford, and they may choose
                         a housing unit that is not their preferred housing type because it offers a location or
                         characteristics that meet their needs at a price point they can afford.
                         Higher-income households generally have greater ability to choose housing that aligns with
                         their preferences than lower-income households because they are less constrained by
                         affordability.
                         If the needed housing mix does not consider market demand for different housing types, it
                         could lead to land use policies that fail to support market-rate housing production.


        ' The median income of homeowners in Oregon is approximately $100,000 a year compared to around $54,000 for
        renters. (American Community Survey, 2019-2023. Table B25119).
        * The homeownership rate for households under the age of 35 is approximately 31 percent in Oregon, compared to
        around 67 percent for those between 35 and 64 and 78 percent for those over the age of 65. (American Community
        Survey, 2019-2023. Table B25011).

    y
"
wr        OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                            8
                 o   There is also a need for housing that the market cannot produce, and determining the needed
                     housing types for non-market housing (i.e., regulated affordable housing) must balance
                     viability of producing the needed units with other considerations about household needs and
                     equity goals.
                 o   Housing type also has implications for land need / density, energy efficiency, transportation
                     mode choice, and other factors relevant to state and local policy goals.
             Financing and market challenges inhibit market-rate multi-unit housing production in smaller
             and more remote communities.
                 o   Developer interviews have identified a range of challenges with delivering multi-unit housing
                     in smaller communities, including comparable or higher construction costs compared to
                     larger cities, lower incomes that constrain what people can afford in rent, lack of contractors
                     for specific aspects of construction at a multi-unit scale, challenges securing financing, and
                     limits on the number of new units that can be absorbed (leased) at a time in a small market.
             Housing type mix matters for the HCA and establishing land need.
                 o   Unit type mix is a key assumption for the HCA, which determines land need, and can be
                     subject to litigation when cities propose an urban growth boundary expansion. This makes
                     having certainty about allowable assumptions for housing type mix more valuable to
                     jurisdictions.
                 o   HCAsin recent years have often estimated needed housing mix based on affordability
                     considerations and the housing types most likely to meet housing needs at different income
                     levels but have generally done this in a qualitative way that includes substantial discussion
                     among policymakers to determine the "right" mix.
                 o   Asafe harbor may appeal to some jurisdictions due to the increased legal certainty, as long as
                     the assumptions seem relatively reasonable to local policymakers. However, a safe harbor
                     that is seen as unreasonable by local policymakers is less likely to be utilized, even if it offers
                     greater legal certainty.
                 o   Unit mix assumptions affect the calculation of land need. Shifting zoning to better
                     accommodate higher-density housing types could decrease land need if production responds,
                     but if the housing mix that is ultimately built does not align with the needed mix, the
                     jurisdiction may have less than a 20-year supply of buildable land in reality. This could be
                     addressed in the next cycle unless land needs are dramatically underestimated.
             Linking to OHNA allocations by affordability bracket introduces additional complexity.
                 o   Acompliance pathway for needed type that is linked to the OHNA allocations by affordability
                     bracket would allow the equity considerations that informed those allocations to carry
                     through to influence housing type mix and help ground the type mix assumptions in how they
                     help deliver housing at the needed range of affordability levels. However, the OHNA
                     allocations by affordability bracket are inherently aspirational and this approach could run
                     the risk of over-emphasizing multi-unit and middle housing.




    y
"
wr      OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                           9
                   o   Allocations by income brackets vary substantially from region to region but vary less among
                       cities within a region (except for in the Metro region). Combining this variation with variation
                       in unit mix by affordability level could lead to unpredictable results over time.

       Implications
           e   Aquantified compliance pathway could be worthwhile given the relevance to the HCA, even if data
               to inform the selected mix(es) are imperfect.
           e   Achieving policy goals will require a balance of mandate and flexibility. A safe harbor would be
               sufficient to address the desire for legal certainty to support the HCA. However, cities that are not
               pursuing a UGB expansion (including cities in the Metro region) would not have an incentive to use the
               safe harbor and might establish a locally determined needed housing mix that would not align with
               the policy objectives due to political pressure. Differing market conditions in different communities
               suggest allowing for some flexibility for local determination of needed housing type mix if desired.
           e   Aquantified compliance pathway will need to draw on a mix of data and policy judgement.                 Using
               the available data to derive a precise needed unit mix is not possible; however, there are patterns and
               trends that can inform a quantified compliance pathway. There is currently a minimum requirement
               related to housing mix in the Metro region (the Metropolitan Housing Rule, which requires
               jurisdictions in the Metro UGB to plan for at least 50% of units to be single-family attached or multi-
               unit housing) that largely advances housing diversity and efficient land use goals and does not appear
               to have a specific basis in data. This offers a precedent for establishing a policy-informed compliance
               pathway related to housing type mix.
           e   Assumptions will need to balance a shift towards the policy objectives with practical
               considerations to avoid unintended consequences. The policy objectives are clear that the goal is
               to increase unit type diversity to expand housing options. To do this, the compliance pathway would
               need to result in a greater emphasis on multi-unit and middle housing relative to recent trends.
               However, if taken too far, over-emphasizing multi-unit and middle housing in a quantified type mix
               compliance pathway risks unintended consequences for under-estimating overall land need and
               misalignment with market demand. This could lead to barriers to overall housing production and/or
               to meeting needs for housing with characteristics that are correlated with housing type, including
               tenure and unit size.
       Recommendation
       Rebuttable Presumption: Jurisdictions must plan for a housing type mix that includes multi-unit and middle
       housing based on the greater of:

           e   The minimum percentages specified in the table below based on city size and region
           e   The share of multi-unit and middle housing permitted and produced over the preceding HPS period

       Jurisdictions may justify an alternative percentage based on an evaluation of market and economic factors,
       affordability by housing type, housing types common for affordable housing production in the jurisdiction or
       similar communities and changing demographics.

Wy 4
  >
wr       OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                            10
        Figure 3: Recommended Housing Type Mix by City Size

         Jurisdictions in Metro       50k+ cities outside          10-50k cities outside         <10k cities outside
         UGB                          Metro UGB                    Metro UGB                     Metro region

         255% multi-unit &            250% multi-unit &            245% multi-unit &             240% multi-unit &
         middle housing               middle housing               middle housing                middle housing

        “Multi-unit” housing includes single-room occupancies (SROs)

        “Middle” housing may include manufactured housing communities.

        The recommended percentages above represent roughly a five percentage point increase in multi-unit and
        middle housing relative to recent trends for the grouping as a whole (rounded up to the nearest 5%).
        Combined with the requirement to equal or exceed the jurisdiction’s own recent trends, this should ensure
        overall progress towards greater housing diversity over time without pushing so hard for a change that the
        rules risk creating unintended consequences that could inhibit housing production.


        Unit Size in the CHN
        The potential compliance pathway relating to unit size in the CHN would be requiring or allowing cities to
        assume that a certain unit size (measured as number of bedrooms) will meet their community’s housing
        needs.

        Summary of Key Findings
        DATA CONSIDERATIONS

            e    There is not a gap of housing units for households with 3+ members overall; however, there are
                 fewer options available within rental housing and for lower-income households.
                    o   Roughly a third of all households have 3+ members in aggregate in most regions and both
                        medium and large cities. While there is substantial variation at the local level, households with
                        3+ members represent less than half of households in most cities. (Based on data from the
                        American Community Survey; see Figure 46 and Figure 45 for details.)
                    o   Renter households are smaller on average than all households.      Roughly 25 - 30% of renter
                        households have 3+ members. (Based on data from the American Community Survey; see
                        Figure 47 for details.)
                    o   More than half of all housing units have 3+ bedroom units in most communities. (Based on
                        data from the American Community Survey; see Figure 40 and Figure 41 for details.)
                    o    For-rent housing is much more likely to be studio/1 bedroom and 2-bedroom units than for-
                        sale housing, which is largely 3+ bedroom units. (Based on analysis of recently constructed
                        rental housing using data from CoStar and recently constructed for-sale housing using sales
                        transactions from Property Radar; see Figure 51 and Figure 55 for details.)




    y
"
wr        OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                           11
                  o   Less than 25% of new for-rent construction has 3+ bedrooms, with limited variation by city
                      size or region, but wide variation by jurisdiction. (Based on analysis of recently constructed
                      rental housing using data from CoStar; see Figure 55 for details.)
                  o   Where rent data is available, it shows that 3-bedroom units tend to be less affordable than
                      smaller units relative to AMI, even after adjusting for unit size using HUD’s methodology.
                      (Based on analysis of recently constructed rental housing using data from CoStar; see Figure
                      37 for details.)
          e   Data reliability is poor, especially in smaller cities.

      POLICY AND IMPLEMENTATION CONSIDERATIONS

          e   Itis challenging for cities to influence bedroom counts through land use actions. Cities typically
              do not regulate bedroom count or tenure.

          e   Implementing policies that could affect bedroom count may affect or compete with other policy
              priorities. Larger units generally have higher rents and sales prices, making them less affordable if
              they are not within a regulated affordable housing development. However, HPS actions to support
              more regulated affordable units for families, including providing regulatory flexibility for affordable
              housing with larger units, could help address a specific need for larger affordable housing units.

      Implications
      There are large margins of error and variations in measuring the gap between household size and size of units
      produced. While there is a gap in the availability of larger units for renter households, it doesn’t appear large
      on average, and in some cities may be non-existent. In addition, there is a lack of clarity on how household
      size should translate to the number of bedrooms as not all households with 3+ people will need 3+ bedrooms.
      The biggest gap is in larger affordable housing units.

      Recommendation
      We do not advise the state to develop a quantitative assumption on unit size as a compliance pathway in
      the CHN. The policy objectives to increase the availability of affordable housing options for families can be
      met through HPS actions regardless of how need is quantified. If the state were to develop a compliance
      pathway for bedroom count assumptions in the CHN, we suggest a safe harbor based on local or regional
      data—for example, a safe harbor that the city may base need for multi-unit rental units with 3+ bedrooms on
      the share of renter with three or more household members in the city or region (whichever is greater), based
      on the latest available 5-year data from the American Community Survey.


      Geographic Location in the CHN
      One intended outcome of the CHN is to help jurisdictions identify the types, characteristics, and locations of
      housing need. The policy objectives focus on increasing housing choice in “high opportunity” areas, and this



y 4
 >
wr      OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                            12
        is the aspect of location that the state asked ECOnorthwest to evaluate further.             A compliance pathway related
        to high-opportunity locations could address two factors:

            e    How high-opportunity areas are defined and identified
            e    Defining and identifying the housing types and/or characteristics needed in high-opportunity areas,
                 such as establishing a certain share of specific housing needs that need to be met within high-
                 opportunity areas

        ECOnorthwest has been supporting DLCD in mapping a variety of assets and harms to inform an approach to
        identification of “high opportunity areas” in a parallel technical effort.* That technical effort is ongoing and
        will continue to evolve. This analysis primarily focuses on how housing types and/or characteristics overlay
        with high-opportunity areas as they are tentatively identified through that on-going work—areas with a high
        number of assets and a low number of harms from a list of 21 indicators.

        Key Findings
        OPPORTUNITY AREA DEFINITION:

            e    There are limitations to the data that is available statewide to identify both assets and harms, as
                 further documented in the methodology for the draft Opportunity Mapping Tool. Some datasets are
                 not available statewide (e.g., presence of sidewalks, locations of farmers markets); others may have
                 less detail or be less complete, nuanced, or up to date than comparable local data (e.g., parks, transit
                 service).
            e    Local efforts to define and map high-opportunity areas could be highly variable in terms of
                 alignment with the state’s policy objectives without further guidance or rulemaking. Some
                jurisdictions may have better data available locally than the state has access to at a statewide level;
                 others may not. Equitable local engagement is a critical component of establishing appropriate
                 locations as high-opportunity areas, but local engagement efforts may also be subject to inequitable
                 pressure by local residents and elected officials to avoid certain areas.
            e    Thecurrent methodology may not consistently identify desirable places to live as high-
                 opportunity areas. (Based on a review of preliminary results in the Opportunity Mapping Tool and
                 existing rule language.)
                     o       Based on the way and the analysis is constructed at this stage, many cities show a pattern
                             with high assets in the center or downtown area, but often also high harms; high-asset, low-




        3 At the time of this analysis, ECOnorthwest was concurrently working with DLCD to create a methodology to define areas
        of high opportunity and build an opportunity mapping tool. To evaluate location, we overlaid the draft Opportunity
        Mapping scores as of late May 2025 to inform this analysis. However, the Opportunity Mapping methodology is still in
        draft format, and is likely to change. It is intended to help identify where in jurisdictions there is proximity or exposure to
        relatively more or less community assets and harms. The outcome of the tool will be a map that gives an overall
        combined score for a geographic area that takes into account both the assets and harms included in the map. The draft
        methodology includes 11 indicators representing community assets, 10 indicators representing community harms, and
        three screening layers that can be overlaid for additional context, but do not influence the aggregated scoring.
    y
"
wr        OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                                      13
                   harm areas in some close-in neighborhoods; and low-asset areas around the periphery, some
                   of which have low-harm and some with high-harm.
               o   Thecurrent definition of assets and the draft approach to opportunity mapping includes
                   proximity to many assets that are typically limited to major corridors and nonresidential
                   areas, such as grocery stores, medical facilities, major employers, and transit. It also includes
                   assets that are commonly allowed and found in residential areas such as trees, schools, and
                   parks, but because all assets are equally weighted, areas with these assets but less proximity
                   to commercial areas and major corridors are less likely to be identified as high-asset areas.
               o   Because the methodology does not consider demographic factors (e.g., income or
                   concentration of poverty) or home values as indicators, some high-income residential areas
                   are categorized as low-asset and/or high-harm due to lack of access to commercial areas and
                   transit and/or exposure to harms such as higher wildfire risk due to proximity to large wooded
                   areas or landslide hazard due to being located on a hillside. This is an intentional choice but
                   could lead to discrepancies between how areas are perceived by the public and how they are
                   categorized in the analysis.
               ©   Notall potential assets and harms or (or could be) mapped and included in the analysis.
                   Factors such as busy arterial roads, exposure to property or violent crime, and school ratings
                   are not included in the definition of assets and harms or in the mapping analysis to date but
                   can impact popular perception of neighborhood desirability.
       e   Mapping existing assets will typically miss areas that may be concept planned or master planned
           to become complete, high-opportunity areas in the future but where key features are not present
           today. Focusing production of multi-unit and affordable housing in high-opportunity areas as
           currently identified could mean less pressure on (or even inadvertently discouraging) jurisdictions to
           expand housing options in existing single-unit detached neighborhoods or to integrate a range of
           housing options into newly developing areas unless combined with other locational considerations.
       e   Not all assets or harms are equally meaningful in all communities. The working draft of the
           Opportunity Mapping Tool does not currently include the ability to differentially weight indicators or
           to add or remove indicators based on their local relevance, though scoring can be calculated relative
           to the UGB, which will tend to limit the impact of indicators that do not vary much within a city.
       e   The current definition of opportunity areas is partially but not fully aligned with the location
           preferences in the ORCA. OHCS is considering updating those preferences and the discrepancies may
           be resolved through that process and/or future refinements to how opportunity mapping is defined.
           Sending mixed or conflicting signals to affordable housing developers could result in additional
           challenges with affordable housing production.
       e   The state still has much work to do to finalize the opportunity area analysis as well as complete
           related analyses and demonstrate how these other analyses will interact with the opportunity areas.
           These include:
               o   The DLCD Community Explorer Tool
               o   The OHCS Oregon Centralized Application (ORCA) location priorities for affordable housing
                   development funding


y 4
 >
wr    OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                          14
                    o     Related analyses of racially and ethnically concentrated areas of affluence and poverty
                          (R/ECAAs and R/ECAPs)
                    o     The Environmental Justice Mapping Tool which will not be complete until the end of 2027.
                    o     Interaction between opportunity area mapping with the HPS rules, the Climate Friendly Areas
                          rules, and the Buildable Land Inventory rules

        LOCATION OF NEW HOUSING RELATIVE TO HIGH- AND LOW-ASSET AREAS AND HIGH- AND LOW-HARM AREAS:

            e   New for-sale units are mostly in low harm areas, and most are located in low asset, low harm areas
                compared to high asset, low harm areas. (Based on analysis of sales transactions for recent
                construction from Property Radar; see Figure 56 for details.)
            e   Market rate rentals are mostly in high asset areas with an even split between high asset, low harm
                and high asset, high harm areas. Market rate rentals located in “high harm” areas are mostly adjacent
                to busy commercial corridors. (Based on analysis of recent multi-unit rental housing construction
                from CoStar; see Figure 57 for details.)
            e   Recent affordable housing projects are largely located in high asset areas, with more in high asset,
                low harm areas. (Based on analysis of recently funded affordable housing project locations provided
                by OHCS; see Figure 58 for details.)
            e   Ingeneral, opportunity areas (as currently mapped) align with where the market is driving production
                for multi-unit housing, less so for for-sale housing. Since most of these areas are in historic centers of
                cities and along highways, some also have a high concentration of harms (toxic cleanup sites, bike &
                ped-involved crashes) that can’t be easily removed.
            e   Tothe extent that identified high-opportunity areas overlap with areas with existing high-value
                development, concentrating zoning reforms and incentives in these areas may have less impact due
                to the challenges of redeveloping high-value existing property.

        Implications
            e   Current opportunity area mapping is still preliminary and may not provide an appropriate benchmark
                for setting quantitative percentages of units to be located in high-opportunity areas.
            e   Despite best efforts, a statewide map may not accurately identify high-opportunity areas in ways that
                align with the policy objectives in all communities. However, local efforts to define and map high-
                Opportunity areas may or may not better align with the policy objectives absent further direction.
            e   Without a compliance pathway related to how high-opportunity areas must be defined and mapped,
                quantitative definitions of need for specific types of units in those areas will have little meaning and
                impact.

        Recommendation

        OPPORTUNITY AREA DEFINITION

        Provide a mix of guidance and additional requirements for how high-opportunity areas must be
        identified locally.



    y
"
wr        OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                          15
        Because of the inherent limitations of a statewide mapping effort, the final version of the statewide
        opportunity mapping tool may be best suited as a resource for jurisdictions along with guidance
        documents detailing how it could be applied locally, and potentially adjusted or adapted (e.g., through
        weighting of the indicators) to reflect equitable engagement for jurisdictions that lack the capacity or data to
        do their own mapping.

        Additional guidance that would also be highly valuable for practitioners with limited experience with such
        data could include:

            e    Information on relevant and readily available data sets and their strengths and limitations.
            e   Appropriate ways to measure proximity to different assets and harms given the geographic reach of
                their impact and the type of asset or harm.
            e   Appropriate geographic scales for the analysis (e.g., parcel, grid, or specific census geographies)

        Because of the importance of defining areas of opportunity for achieving the state’s policy objectives, it may
        also be appropriate to establish additional rules that lay out more detailed requirements for local opportunity
        mapping efforts, such as:

            e    Further defining the key assets and harms that must be considered in establishing high-opportunity
                areas, building on or refining the definition of “Location” in the OHNA rules (OAR 600-008-0005(27))
                and its embedded definition of “Key destinations" from the DLCD Transportation Planning rules (OAR
                660-012-0360(2)).*
            e   Clarifying howjurisdictions may weigh the importance of different assets and harms based on local
                conditions and equitable engagement
            e   Clarifying how urbanizable areas or planned development areas that are expected to become
                complete communities when developed should be addressed
            e   Clarifying whether to integrate, overlay, or separately address areas that are segregated by race and
                 income (e.g., R/ECAPs and R/ECAAs), and/or market indicators of exclusivity (e.g., current home
                 prices, presence or absence of recent housing production) when identifying areas of opportunity
            e   Clarifying how assets should be weighed against harms (e.g., are high-asset areas considered high-
                opportunity even if they also have relatively high exposure to harms?).
            @    Requiring that jurisdictions demonstrate how the identified high-opportunity areas reflect and align
                with input received from equitable engagement

        These requirements could establish a somewhat clearer and more detailed framework for the identification of
        high-opportunity areas than exists under current rules, while deferring details of data sources and methods to
        guidance.




        * Note that “Key destinations as defined by OAR 660-012-0360(2)” includes major facilities that may have substantial
        pedestrian, bike, or transit activity but do not necessarily benefit the adjacent residents, including major sports or
        performance venues and colleges. These assets are not included in the current opportunity mapping but might be
        included in local analyses under current rule language.
    y
"
wr        OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                                    16
      ESTABLISHING SPECIFIC NEEDS TO MEET WITHIN OPPORTUNITY AREAS

      Because it would be premature to use the available data to establish quantitative rules for a specific share of
      certain housing needs to be met within opportunity areas given the preliminary nature of statewide mapping
      results, it may be more appropriate to establish compliance pathways that require a qualitative or relative
      definition of need relative to location. For example, for key needs such as affordable housing, accessible units,
      and affordable homeownership, the rules could more explicitly require that jurisdictions define a need for an
      increasing share of these housing needs to be met within high-opportunity areas, and/or for these housing
      options to be equitably distributed relative to high-opportunity areas (e.g., that there should be equal or
      greater availability of housing that meets those needs within high-opportunity areas compared to the
      distribution of the overall housing stock).


      Accessible Units in the CHN
      The potential compliance pathway relating to accessible housing in the CHN would be requiring or allowing
      cities to assume that a specific share of housing should meet specific accessibility standards to meet
      their community’s housing needs.

      There are several relevant building code standards related to accessibility, including:

          e   Type Aunits are required to have certain features for wheelchair access, including accessible
              entrances and doorways, maneuvering clearances, and must have certain features that can be
              modified or added based on the tenants’ needs—such as reinforced walls for adding grab bars in
              bathrooms. For multi-unit developments with more than 20 units, the building code requires at least
              2% (but not less than one dwelling unit) to be designed as Type A units.
          e   Type B units are considered “adaptable,” in that they are usable by a person in a wheelchair but are
              not fully wheelchair friendly. For example, interior doors must allow clear widths for wheelchair
              access, but only the front door is required to meet the higher accessibility/maneuvering requirements.
              Other adaptability features must also be included. Multi-unit developments with four or more units
              are subject to standards requiring Type B units. For buildings with an elevator (typically 4+ story
              buildings), all units must be Type B units, per the building code; for those without an elevator, all
              ground floor units must be Type B. (Note that multi-level units such as townhouses are excluded from
              these requirements.)


      Summary of Key Findings
      DATA CONSIDERATIONS

          e   The best available data to estimate need for accessible units is the share of the population with
              ambulatory disabilities. There are many other types of disabilities (e.g., sensory disabilities) that may
              require or benefit from specific housing features, but not necessarily the same features as those
              needed for individuals with ambulatory disabilities.



y 4
 >
wr      OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                           17
        e   Roughly 3-13% of the population has ambulatory disabilities in Medium and Large cities across
            Oregon, though most fall between 5 and 10%. The overall share at a regional scale ranges from just
            over 4% to just under 8%. (Based on an analysis of ACS data.)
        e   The prevalence of ambulatory disabilities is higher:
                o    Among older people, especially those 75 and up (statewide, less than 6% of adults ages 18-55
                     have an ambulatory disability, compared to over 30% of those over age 75)
                o    Among   lower-income households
                o    In Medium cities (compared to Large and Metro cities)
                oO   Incities outside the Metro region
        e   The population is aging in many Oregon cities, which is likely to increase the share of the population
            with ambulatory disabilities over time.
        e   There is no comprehensive or reliable data on prevalence of Type A and B units at the state or local
            level. To reach a rough approximation of units that have likely been built to Type A or Type B
            standards, ECOnorthwest analyzed available data on recent multi-unit developments including
            number of stories, presence of elevators, and number of housing units. This data is incomplete and
            not entirely reliable.
        e   TypeA and B units are required for certain types of housing under existing building codes and federal
            requirements:
                o    Multi-unit structures with 4+ units (excluding townhouses) must design ground floor units and
                     upper floor units served with elevators to Type B (adaptable) standards
                o    Multi-unit structures with 20+ units must design 2% of units to Type A (accessible) standards
                o    Affordable housing that receives federal funding is subject to additional requirements that at
                     least 5% of units must be accessible for people with physical or mobility disabilities and 2%
                     must be accessible for people with vision or hearing disabilities.
                o    Other types of housing may voluntarily include accessibility / universal design features, but it
                     is not required.
        e   Close to 50% of all recently built multi-unit housing units may have been designed to Type B
            standards, and roughly 2% of units may have been built to Type A standards, though this varies by
            city size and region as shown in Figure 4.
                o    The higher prevalence of Type B adaptable units in larger cities likely reflects the greater share
                     of multi-unit housing with elevators in those areas. This contrasts with the lower share of the
                     population with disabilities living in larger cities and the Metro region.
                o    Senior-specific housing was excluded from the analysis but likely includes a higher share of
                     accessible / adaptable units than other multi-unit housing.
                o    The higher requirements for affordable housing are not reflected in this analysis.




Wy 4
  >
wr     OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                         18
     Figure 4: Share of New Construction of Type A and B Housing by City Size
     Source: CoStar




             Metro or >25K -




       2                                                                                Unit type

      .o)                                                                               I)   Type B



                      <10k-




                               0%                 20%              40%
                                    Estimated percent of new construction   units


     POLICY AND IMPLEMENTATION CONSIDERATIONS

             e   Many seniors prefer to age in place, which may mean continuing to live in existing single-unit
                 detached housing retrofitted to meet their needs. If and when they do relocate, many older adults
                 indicate they would still prefer a single-unit detached home or active adult or senior housing.°

             e   Increasing the share of accessible and adaptable units in new market-rate apartments may not
                 meet the most pressing needs for accessible housing. Market-rate apartments predominately serve
                 younger adults, who have a lower rate of ambulatory disabilities than older adults. Individuals with
                 disabilities are over-represented in lower-income households, but new market-rate apartments may
                 not be affordable for those households. New market-rate apartments also tend to be less financially
                 feasible in smaller cities and outlying areas, making that a challenging way to increase the supply of
                 accessible units in those areas.

     Implications
             e   Shortages of accessible and adaptable units are likely most prevalent for:
                      o    Single-unit detached, cottage clusters, duplexes, and townhouses that are adaptable to
                           changing ability levels as occupants age
                      o    Housing that is both accessible and affordable to those with lower incomes




     ° Maggie Ratnayake, et. al., “Aging in Place:: Are We Prepared?,” Delaware Journal of Public Health 8, no. 3 (2022): 28-31,
     https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC9495472/.
     ° Binette, Joanne, and Fanni Farago. 2024 Home & Community Preferences Among Adults 18 and Older. Washington, DC:
     AARP Research, December 2024. https://doi.org/10.26419/res.00831.001



wr          OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                               19
                  o    Housing offering greater degrees of accessibility for those using wheelchairs (housing built to
                       Type A accessibility standards and adapted for individuals with wheelchairs or housing built
                       to higher levels of accessibility)
                  o    Housing that meets the needs of those with sensory disabilities (this is only required within
                       federally funded affordable housing)
                  o    Accessible and adaptable housing in smaller cities and outlying regions where rates of
                       ambulatory disabilities are higher, there are fewer new multi-unit developments, and
                       elevator-served buildings are less common.
         e   Increasing accessibility of the existing single-unit detached housing stock and supporting
             development of accessible senior housing may best meet the needs of seniors with mobility
             disabilities.
         e   Need for accessible and adaptable units is likely to grow over time as the population ages.
     Recommendation
     It may be helpful for the state to provide guidance or a safe harbor to assist cities with making reasonable
     estimates of the need for accessible housing, given that local planners may have limited experience planning
     for accessible housing and there is limited reliable data. For example, a safe harbor could be to estimate the
     need for accessible units as a percentage of units based on the share of the population with ambulatory
     disabilities in the City or region (whichever is higher).

         e   Thestate could consider adding a small margin (e.g., 1-2 percentage points) to the current share to
             account for aging trends.
         e   Given the importance of retrofitting existing homes as well as producing new accessible units
             (including within senior-specific housing) to meet the needs of a range of individuals with disabilities,
             a CHN compliance pathway related to accessibility should be framed broadly enough to encompass
             all of these needs and options (e.g., articulating the need as units built or retrofitted to meet the needs
             of people with mobility disabilities rather than specifying Type A or B units).

     Additional guidance may also be helpful for local planners to incorporate accessibility considerations into the
     CHN, including information on:

             Existing requirements related to Type A and B units
             housing features that meet the needs of individuals with sensory disabilities
             Universal Design practices that can apply to a range of housing types and benefit a range of users
             How to collect data on Type A and B units and/or other accessibility features for new or existing
             housing


     Affordable Homeownership in the CHN
     The potential compliance pathway relating to affordable homeownership in the CHN would be requiring or
     allowing cities to assume that a certain share of housing should be affordable homeownership to meet
     their community’s housing needs.




wr     OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                          20
        Summary of Key Findings
        DATA CONSIDERATIONS

                Existing homeownership rates vary by income level. Statewide, the homeownership rate for
                households under 30% HAMEFI is well below that of moderate- and higher-income households. The
                gaps between the homeownership rates at each income level are generally just under 10 percentage
                points each, with a bigger jump for households over 100% of HAMFI. (Based analysis of HUD’s
                Comprehensive Housing Affordability Strategy (CHAS) data which relies on 2017-2021 ACS 5-Year
                estimates.)

        Figure 5: Homeownership Rate by Income
        Source: CHAS

        Income Bracket              Homeownership Rate

        >100% HAMFI                                 73.0%

        80-100% HAMFI                               53.4%

        50-80% HAMFI                                45.5%

        30-50% HAMFI                                36.4%
        <30% HAMFI                                  27.5%

        Total                                       56.2%



            e   Existing homeownership rates by income vary between communities, particularly within the Metro
                region, but there are not clear patterns of differences based on region or city size.
                Overall homeownership rates vary somewhat by region, with less variation by city size.
                There is very little for-sale housing affordable to lower-income households, especially within newer
                housing stock. (Based on analysis of 2023 PUMS 5-year data for the state as a whole.)

        POLICY AND IMPLEMENTATION CONSIDERATIONS

                Identifying true “need” for affordable home ownership is challenging. Lower income households
                are far more likely to be renters than higher-income households, but there is no available data on how
                many of those households would prefer to be homeowners.
                       o   One way to think about this is through revealed preferences: we can observe the patterns of
                           those who are less income constrained (above 120% of AMI) and assume that lower- and
                           middle-income households “need” access to home ownership product at similarly high rates.
                           However, this assumes that lower-income households share the same preferences and
                           priorities as higher-income households, which may not necessarily be the case.
                Tenure and unit type are tightly interwoven. There will be interaction (whether explicitly
                recognized in a compliance pathway or not) with any unit mix compliance pathway that is
                implemented.

    y
"
wr        OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                       21
                   o   Statewide, just 12% of newer single-unit detached ownership housing is affordable to
                       households below 100% of AMI, while 59% of new middle housing units were affordable to
                       households below 100% of AMI.
                   o   Asnoted previously, construction defect liability challenges inhibit development of multi-unit
                       ownership housing that could (in some cases) offer a more affordable form of
                       homeownership.
          e   Maintaining homeownership can also be challenging for low-income households. Lower-income
              households generally have less savings and a smaller buffer between essential expenses and income
              than higher-income households. Low-income homeowners may struggle to cover unexpected costs
              for maintenance or repairs while continuing to pay their mortgage and other expenses, which can lead
              to deteriorating housing conditions or need to take on additional debt.
          e   The existing rules already identify housing tenure and wealth-building opportunities as a fair housing
              issue area that must be addressed in the CHN.

      Implications
      There is no clear, data-informed way to establish an optimal rate of homeownership for low-income
      households. While increasing the rate of homeownership for low-income households is important and aligned
      with the Policy Objectives, being overly ambitious about the degree of increase could result in conflicts with
      other policy goals.

      Recommendation
      If the state wishes to establish a compliance pathway to more explicitly require cities to identify a need for
      affordable homeownership opportunities and/or to quantify this need, it may be appropriate to simply state
      more explicitly that this need that must be addressed in the CHN. If the state wishes to establish   a compliance
      pathway to quantify this need, the best available option may be to provide a safe harbor that cities may
      estimate the need based on increasing homeownership rates for low- and moderate-income households by at
      least a specified increment (e.g., 5 or 10 percentage points) relative to current homeownership rates. This
      increment would approximately shift a given income group up to a similar level of homeownership as the next
      higher income group has today. Such a goal would still require substantial effort and funding to achieve but
      would be less likely to result in unintended consequences of jurisdictions understanding the need to be so
      dramatically higher that they might take actions that become counterproductive.




W 4
 >
a       OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                            22
     Part 2: Housing Production Strategies Compliance
     Pathways

     HPS Research Questions
     The state is interested in exploring compliance pathways for action selection in the HPS that encourage or
     require cities to take land use actions that will support the policy objectives. To inform potential rulemaking,
     the state asked ECOnorthwest to consider the following research questions:

              What zoning or land use actions (reforms or incentives) would support the Policy Objectives with the
              fewest unintended consequences?
              Are there particular thresholds at which those reforms or incentives are effective or result in
              unintended consequences?
              How might this vary by region and/or city size?
              What compliance pathways are most likely to reduce the likelihood that zoning and land use are
              barriers to development that meets key housing needs?

     ECOnorthwest focused on the following elements of the policy objectives for this evaluation:

         @    Inclusive Zoning Policies to enable a diversity of housing types, including multi-unit and middle
              housing, overall and in high-opportunity areas
         e    Affordable Housing Production and Housing Choice in high-opportunity areas
         e    Accessible Unit Production and Housing Choice in high-opportunity areas
         e    Affordable homeownership in high-opportunity areas
         e    Provide different types and sizes of affordable housing units


     HPS Analysis Approach
     Process and Elements of Analysis
     To respond to these questions, ECOnorthwest carried out a four-step research process.

         1.   Defining Prototypes: What types of housing development could support the Policy Objectives?
        2.    Feasibility Analysis: Where are those types of development plausibly feasible for the market to
              deliver (in an optimistic scenario), based on a pro forma analysis?
                  a.   How does this relate to preliminary mapping of high-opportunity areas?
                  b.   How does this vary by City size and region?
              Zoning Analysis: In select jurisdictions with readily available data, where are those types of
              development currently allowed?
              Land Use Actions: What does this suggest about HPS land use actions that could expand
              Opportunities for development that would support the Policy Objectives?



wr     OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                        23
        Development Prototypes
        The types of development selected for analysis based on their potential to support the state’s policy
        objectives are summarized in brief below. Additional details about these prototypes are provided in the data
        appendix beginning on page 113.

        Figure 6: Development Prototypes


                                                                Neighborhood-scale multi-unit housing
          Diverse variety of housing types
                                                                Compact middle housing


          Affordable & mixed-income                             Mixed-income neighborhood-scale multi-unit
          housing                                               Mixed-income corridor-scale multi-unit housing

                                                                Adaptable middle housing
          Accessible housing                                    Neighborhood-scale multi-unit housing
                                                                4+ story multi-unit housing

          Diversity of unit sizes /
                                                                Multi-unit housing with 3+ bedroom units
          family-sized units


            e   Neighborhood-scale multi-unit housing: 3-story multi-unit development on small lots with roughly 8-
                12 units and little or no parking and open space.
            e   Compact middle housing: middle housing types on smaller lots with less parking and open space/
                landscaping compared to current minimum compliance standards under middle housing rules.
            e   Adaptable middle housing: single-story cottages and stacked quad- and six-plexes that offer potential
                for adaptable units.
            e   4+story multi-unit housing (also referred to as corridor-scale multi-unit housing): multi-unit housing
                on larger sites with 4 or more stories and at least 40 units, likely providing elevator service and more
                adaptable and accessible units.
            @   Mixed-income variations of multi-unit housing assume 20% of units at 80% of AMI.
            e   Variations with 3+ bedroom units assume a higher proportion of units with 3+ bedrooms compared to
                current statewide averages for multi-unit housing.

        Interpretation of Results
        The results provide a rough indicator of where and to what extent market-rate developers might respond to
        various inclusive land use policies, supporting development that aligns with the state’s policy objectives.
        Specifically, block group-based market feasibility results can help discern which prototypes could be feasible
        under favorable market conditions and therefore which land use actions could have an impact on market-rate
        housing development.


    7
"
wr        OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                         24
        The analysis results are indicative of the land use actions that could be productive in different size cities
        should market conditions improve, helping to distinguish between the following:
                Policy actions that could enable prototypes that are likely infeasible everywhere
                Policy actions that could enable prototypes that are likely infeasible in many places, including
                medium cities, but might be closer to being feasible in large and Metro cities and/or high opportunity
                areas in some of those cities
                Policy actions that could enable prototypes that are likely infeasible in many places, but might be
                closer to being feasible in medium, large, and Metro cities and/or high opportunity areas in some of
                those cities

        The analysis results do NOT describe the scope or scale of actual feasible development in any city or
        submarket.


        Summary of Key Findings
        Analysis Results
                Under current market conditions, most housing development shows limited financial feasibility
                in nearly all Oregon submarkets. As a result, the balance of the analysis focused on housing
                development feasibility under more favorable hypothetical conditions, given the extended time
                horizon over which land use actions and development could take effect.
                Under more favorable market conditions, feasibility varies between Large and Metro Cities
                compared to Medium Cities.
                     o   Smaller prototypes showed potential feasibility across more submarkets than larger
                         prototypes.
                     o   Ifa particular prototype showed potential feasibility under favorable conditions in Medium
                         Cities, it would generally be feasible in more of the Large and Metro Cities.
                     o   Ifa particular prototype showed potential feasibility under favorable conditions in Large and
                         Metro Cities, the City of Portland would consistently be among the cities that showed the most
                         feasible submarkets.
                     o   Larger multi-unit prototypes (50+ units) showed relatively little feasibility under favorable
                         conditions outside of the City of Portland.
                The most promising types of development that could align with the policy objectives include:
                     o   Diverse variety of housing types: Expanding opportunities for more compact detached
                         middle housing in Medium Cities and for neighborhood-scale multi-unit housing in Large and
                         Metro Cities could potentially result in feasible development that supports a more diverse
                         range of housing types.
                     o   Affordable & mixed-income housing: There may be potential to use neighborhood-scale
                         multi-unit housing as a regulatory incentive / density bonus for mixed-income housing in
                         Large and Metro Cities. Mixed-income housing height / density bonuses are less likely to be



y   4

          OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                            25
                      effective as incentives for mixed-income development where typical 3-story multi-unit
                      housing is already allowed, even in Large and Metro Cities without further financial incentives.
                  o   Accessible housing: Incentivizing adaptable detached middle housing has potential for
                      feasibility across jurisdiction sizes. Expanding opportunities for neighborhood-scale multi-unit
                      housing and 4+ story corridor-scale multi-unit housing in Large and Metro Cities could
                      potentially result in feasible development that supports more accessible housing units based
                      on current building code requirements (this is much less likely to be effective in Medium
                      Cities).
                  o   Diversity of unit sizes / family-sized units: There may be potential to use neighborhood-
                      scale multi-unit housing as a regulatory incentive / density bonus for including a higher share
                      of 3+ bedroom units in Large and Metro Cities. There may be more limited potential to use 4+
                      story corridor-scale multi-unit housing as a regulatory incentive / density bonus for including
                      a higher share of 3+ bedroom units in Large and Metro Cities in areas where typical 3-story
                      multi-unit housing is already allowed.
          e   InLarge and Metro Cities, feasibility results were generally similar within the preliminary identified
              high-asset, low-harm areas and citywide, assuming equal availability of suitable sites in both areas.
              (Lack of a statewide parcel dataset precluded ECOnorthwest from analyzing actual site conditions at a
              statewide scale.)
          e   Azoning scan of four jurisdictions found that relatively few of the housing prototypes that could help
              address Policy Objectives were allowed by zoning across a substantial portion of the cities’ land area.
                  o   Inthe two Large and Metro Cities analyzed, there were limited areas (largely
                      commercial/mixed-use zones) zoned to allow higher-intensity multi-unit housing, and limited
                      areas (generally medium/high density residential zones) that allow compact middle housing
                      (as specified in this analysis), neighborhood-scale multi-unit housing, or six-plexes.
                  o   Inthe two Small / Medium Cities analyzed, the forms of middle housing and multi-unit
                      housing that could achieve the policy objectives (as specified in this analysis) were allowed
                      almost nowhere within the cities.

       The analysis results suggest that relaxing zoning constraints on multi-unit and middle housing with
       specific characteristics could expand housing development options in ways that align with the policy
       objectives, though zoning reforms alone may be insufficient to result in meaningful production of these
       needed housing options in many parts of Oregon, particularly in smaller cities.

       Policy and Implementation Considerations
       EFFECTIVENESS OF LAND USE ACTIONS

          e   Zoning is one of the key levers that cities control that impacts housing production. There is generally
              little harm in removing regulatory barriers to needed housing development, even if there is not a
              clear precedent for market-feasible development of that type available in the area. However, past a
              certain point, excessive up-zoning could create unintended consequences.



Wy 4
  >
wr       OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                           26
                 o   If zoning regulations allow far more development than is market-feasible within the
                     foreseeable future, this could inflate property owner expectations about development
                     potential and land value, making them less likely to sell their land to developers building
                     below what is allowed.
                 o   HCArules and policy guidance should be reviewed to ensure they sufficiently address
                     quantifiable validation and avoid unintended preclusion of UGB expansions resulting from
                     widespread upzoning. Any widespread upzoning compliance measures should be
                     accompanied by HCA rules and guidance that avoid overcounting speculative capacity.

         e   For Medium Cities, land use actions that enable a broader range of small-scale housing
             development options are more likely to align with what can be financed and built in smaller
             markets. While the feasibility results showed little development potential, small-scale local
             developers and investors may be willing to build small projects that do not meet feasibility criteria for
             larger developers and more competitive markets.
         e   While zoning reforms have a relatively low cost for jurisdictions (primarily staff time and potentially
             consultant support to develop new regulations and provide information and public engagement
             related to the changes), they can be politically challenging. Cities are less likely to implement land
             use actions that impact development options in existing neighborhoods if there are other
             options available under the rules, especially in communities where prevailing local sentiment does
             not align with the policy direction.
         e   Thecurrent state of zoning regulations for housing, especially multi-unit housing, is highly variable
             even among cities in the same region or of a similar size. The impact of any zoning reforms will
             depend on how restrictive applicable regulations are today in a given community. Allowing
             jurisdictions to demonstrate that their existing zoning is already at least as permissive as any given
             zoning standards will create flexibility for cities that have already made substantial progress in
             removing regulatory barriers to needed housing options.
         e   Non-regulatory barriers to production of needed housing options (e.g., market conditions, financing
             and access to capital) may remain in jurisdictions where zoning is already aligned to allow specific
             development. In these situations, other actions may have greater impact than further zoning reforms.
             Providing flexibility for jurisdictions to focus on other actions if they can show that their zoning
             is already comparable to what is required can support effective action to address remaining
             barriers.

      SPATIAL CONSIDERATIONS

         e   Given the uncertainty about site conditions and current zoning in high-opportunity areas, a broader
             geographic approach is more likely to create overlap between supportive market conditions,
             viable sites, and inclusive zoning, as illustrated below.




y 4
 >
wr      OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                           27
       Figure 7: OHNA HPS Compliance Design Considerations

                            Upzone                 less area                                  Upzone          more             area

                                    City’s Total Land Area                                       City’s Total Land Area




                                                            Areas
                                  Buildablé              Upzoned                                Buildable
                                                                                                  land              Areas
                                     Land               for OHNA
                                                                                                                  Upzoned
                                                       Compliance
                                                                                                                  for OHNA


                                                   5a \
                                                     ica)
                                                       |
                                                                                                          a   :
                                    Marke't
                                   Feasibie
                                                           High
                                                       Opportunity
                                                                                                market
                                                                                                Feasibis
                                    Areas*                  Areas**                              Areas*           i—tsé Sree




         Notes:   (*) Market-feasible areas have not been defined
         (**) Interacts with definitions of high opportunity areas and their CPs in the CHN



           e        InMedium Cities, spatial differences between high-opportunity and lower-opportunity areas may be
                    less dramatic due to their smaller geographic extent, and state-provided opportunity mapping may be
                    less reliable due to data limitations, making it less effective to focus zoning reforms specifically on
                    high-opportunity areas in smaller cities.
           e        Development on vacant/ partially vacant land (particularly development-ready land) is more likely to
                    be feasible than redevelopment given similar market conditions, particularly in smaller cities and
                    those with weaker market conditions. However, some vacant and partially vacant land has
                    challenging site conditions that have prevented it from developing to date. This is less likely for
                    development-ready land, but that may be in short supply in some cities, especially in the first round of
                    developing an HPS under the new rules. Applying zoning reforms to a mix of buildable land,
                    development-ready land, and developed land where redevelopment may be possible can
                    maximize potential for feasible development.
           e        Allowing or requiring cities to choose specific areas to implement zoning reforms creates the potential
                    for tailoring implementation to local context. However, experience implementing middle housing
                    legislation suggests if cities choose where to apply zoning reforms within existing neighborhoods
                    this can create substantial political pressure to avoid certain neighborhoods.
           e        Integrating a range of housing options into future neighborhoods may be equally important as
                    retrofitting existing neighborhoods to provide a wider range of housing choices. If reforms focus only
                    on current high-opportunity areas, they will miss opportunities to create more inclusive future
                    neighborhoods.



Wy 4

wr       OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                                          28
            e   Further expanding housing allowances in commercial zones could have unintended
                consequences. Ability to require ground-floor commercial or limit residential uses in some
                commercial zones can be essential to meeting economic development goals, maintaining vibrant
                downtowns, and protecting opportunities for future walkable commercial development in concept
                planned greenfield areas. In addition, allowing cities to meet needs for higher-intensity housing only
                or primarily within commercial areas may or may not expand housing choice.


        OHNA HPS Compliance Pathway Concepts
        The concepts below generally pair a minimum requirement to take one or more actions in the HPS to address
        a given housing need with a safe harbor that establishes one or more land use actions cities can take that
        would be considered sufficient to meet that minimum requirement (alone, or in combination with at least one
        other action of the jurisdiction’s choosing). While a safe harbor in the HPS likely offers less incentive than a
        safe harbor applicable to the HCA or relevant to a UGB expansion context, because this analysis (in
        combination with the CHN analysis) identified relatively few land use actions that could be effective in
        meeting the identified needs, making these actions minimum requirements or even rebuttable presumptions
        would result in a highly prescriptive approach. If the state prefers to take a more prescriptive approach to
        ensure more widespread adoption of these land use actions, an alternative would be to establish the land use
        actions as rebuttable presumptions rather than safe harbors. In that situation, a rebuttal might require
        jurisdictions to evaluate how alternative land use actions or other actions would offer a comparable degree of
        impact considering market conditions and locally relevant barriers.

        Diverse variety of housing types
        MIDDLE HOUSING

        Minimum requirement: Cities could be required to take at least one action specifically focused on supporting
        development of middle housing. If the action is not identified in the HPS menu as supporting or potentially
        supporting middle housing development, the City would have to describe how that action will help overcome
        barriers to middle housing development. In Large and Metro Cities, the action could be required to support
        development of middle housing particularly in high-opportunity areas.

        Safe harbor: Cities could be considered to have taken sufficient action to address the need for middle
        housing in the HPS if they include the following land use actions. Demonstrating that existing zoning already
        meets the criteria below would not qualify for the safe harbor—other action would be required to support
        middle housing. (This is unrelated to land sufficiency determinations in the HCA.)

            e   Medium Cities
                    o    Implement middle housing regulations consistent with existing rules for Large and Metro
                         Cities (OAR 660, Division 46) for all residential land in zones subject to middle housing
                         requirements under OAR 660-046-0205.

                         _OR-

y   4

          OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                          29
                   o    Implement new middle housing model code for Medium Cities or standards that are no more
                        restrictive (see note 1) for all buildable residential land in zones subject to middle housing
                        requirements under OAR 660-046-0205.

           e   Large and Metro Cities
                   o    Implement new middle housing model code for Large Cities or standards that are no more
                        restrictive, including, ata minimum:

                            =   50% of buildable residential land with residential zones subject to middle housing
                                requirements under OAR 660-046-0205;
                            =   100% of development-ready land with residential zones subject to middle housing
                                requirements under OAR OAR 660-046-0205;
                            =   100% of land within high-opportunity areas with residential zones subject to middle
                                housing requirements under OAR 660-046-0205; excluding parcels developed with
                                existing multi-unit or middle housing and areas at elevated risk of displacement

       Note: 50% of buildable residential land is intended to allow some flexibility for where this would apply to avoid
       making it too onerous for cities while still leading to changes for a majority of relevant buildable land.

       MULTI-UNIT HOUSING

       Minimum requirement: Cities could be required to take at least one action specifically focused on supporting
       development of multi-unit housing. If the action is not identified in the HPS menu as supporting or potentially
       supporting multi-unit housing development, the City would have to describe how that action will help
       overcome barriers to multi-unit housing development. In Large and Metro Cities, the action could be required
       to support development of middle housing particularly in high-opportunity areas.

       Safe harbor: Cities could be considered to have taken sufficient action to address the need for multi-unit
       housing in the HPS if they include at least one of the following land use actions. Demonstrating that existing
       zoning already meets the criteria below would not qualify for the safe harbor—other action would be required
       to support middle housing. (This is unrelated to land sufficiency determinations in the HCA.)

           e   Medium Cities
                   o    Implement new multi-unit model code for Medium Cities or standards that are no more
                        restrictive (see note 1), including, at a minimum:
                            =   50% of buildable residential land with residential zones that allow multi-unit housing;
                                and
                            =   100% of development-ready land with residential zones that allow multi-unit housing
                   o    Implement new multi-unit model code for Small Cities or standards that are no more
                        restrictive (see note 1) for all residential zones that allow multi-unit housing
           e   Large and Metro Cities




Wy 4
  >
wr       OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                             30
                      o   Implement new multi-unit model code for Large Cities or standards that are no more
                          restrictive (see note 1) in residential zones that allow multi-unit housing, including, at a
                          minimum:
                              =    50% of buildable residential land with residential zones that allow multi-unit housing;
                                   and
                              =    100% of development-ready land with residential zones that allow multi-unit housing
                              =    100% of land within high-opportunity areas with residential zones that allow multi-
                                   unit housing, excluding parcels developed with existing multi-unit housing and areas
                                   at elevated risk of displacement
                      o   Implement new multi-unit model code for Medium Cities or standards that are no more
                          restrictive* for all residential zones that allow multi-unit housing.

        Note 1: No more restrictive means that maximum height, maximum density and/or floor area ratio, minimum
        lot size, parking ratio, maximum lot coverage and minimum landscaping and/or open space are individually
        and collectively no more restrictive than the standards in the model code, or an analysis demonstrates that
        the jurisdiction’s zoning standards allow the same number and size of units on typical example sites.

        Affordable & mixed-income housing
        Minimum requirement: Cities could be required to take at least two actions specifically focused on
        supporting production of affordable housing (including mixed-income housing). If the actions are not
        identified in the HPS menu as supporting or potentially supporting affordability, the City would have to
        describe how that action will help overcome barriers to affordable and/or mixed-income housing
        development. In Large and Metro Cities, the actions could be required to support production of affordable
        and/or mixed-income housing particularly in high-opportunity areas.

        Safe harbor: Cities could be considered to have taken sufficient action to address the need for affordable
        and/or mixed-income housing in the HPS if they include the following land use actions (as applicable for the
        city size) and one other action. Demonstrating that existing zoning already meets the criteria below would not
        qualify for the safe harbor—other action would be required to support affordable and/or mixed-income
        housing.

        Note: The suggestion to require two actions for affordable housing reflects the fact that zoning reforms or
        incentives are typically not sufficient to deliver affordable housing without other supportive measures.

            e      Medium Cities
                      o   Allow affordable (see note 2) neighborhood-scale multi-unit housing (see note 3) in all urban
                          residential zones.
            e      Large and Metro Cities
                      o   Allow mixed-income or affordable (see note 2) neighborhood-scale multi-unit housing (see
                          note 3) in the following areas, at a minimum:



    y
"
wr        OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                            31
                            =   50% of buildable residential land with residential zones subject to middle housing
                                requirements under OAR 660-046-0205;
                            =   100% of development-ready land with residential zones subject to middle housing
                                requirements under OAR 660-046-0205;
                            =   100% of land within high-opportunity areas with residential zones subject to middle
                                housing requirements under OAR 660-046-0205 excluding parcels developed with
                                existing multi-unit or middle housing and areas at elevated risk of displacement.

        Note 2: For purposes of this concept, affordable means Category 1C - 30-year Affordable Housing and mixed-
        income means Category 1B - 10-year Mixed-Income Housing (at least 20% of units affordable at 80% of AMI or
        less) per the new model code.

        Note 3: For purposes of this concept, allowing neighborhood-scale multi-unit housing means allowing multi-
        unit housing with at least 12 units under standards consistent with one of the following options:

                Option A: Minimum lot size no larger than that required for single-unit detached housing; requiring no
                more than 0.5 parking spaces per unit; allowing a building height of at least 3 stories and 35’; subject
                to FAR, open space/landscaping, setbacks, and lot coverage (if applicable) no more restrictive than
                the new multi-unit model code for the applicable city size for the smallest lot size category.
                Option B: If no off-street parking is required, other standards are consistent with minimum
                compliance for quadplexes in Large Cities under existing middle housing rules (OAR 660-046-0220)

        Accessible housing
        Minimum requirement: Cities could be required to take at least one action specifically focused on supporting
        producing or retrofitting accessible housing. If the action is not identified in the HPS menu as supporting or
        potentially supporting accessibility, the City would have to describe how that action will help meet this need.

        Safe harbor: Cities could be considered to have taken sufficient action to address the need for accessible
        housing in the HPS if they include at least one of the following land use actions. Demonstrating that existing
        zoning already meets the criteria below would not qualify for the safe harbor—other action would be required
        to support accessible housing.

                Medium Cities
                    o   Allow adaptable or accessible middle housing (see note 4) subject to standards no more
                        restrictive (see note 1) than the new medium cities model code for middle housing after
                        accounting for the bonuses provided for Category 2A and 2B units.
                Large and Metro Cities
                    o   Allow adaptable or accessible middle housing (see note 4) subject to standards no more
                        restrictive (see note 1) than the new large cities model code for middle housing after
                        accounting for the bonuses provided for Category 2A and 2B units.

                        ~OR-

y   4

          OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                         32
                   o   Allow multi-unit housing with 4 or more stories subject to standards no more restrictive (see
                       note 1) than the new large cities model code for multi-unit housing after accounting for the
                       bonuses provided for Category 2A and 2B units.

      Note 4: For purposes of this concept, accessible or adaptable middle housing means middle housing that
      would be eligible under the new model code criteria for accessibility bonuses for the applicable housing type.

      Note: this concept includes a safe harbor related to zoning to increase accessible units through encouraging
      development of multi-unit housing that is more likely to include Type A and/or B units, despite the fact that the
      CHN analysis in the previous section suggests that this may not be the most effective way to address the most
      pressing gaps in accessible housing because many of the other actions that could more substantively benefit
      accessibility (e.g., offering funding for home retrofits or for affordable housing with higher levels of accessibility
      features) may not be viable for many jurisdictions that do not have dedicated local funding for housing
      programs. The state will need to choose between encouraging cities to take land use actions that may offer some
      benefits for accessibility and encouraging a broader range of actions that may include targeted funding to
      address the most pressing accessibility needs.

      Diversity of unit sizes / family-sized units
      Minimum requirement: Cities could be required to take at least the following land use action to remove
      barriers to production of affordable housing with family-sized units:

          e   Allow affordable housing (see note 2) to measure density by bedroom rather than by unit for purposes
              of meeting minimum density standards in all residential zones that establish a minimum density.

      Note: the limited requirement associated with this need is based largely on the findings in the CHN section
      related to need for and potential unintended consequences related to encouraging family-sized units.




W 4
 >
a       OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                              33
       CHN Research Appendix
       This appendix provides additional detail on the qualitative and quantitative analysis that ECOnorthwest
       conducted in preparing the attached summary and recommendations related to Contextualized Housing
       Needs for unit mix, unit size, geographic location, accessible units, and affordable homeownership.


       Unit Mix
       Unit Mix Qualitative Assessment of Impact
       Question: How might unit type mix assumptions in the CHN impact zoning, land use actions, or other
       choices a city might take to advance the policy objectives?

       CHN unit mix assumptions translate OHNA targets for unit production to expected distribution of those new
       units by type to arrive at the number of detached single unit, middle housing, and multi-unit housing units a
       city will plan for over the next 20 years (in their HCA) and the next 6 - 8 years (in their HPS). Each city currently
       makes these assumptions based on its own analysis, without specific guidance or requirements for how the
       analysis should occur or what the mix should be.

       DLCD has asked ECO to assess the implications of setting “high end” or “low end” assumptions in the CHN, to
       support the state’s choices in rulemaking for development of the CHN. We assume that even a lower-end mix
       choice will aim for a higher portion of multi-unit or middle housing types than we see in the current stock and
       /orin new development patterns, or the policy objectives will not be achieved. In other words, we assume
       that whether low or high, the state’s compliance pathways for unit mix assumptions will aim to ask cities to
       plan for more multi-unit and middle housing types in the future.

       INTERACTION WITH THE HCA/      LAND USE EFFICIENCY: LAND NEED IMPLICATIONS
       Unit mix assumptions directly affect the calculation of land need; by influencing a city’s choices about how
       much higher-density and lower-density zoned land is needed to accommodate expected growth. Current
       methods for projecting land need often rely on achieved density assumptions that reflect a specific unit mix. If
       a jurisdiction anticipates a shift in housing types—such as more apartments and fewer detached single units—
       those shifts will likely affect the amount of higher-density residential land needed compared to lower-density
       residential land, which in turn is likely to impact the total residential land need. This may make it less likely
       that jurisdictions will demonstrate a need for additional land or expansions to the Urban Growth Boundary
       (UGB).

       If the jurisdiction’s zoning changes and other actions combine with market viability to deliver higher density
       housing, this could result in more efficient residential development patterns and less need to expand
       outward.

       However, if the housing mix that is ultimately built does not align with the needed mix, some land planned for
       higher density housing may be developed at lower densities, resulting in less capacity than expected, or

Wy 4
  >
wr       OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                             34
        higher-density residential land may sit vacant while lower-density residential land is built out more quickly.
        Either of these situations could result in the jurisdiction having less than a 20-year supply of buildable land in
        reality, even though the HCA shows that they have sufficient land. HCAs must be updated every 6 to 8 years, so
        a jurisdiction could potentially adjust partway through the 20-year planning period but given how challenging
        and drawn out UGB expansions can be, there is still some risk of running short of residential land if the land
        needs are dramatically underestimated.

        A greater need for higher-density residential land and smaller need for lower-density residential land could
        also result in jurisdictions needing or choosing to accommodate that need for higher-density residential land
        in UGB expansion areas at the edge. This could encourage     jurisdictions to plan for a mix of different housing
        types within future residential areas. However, if the jurisdiction is unable to also demonstrate a need for land
        for other residential densities, it risks creating isolated pockets of high-density housing that do not align with
        transportation infrastructure, community goals, or the desired diversity of housing types. These imbalances
        can negatively impact livability and accessibility in new developments.

        INTERACTION WITH THE HPS / ACTION SELECTION
        In the HPS, CHN assumptions about unit mix can also impact the actions that cities select to encourage the
        production of those unit types. However, there is not a mathematical relationship between the identified
        needs and action selection, so it is less clear how and to what extent having a higher or lower share of middle
        housing and/or multi-unit housing in the CHN would drive different action selection. For some jurisdictions,
        identifying a need for a higher share of middle housing and/or multi-unit housing could lead to a greater focus
        on action to support middle housing or multi-unit housing development and could make a difference in which
        actions are selected and how they are implemented. And, it is possible that cities might find greater political
        and community support to focus actions / effort on supporting market-rate multi-unit housing and middle
        housing. Setting CHN needs for middle housing and multi-unit housing lower could mean that some
        jurisdictions choose to take fewer or more modest/easier actions to address these needs because the need is
        not perceived to be as great.

        If jurisdictions opt to or are required to select land use actions to support middle housing or multi-unit
        housing development, this could include the following categories of actions:

            e   Regulatory Requirements or Policy - actions that impose new requirements, mandates, or limitations
                on development aimed at ensuring new development meets specific goals or needs
            e   Reduce Regulatory and Permitting Barriers - actions that increase flexibility or streamline permitting
                for certain types of development
            e   Zoning or Regulatory Incentives - actions that offer optional incentives within the zoning code or other
                regulations for certain types of development

        The implications of these actions and the potential implications of having a higher or lower share of middle
        housing and/or multi-unit housing in the CHN depend on which type of actions jurisdictions implement. In
        general, actions to reduce regulatory or permitting barriers and zoning or regulatory incentives have relatively
        low risk of unintended consequences that could negatively impact overall housing production or any of the

    y
"
wr        OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                          35
       policy objectives; the primary risk is that they could take staff time and energy with little impact if not
       implemented effectively or in the right context. Regulatory requirements or policies have more potential for
       unintended consequences on development, but if calibrated and implemented effectively, they potentially
       have a greater impact in some circumstances. Specific actions where the CHN needs for middle housing and
       multi-unit housing could impact whether and how the actions are implemented in ways that could be
       beneficial, or problematic include:

           e   Housing mix requirements for larger developments (RR-1 in the working draft updated actions list):
               Jurisdictions might use the overall needed housing mix to inform housing mix requirements for large
               developments.
                   o   Potential positive consequences: If the required housing mix reflects a moderate shift relative
                       to past trends, it could encourage inclusion of more middle housing and multi-unit housing
                       than would otherwise be built.
                   o   Potential negative consequences: If the mix is substantially above past trends and not
                       financially viable or out of step with market demand, this requirement could have a chilling
                       effect on development activity. Developers may delay or forgo projects entirely if the
                       requirements are incompatible with feasible project economics, or the planned mix
                       components may lag behind other housing types, delaying housing production.
           e   Minimum densities (RR-5 in the working draft updated actions list) and Upzone residential land (RB-7
               in the working draft updated actions list): Jurisdictions might impose higher minimum densities or
               prohibit single-unit detached housing in some zones to try to align with the needed mix, or rezone
               buildable land to zones that are more aligned with middle housing and/or multi-unit housing.
                   o   Potential positive consequences: In some cases, this could reduce competition from single-unit
                       detached housing and expand opportunities to develop middle housing and/or multi-unit
                       housing, making it easier for developers of other types of housing to secure land.
                   o   Potential negative consequences: If applied too extensively, this could overly restrict land
                       availability for single-unit detached housing and other forms that may be more aligned with
                       current market feasibility. This not only reduces the likelihood that recently viable housing
                       types will continue to be produced but also increases the risk that higher-density
                       development may not pencil out financially. The result could be a decline in overall housing
                       production due to a misalignment with what the market can support.
                   o   Potential negative consequences: Although empirical evidence is limited, there is a risk that
                       upzoning may increase the speculative value of land. This refers to the price landowners
                       believe their property is worth—often inflated by the expectation of future development—
                       rather than what developers are actually willing to pay. Without a completed transaction, it's
                       difficult to measure the real market impact of zoning changes. However, inflated land values
                       driven by speculation can limit the supply of land available for development, further
                       constraining housing production.




Wy 4
  >
wr       OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                           36
       DATA CONSIDERATIONS

           e   While not always true in all markets, our analysis found that, in general, denser housing types are
               more affordable (see data on affordability by type / type by affordability). In particular, regulated
               affordable units recently funded by OHCS are largely multi-unit. To the extent that the land efficiency
               measures, zoning, and housing production policies that cities set successfully result in the production
               of a higher proportion of multi-unit and middle housing types without hindering the ability of the
               housing market to meet overall demand through total unit production, the overall affordability of the
               stock should be improved.
           e   Our analysis generally found that, in aggregate, small cities have a higher share of new units in
               detached single-unit structures than large and metro cities (60.5% compared to 42.6%); however, the
               variation within these size groupings is relatively large. Metro and the Willamette Valley regions have
               lower shares of new units in single-unit detached structures compared to other regions of the state,
               though there is substantial variation at the regional level as well.
           e   The degree of variation suggests that selecting a high or low end that works perfectly across all
               cities within a size group or region is not likely to be possible -- some outliers will already be
               producing more multi-unit or middle housing units than nearly any selected high or low end. The state
               may be able to design the compliance pathway to mitigate this to some extent (e.g., by directing cities
               to use their recent trends or the established share, whichever is higher), but this could reduce the
               benefit of the compliance pathway for the jurisdiction due to the additional work required.

       MARKET CONSIDERATIONS

       Housing developers play many roles in the delivery of new housing, but their most critical function is securing
       the debt and equity needed to finance construction. To attract capital, developers assess the costs of
       producing different types and densities of housing against the rents or sale prices achievable in the local
       market. Complicating this further, most developers specialize in specific types of housing. For instance, those
       who build single-unit detached homes often do not build multi-unit housing, and even within multi-unit,
       developers of rental apartments may not build for-sale condominiums.

       This leads to a key implication: developers with a track record of producing housing in a given market may
       lack the expertise, relationships, or financial backing to deliver higher-density housing than what has
       historically been built. Zoning that forces a shift in housing mix may actually reduce the number of capable
       developers, thereby limiting the market’s capacity to scale up production.

       While statewide data suggest that denser housing is generally more affordable, there are important cost
       inflection points as building prototypes grow in complexity. For example, the jump from a three-story walk-up
       to a four-story building with an elevator significantly increases construction costs. Developers aim to align
       construction costs with achievable rents or sales prices to ensure market feasibility. As a result, the maximum




        An important exception: in smaller and more rural cities, single-unit detached development (even when newly
       constructed) is a key source of middle-income home ownership product.

Wy 4
  »
wr       OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                           37
        allowed density is often not financially viable. In these cases, setting a high-density zoning threshold may be
        less effective at boosting housing production than setting a lower, more feasible threshold.

        ADDITIONAL CONSIDERATIONS

        It is unclear how compliance pathways will interact with other required upzoning policies that have been
        implemented in the last several years or are just now taking effect (e.g., middle housing legislation, Climate
        Friendly Equitable Communities rules). Some cities may have relatively few regulatory barriers to middle
        housing and/or multi-unit housing already due to those changes, while in others more substantive barriers
        may still remain. In many cities, the impacts of the regulatory changes in response to these requirements have
        only very recently started to show up in permitting data, and it may take several more years to see a real shift
        in development outcomes that would be reflected in achieved density numbers. The rules could create a
        situation where jurisdictions are needing to update development regulations faster than they can see and
        measure the response to those updates. This could also create a perception that the regulatory reforms are
        not working, whether or not this is accurate.

        The compliance tool design could also have an impact on outcomes:

            e   Optional pathways (like safe harbors or rebuttable presumptions) would give cities the ability to
                evaluate their own markets and development patterns and determine if the suggested mix is likely to
                result in unintended consequences in their communities.
            e   Optional pathways may not be attractive if the targets in them are substantially higher than the
                jurisdiction would have set on their own, and above what is politically viable.
            e   Ifsafe harbors or rebuttable presumptions carry the benefit of helping cities avoid legal challenges on
                their findings of land needs, jurisdictions that are expecting to need a UGB expansion and expecting it
                to be contentious would be more likely to opt in to those safe harbors, even if they are not a perfect fit
                for local conditions.

        If compliance pathways are structured as minimum compliance, jurisdictions with more pro-housing local
        politics are more likely to choose to exceed the minimum requirements, while those with less pro-housing
        political support are more likely to elect to do the minimum, even if this is lower than staff might have
        recommended.

        Unit Mix Data Appendix
        1) BASELINE HOUSING MIX

        1a) Permit trends: housing mix of new housing
        Prompt: What is the housing type mix of recently built housing for cities based on permit data, and how does
        it vary by OHNA region and by city size?

        Data source: HUD State of the Cities Database (SOCDS), 2015-2023 annual permits, aggregated




    y
"
wr        OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                         38
        Limitations: Several Oregon cities (Canby, Gladstone, Molalla, Roseburg, The Dalles, Klamath Falls) are not
        accurately represented in SOCDS - showing zero permit records over the last 8 years, which is highly unlikely.
        The cause is that these cities are not captured at all in the Census Building Permit Survey - the database that
        feeds into SOCDS.

        Potentially reliable patterns by region and/or city size:

        City size: small cities have a higher share of new units in single-unit detached structures than large and metro
        cities in aggregate (60.5% compared to 42.6%); however, the variation within these size groupings is relatively
        large.

        Region: Metro and the Willamette Valley regions have lower shares of new units in single-unit detached
        structures compared to other regions of the state, though there is substantial variation at the regional level as
        well.

        Figure 8: Housing Permits by Housing Type and City Size

        Variable                                       City Size          Count of Permits      Percent
        Units in Single Family Structures              10k-25k                          5,836       60.5%
        Units in 2-Unit Multifamily Structures         10k-25k                            432        4.5%
        Units in 3 & 4-Unit Multifamily Structures     10k-25k                            225        2.3%
        Units in 5+ Unit Multifamily Structures        10k-25k                          3,160       32.7%
        Units in Single Family Structures              Metro or >25K                   49,332       42.6%
        Units in 2-Unit Multifamily Structures         Metro or >25K                    2,490        2.2%
        Units in 3 & 4-Unit Multifamily Structures     Metro or >25K                      901        0.8%
        Units in 5+ Unit Multifamily Structures        Metro or >25K                   62,967       54.4%




    y
"
wr         OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                       39
        Figure 9: Housing Permits by Housing Type and City Size

         100%




          75%




          50%



                                                                              ®   Units in 5+-Unit
                                                                                  Multifamily Structures
          25%
                                                                              Units in 3 & 4-Unit
                                                                                 Multifamily Structures
                                                                              ®   Units in 2-Unit
                                                                                  Multifamily Structures
                                                                              ®   Units in Single Family
                                                                                  Structures
           0%
                          Metro or >25               10k-25k

                                         City size


        Figure 10: Housing Permits by Housing Type and OHNA Region

        Region          Variable                                      Count of Permits              Percent
        Central          Units in Single Family Structures                            10,561               65.5%
        Central          Units in 2-Unit Multifamily Structures                            664                4.1%
        Central          Units in 3 & 4-Unit Multifamily Structures                        128                0.8%
        Central          Units in 5+ Unit Multifamily Structures                        4,766              29.6%
        Metro            Units in Single Family Structures                            23,500               33.5%
        Metro            Units in 2-Unit Multifamily Structures                            954                1.4%
        Metro            Units in 3 & 4-Unit Multifamily Structures                        488                0.7%
        Metro            Units in 5+ Unit Multifamily Structures                      45,115               64.4%
        Northeast        Units in Single Family Structures                              1,315              62.3%
        Northeast        Units in 2-Unit Multifamily Structures                            102                4.8%
        Northeast        Units in 3 & 4-Unit Multifamily Structures                            31             1.5%
        Northeast        Units in 5+ Unit Multifamily Structures                           662             31.4%
        Northern Coast] Units in Single Family Structures                                  371             60.1%
        Northern Coast] Units in 2-Unit Multifamily Structures                                 20             3.2%
        Northern Coast] Units in 3 & 4-Unit Multifamily Structures                              7             1.1%
        Northern Coast] Units in 5+ Unit Multifamily Structures                            219             35.5%


    A
<
wr        OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations
       Region                         Variable                                            Count of Permits          Percent
       Southeast                      Units in Single Family Structures                                       67           97.1%
       Southeast                      Units in 2-Unit Multifamily Structures                                   2              2.9%
       Southeast                      Units in 3 & 4-Unit Multifamily Structures                               0              0.0%
       Southeast                      Units in 5+ Unit Multifamily Structures                                  0              0.0%
       Southwest                      Units in Single Family Structures                                  4,680             66.8%
       Southwest                      Units in 2-Unit Multifamily Structures                                 354              5.1%
       Southwest                      Units in 3 & 4-Unit Multifamily Structures                             147              2.1%
       Southwest                      Units in 5+ Unit Multifamily Structures                            1,823             26.0%



       Figure 11: Housing Permits by Housing Type and City Size (distribution of city %s)


                Units in 5+-Unit Multifamily Structures     a




       =
                 _              ohn     ieeces
              Units in 3 & 4-Unit Multifamily Structures
                                                            I
                                                            i
        =]                                                                                             Population size
        °
        ro)                                                                                            fF 10k-25k
       =>         Units in 2-Unit Multifamily Structures    ..
                                                                 ,                                     ff} Metro or >25K




                      Units in Single Family Structures



                                                           0%        25%       50%       75%    100%
                                                                     % of permits, 2015-2023




Wy 4
  >
wr            OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                                    41
        Figure 12: Housing Permits by Housing Type and OHNA Region (distribution of city %s)

                                                                         —_
                                                                         eet
                                                                    ————————____—
                                                                1
              Units in 5+-Unit Multifamily Structures                                ——




                  ,
                                                                |I                                                          Region
            Units in 3 & 4-Unit Multifamily Structures
        —                                                            A                                                      {Central
        =                                                                                                                   {} Metro
        8                                                                                                                   {Northeast
        =                                                                                                                   {I} Northern Coast
        =                                                       ;        “ae                                                #8 Southeast
                                                                     1                                                      {i   Southwest
                Units in 2-Unit Multifamily       Structures         4
                                              y                      ne                                                     fH   Willamette Valley



                                                                                     SEE
                                                                                          ——
                      Units in Single Family Structures                               =




                                                               0%              25%          50%        75%           100%
                                                                                % of permits, 2015-2023



        1b) Housing type mix of all existing housing stock
        Prompt: Housing type mix of all existing housing stock by jurisdiction

        Data source: ACS 5-year 2023, place level

        Limitations: Usual limitations with Census data for smaller cities. The data visualization uses point estimates
        to display the interquartile range by region or size. It is not possible to include the margin of error (MOE) for
        the estimate because each individual point has its own MOE, and including the MOE for each (while possible)
        would obscure the desired outcome of understanding the range and its midpoint. If you were to explore MOE
        per each point, it might increase the perceived variance by region.

        Figure 13: Existing Housing Stock by Housing Type and City Size (% of total existing stock)

        City Size                        Unit Type                                   Count          Percent
        10k-25k                          SFD                                               87,116            62.3%
        10k-25k                          Middle housing                                    22,712            16.3%
        10k-25k                          5+ units                                          20,654            14.8%

        10k-25k                          Mobile home/other                                  9,268             6.6%
        Metro or >25K                    SFD                                              551,660            56.3%
        Metro or >25K                    Middle housing                                   146,667            15.0%
        Metro or >25K                    5+ units                                         252,467            25.8%

        Metro or >25K                    Mobile home/other                                 28,211             2.9%



    y
"
wr          OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                                                      42
        Figure 14: Existing Housing Stock by Housing Type and OHNA Region (% of existing stock):

        City Size           Unit Type             Count         Percent
        Central             SFD                      46,082          70.6%
        Central             Middle housing            8,456          13.0%
        Central             5+ units                  7,962          12.2%
        Central             Mobile home/other         2,771           4.2%
        Metro               SFD                     322,174          54.2%

        Metro               Middle housing           87,386          14.7%
        Metro               5+ units                174,639          29.4%

        Metro               Mobile home/other         9,922           1.7%
        Northeast           SFD                      19,708          62.5%
        Northeast           Middle housing            4,188          13.3%
        Northeast           5+ units                  4,673          14.8%
        Northeast           Mobile home/other         2,940           9.3%
        Northern Coast      SFD                       7,030          66.2%
        Northern Coast      —|Middle housing          2,107          19.8%
        Northern Coast      5+ units                  1,171          11.0%
        Northern Coast      Mobile home/other             317         3.0%
        Southeast           SFD                       9,355          62.6%
        Southeast           Middle housing            2,604          17.4%
        Southeast           5+ units                  2,240          15.0%
        Southeast           Mobile home/other             739         4.9%
        Southwest           SFD                      61,174          64.0%
        Southwest           Middle housing           16,238          17.0%
        Southwest           5+ units                 13,808          14.4%
        Southwest           Mobile home/other         4,357           4.6%
        Willamette Valley   |SFD                    173,253          56.5%
        Willamette Valley   |Middle housing          48,400          15.8%
        Willamette Valley   |5+ units                68,628          22.4%
        Willamette Valley   |Mobile home/other       16,433           5.4%




    y
"
wr        OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                      43
      Figure 15: Existing Housing Stock by Housing Type and City Size (distributions of city %s)




            Mobile home/other     a




                      +5 units
                                      io
                                      --[-   e


       2                                                                  Population size
      L                                                                   {I} 10k-25k
      =                                                                   fk Metro or >25K

               Middle housing




                         SFD                                =




                                 0%      20%       40%        60%   80%
                                           % of housing units




W 4

wr         OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                     44
        Figure 16: Existing Housing Stock by Housing Type and OHNA Region (distributions of city %s)


                                       —i-
                                      ——
                                       —ii-
              Mobile   home/other     tI
                                          i
                                      ii—
                                        —




                                          a                                             Region
                          +5 units        ti LW                                               g
                                          ee                                            f+ Central
                                           -                                            {I}       Metro
         8
                                                                                        ff}       Northeast
         =
         =                                                                              {J} Northern Coast
                                               7   °                                    ff}       Southeast
         >
                                               gi
                                                 i                                      H         Ora       y
                 Middle housing
                                          i                                                         liamette    Valiey




                                                                 =~
                                                                        {_i}—
                                                                        it
                             SFD                                        oo
                                                                           —(I+



                                     0%           20%      40%      60%           80%
                                                   % of housing units

        2) AFFORDABILITY BY TYPE / TYPE BY AFFORDABILITY

        2a) Affordability of existing housing stock by type
        Prompt: Provide data tables of type mix of units affordable at each income bracket. Update to reflect unit
        affordability (rather than household income), only available at regional level through PUMS.

        Data source: 2023 PUMS 5-year

        Limitations: Can only crosstab by region for PUMS. We calculated a rule-of-thumb statistical reliability test -
        estimates for which the standard error is more than 30% of the estimated value are classified unreliable and
        are not shown on charts derived from PUMS.

        Potentially reliable patterns by region and/or city size: For most regions in the state, at higher affordability
        brackets, the housing typology mix swings towards single-unit detached housing. At lower affordability
        brackets, housing type diversity increases - middle housing, 5+ unit apartments, and mobile homes/other
        types become more prevalent. The Metro region is the only region in the state where 30-60% and 60-80% AMI
        units are predominantly composed of 5+ unit apartments. In most regions, the most deeply affordable
        existing units include larger shares of mobile homes and single-unit detached.


    y
"
wr           OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                         45
     Figure 17: Affordability of Existing Housing Stock by Type and OHNA Region
     Note: each facet sums to 100% for new stock and existing stock, white spaces on the charts indicate estimates that did not
     pass a Statistical reliability test.

                                             Central                                                                    Metro                                           Northeast

              >120%                                                                             |
            100-120% a                                                                    i
                                                                                                                                                                                    ens
             80-100%                        74                                 9        106                   62                 14        23                            78              =

              60-80%                                                  TE                                                                                            =
              30-60%                                                                                                                                               77               189
               0-30%              44                   9         13                34               29             13       30             28

                                      Northern Coast                                                               Southeast                                        Southwest                      Reliability test

       > 120 |                                                                                  TT                                              F                                                      TRUE
                                                                                                                                                                                                   By TRUE
      £10120   i                                                                                ic                                               0
      S 20-10%                                                                                  as                                              o                       ZT
      2 60-80%                          :                                                 r                                                                                                        Housing type
      %       30-60%
               0-30%             38
                                                                                                                                                                                                   HE Mobile home/other
                                                  12        14                     7                     48               79          36                      34        6 10         (             i   +5 units

                                    .                                                         0%         25% 50%                 75% 100%0%                    25% 50% 75% 100%                    Mill Middle housing
                                  Willamette Valley                                                                                                                                                M   srp
              >120%
            100-120%
             80-100%                     73                                9            125
              60-80%
              30-60%        29                   26                   33                 12
               0-30%        29          11             18

                       0%        25%              50%                 75%                100%
                                                                                             Percent of affordable stock



     Figure 18: Existing Housing Stock by Type, Income Level, and OHNA Region (% of total existing stock)

                                                            Income                                                                                                 Count by                      Share of Type within
      Region                                                Level                             Housing Type                                      Count              [Income Level                 Income Level
     Central                                                0-30%                             Mobile home /other                                     2,959                               8,768                        33.7%
     Central                                                0-30%                             5+ units                                               1,145                               8,768                        13.1%
     Central                                                0-30%                             Middle housing                                            781                              8,768                           8.9%
     Central                                                0-30%                             SFD                                                    3,883                               8,768                        44.3%
     Central                                                30-60%                            Mobile home/other                                      2,247                          13,720                            16.4%
     Central                                                30-60%                            5+ units                                               2,056                          13,720                            15.0%
     Central                                                30-60%                            Middle housing                                         2,486                          13,720                            18.1%
     Central                                                30-60%                            SFD                                                    6,931                          13,720                            50.5%
     Central                                                60-80%                            Mobile home/other                                         968                         13,198                               7.3%
     Central                                                60-80%                            5+ units                                               2,103                          13,198                            15.9%
     Central                                                60-80%                            Middle housing                                         2,883                          13,198                            21.8%


vA
wr         OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                                                                                                                           46
                                Income                                           Count by            Share of Type within
        Region                  Level          _———       Type     Count         [Income Level       Income Level
        Central                 60-80%                                7,244                 13,198                  54.9%
        Central                 80-100%        Mobile home/other           665              10,514                    6.3%
        Central                 80-100%        5+ units               1,032                 10,514                   9.8%
        Central                 80-100%        Middle housing              994              10,514                   9.5%
        Central                 80-100%        SFD                    7,823                 10,514                  74.4%
        Central                 100-120%       Mobile home/other           458              10,655                   4.3%
        Central                 100-120%       5+ units                    392              10,655                   3.7%
        Central                 100-120%       Middle housing              276              10,655                   2.6%
        Central                 100-120%       SFD                    9,529                 10,655                  89.4%
        Central                 >120%          Mobile home/other           718              45,648                    1.6%
        Central                 >120%          5+ units                    627              45,648                    1.4%
        Central                 >120%          Middle housing         1,932                 45,648                   4.2%
        Central                 >120%          SFD                   42,371                 45,648                  92.8%
        Metro                   0-30%          Mobile home/other     12,659                 45,944                  27.6%
        Metro                   0-30%          5+ units              13,594                 45,944                  29.6%
        Metro                   0-30%          Middle housing         6,150                 45,944                  13.4%
        Metro                   0-30%          SFD                   13,541                 45,944                  29.5%
        Metro                   30-60%         Mobile home/other      5,083                129,651                   3.9%
        Metro                   30-60%         5+ units              69,497                129,651                  53.6%
        Metro                   30-60%     —   Middle housing        30,625                129,651                  23.6%
        Metro                   30-60%          SFD                  24,446                129,651                  18.9%
        Metro                   60-80%         Mobile home/other      1,107                139,452                    0.8%
        Metro                   60-80%         5+ units              64,823                139,452                  46.5%
        Metro                   60-80%         Middle housing        29,351                139,452                  21.0%
        Metro                   60-80%         _SFD                  44,171                139,452                  31.7%
        Metro                   80-100%        Mobile home/other      1,043                 92,777                    1.1%
        Metro                   80-100%        5+ units              21,199                 92,777                  22.8%
        Metro                   80-100%        Middle housing        13,055                 92,777                  14.1%
        Metro                   80-100%        SFD                   57,480                 92,777                  62.0%
        Metro                   100-120%       Mobile home/other           954              93,499                    1.0%
        Metro                   100-120%       5+ units               6,022                 93,499                    6.4%
        Metro                   100-120%       Middle housing         7,650                 93,499                   8.2%
        Metro                   100-120%       SFD                   78,873                 93,499                  84.4%
        Metro                   >120%          Mobile home/other      1,148               241,197                     0.5%


    y
"
wr        OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                         47
                               Income                                      Count by            Share of Type within
        Region                 Level       Housing Type        Count       [Income Level       Income Level
        Metro                  >120%       5+ units              11,745             241,197                    4.9%
        Metro                  >120%       Middle housing        10,886             241,197                    4.5%
        Metro                  >120%       SFD                  217,418             241,197                   90.1%
        Northeast              0-30%       Mobile home/other      4,591               10,912                  42.1%
        Northeast              0-30%       5+ units                1,223              10,912                  11.2%
        Northeast              0-30%       Middle housing            864              10,912                    7.9%
        Northeast              0-30%       SFD                    4,234               10,912                  38.8%
        Northeast              30-60%      Mobile home/other       3,655              19,545                  18.7%
        Northeast              30-60%      5+ units                3,505              19,545                  17.9%
        Northeast              30-60%      Middle housing          3,270              19,545                  16.7%
        Northeast              30-60%      SFD                     9,115              19,545                  46.6%
        Northeast              60-80%      Mobile home/other       1,401              10,577                  13.2%
        Northeast              60-80%      5+ units                1,154              10,577                  10.9%
        Northeast              60-80%      Middle housing          1,217              10,577                  11.5%
        Northeast              60-80%      SFD                     6,805              10,577                  64.3%
        Northeast              80-100%     Mobile home/other         905               7,391                  12.2%
        Northeast              80-100%     5+ units                  306               7,391                   4.1%
        Northeast              80-100%     Middle housing            388               7,391                   5.2%
        Northeast              80-100%     SFD                     5,792               7,391                  18.4%
        Northeast              100-120%    Mobile home/other         848               6,928                  12.2%
        Northeast              100-120%    5+ units                  240               6,928                   3.5%
        Northeast              100-120%    Middle housing            124               6,928                    1.8%
        Northeast              100-120%    SFD                     5,716               6,928                  82.5%
        Northeast              >120%       Mobile home/other       1,680              23,139                    7.1%
        Northeast              >120%       5+ units                  379              23,139                    1.6%
        Northeast              >120%       Middle housing            314              23,139                    1.3%
        Northeast              >120%       SFD                   21,366               23,139                  90.0%
        Northern Coast         0-30%       Mobile home/other       2,185               5,931                  36.8%
        Northern Coast         0-30%       5+ units                  818               5,931                  13.8%
        Northern Coast         0-30%       Middle housing            701               5,931                  11.8%
        Northern Coast         0-30%       SFD                     2,227               5,931                  37.5%
        Northern Coast         30-60%      Mobile home/other       1,714              12,279                  14.0%
        Northern Coast         30-60%      5+ units                2,065              12,279                  16.8%
        Northern Coast         30-60%      Middle housing          3,649              12,279                  29.7%


    y
"
wr       OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                    48
                               Income                                      Count by            Share of Type within
        Region                 Level       a          Type     Count       [Income Level       Income Level
        Northern Coast         30-60%                             4,851               12,279                  39.5%
        Northern Coast         60-80%      Mobile home/other        613                6,107                  10.0%
        Northern Coast         60-80%      5+ units                 567                6,107                   9.3%
        Northern Coast         60-80%      Middle housing           717                6,107                  11.7%
        Northern Coast         60-80%      SFD                    4,210                6,107                  68.9%
        Northern Coast         80-100%     Mobile home/other        450                4,862                   9.3%
        Northern Coast         80-100%     5+ units                 144                4,862                   3.0%
        Northern Coast         80-100%     Middle housing           287                4,862                   5.9%
        Northern Coast         80-100%     SFD                    3,981                4,862                  81.9%
        Northern Coast         100-120%    Mobile home/other        406                5,889                    6.9%
        Northern Coast         100-120%    5+ units                   18               5,889                    0.3%
        Northern Coast         100-120%    Middle housing           164                5,889                   2.8%
        Northern Coast         100-120%    SFD                    5,301                5,889                  90.0%
        Northern Coast         >120%       Mobile home/other        538               15,554                   3.5%
        Northern Coast         >120%       5+ units                 113               15,554                    0.7%
        Northern Coast         >120%       Middle housing           480               15,554                   3.1%
        Northern Coast         >120%       SFD                   14,423               15,554                  92.7%
        Southeast              0-30%       Mobile home/other      2,323                6,465                  35.9%
        Southeast              0-30%       5+ units                 602                6,465                   9.3%
        Southeast              0-30%       Middle housing           460                6,465                    7.1%
        Southeast              0-30%       SFD                    3,080                6,465                  47.6%
        Southeast              30-60%      Mobile home/other      2,292               11,772                  19.5%
        Southeast              30-60%      5+ units               1,744               11,772                  14.8%
        Southeast              30-60%      Middle housing         1,845               11,772                  15.7%
        Southeast              30-60%      SFD                    5,891               11,772                  50.0%
        Southeast              60-80%      Mobile home/other        733                6,017                  12.2%
        Southeast              60-80%      5+ units                 249                6,017                   4.1%
        Southeast              60-80%      Middle housing         1,138                6,017                  18.9%
        Southeast              60-80%      SFD                    3,897                6,017                  64.8%
        Southeast              80-100%     Mobile home/other        313                4,762                    6.6%
        Southeast              80-100%     5+ units                 136                4,762                   2.9%
        Southeast              80-100%     Middle housing           200                4,762                   4.2%
        Southeast              80-100%     SFD                    4,113                4,762                  86.4%
        Southeast              100-120%    Mobile home/other        245                3,993                    6.1%


    y
"
wr       OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                    49
                                Income                                     Count by            Share of Type within
        Region                  Level       Housing Type        Count      [Income Level       Income Level
        Southeast               100-120%    5+ units                                   3,993                    1.4%
        Southeast               100-120%    Middle housing           100               3,993                   2.5%
        Southeast               100-120%    SFD                    3,594               3,993                  90.0%
        Southeast               >120%       Mobile home/other        882              12,433                    7.1%
        Southeast               >120%       5+ units                 114              12,433                    0.9%
        Southeast               >120%       Middle housing           312              12,433                   2.5%
        Southeast               >120%       SFD                   11,125              12,433                  89.5%
        Southwest               0-30%       Mobile home/other     10,855              21,874                  49.6%
        Southwest               0-30%       5+ units               2,255              21,874                  10.3%
        Southwest               0-30%       Middle housing         1,357              21,874                    6.2%
        Southwest               0-30%       SFD                    7,407              21,874                  33.9%
        Southwest               30-60%      Mobile home/other      7,224              35,571                  20.3%
        Southwest               30-60%      5+ units               6,591              35,571                  18.5%
        Southwest               30-60%      Middle housing         8,468              35,571                  23.8%
        Southwest               30-60%      SFD                   13,288              35,571                  37.4%
        Southwest               60-80%      Mobile home/other      3,429              29,744                  11.5%
        Southwest               60-80%      5+ units               3,808              29,744                  12.8%
        Southwest               60-80%      Middle housing         6,719              29,744                  22.6%
        Southwest               60-80%      SFD                   15,788              29,744                  53.1%
        Southwest               80-100%     Mobile home/other      2,263              23,238                   9.7%
        Southwest               80-100%     5+ units                 764              23,238                   3.3%
        Southwest               80-100%     Middle housing         2,963              23,238                  12.8%
        Southwest               80-100%     SFD                   17,248              23,238                  14.2%
        Southwest               100-120%    Mobile home/other      1,780              21,532                   8.3%
        Southwest               100-120%    5+ units                 623              21,532                   2.9%
        Southwest               100-120%    Middle housing           673              21,532                   3.1%
        Southwest               100-120%    SFD                   18,456              21,532                  85.7%
        Southwest               >120%       Mobile home/other      4,456              81,430                   5.5%
        Southwest               >120%       5+ units               1,512              81,430                    1.9%
        Southwest               >120%       Middle housing         2,358              81,430                   2.9%
        Southwest               >120%       SFD                   73,104              81,430                  89.8%
        Willamette Valley       0-30%       Mobile home/other     16,530              39,823                  41.5%
        Willamette Valley       0-30%       5+ units               7,297              39,823                  18.3%
        Willamette Valley       0-30%       Middle housing         4,332              39,823                  10.9%


    y
"
wr        OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                   50
                                    Income                                        Count by            Share of Type within
        Region                      Level          _———       Type     Count      [Income Level       Income Level
        Willamette Valley           0-30%                                11,664              39,823                  29.3%
        Willamette Valley           30-60%         Mobile home/other     11,432              94,863                  12.1%
        Willamette Valley           30-60%         5+ units              31,425              94,863                  33.1%
        Willamette Valley           30-60%         Middle housing        24,892              94,863                  26.2%
        Willamette Valley           30-60%          SFD                  27,114              94,863                  28.6%
        Willamette Valley           60-80%         Mobile home/other      4,966              83,913                   5.9%
        Willamette Valley           60-80%         5+ units              20,923              83,913                  24.9%
        Willamette Valley           60-80%         Middle housing        15,902              83,913                  19.0%
        Willamette Valley           60-80%         _SFD                  42,122              83,913                  50.2%
        Willamette Valley           80-100%        Mobile home/other      2,916              55,909                   5.2%
        Willamette Valley           80-100%        5+ units               6,923              55,909                  12.4%
        Willamette Valley           80-100%        Middle housing         5,259              55,909                   9.4%
        Willamette Valley           80-100%        SFD                   40,811              55,909                  73.0%
        Willamette Valley           100-120%       Mobile home/other      2,435              45,939                   5.3%
        Willamette Valley           100-120%       5+ units               1,864              45,939                   4.1%
        Willamette Valley           100-120%       Middle housing         2,248              45,939                   4.9%
        Willamette Valley           100-120%       SFD                   39,392              45,939                  85.7%
        Willamette Valley           >120%          Mobile home/other      4,185             147,534                   2.8%
        Willamette Valley           >120%          5+ units               2,958             147,534                   2.0%
        Willamette Valley           >120%          Middle housing         4,528             147,534                   3.1%
        Willamette Valley           >120%          SFD                  135,863             147,534                  92.1%



        2b) Affordability of newer housing stock by type (per Census)
        Prompt: Provide data tables of type mix of units affordable at each income bracket. Same analysis limited to
        units built recently (e.g., since 2010).

        Data source: 2023 PUMS 5-year

        Limitations: We can only define new construction by decade prior to 2020, so we have to use 2010 as the
        breakpoint when using PUMS. Doing so also decreases the margins of error (MOEs) thanks to more
        observations by region, but the crosstabs by new construction still show highly unreliable estimates for some
        regions/housing types. PUMS data are only available by region. We calculated a rule-of-thumb statistical
        reliability test - estimates for which the standard error is more than 30% of the estimated value are classified
        unreliable and are not shown on charts derived from PUMS.




    y
"
wr        OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                          51
     Potentially reliable patterns by region and/or city size: Cross-tabbing by year of construction, type, region,
     and affordability yields much fewer statistically reliable estimates compared to the chart above. For all
     regions, new construction >120% AMI units are largely composed of single-unit detached units. In Northeast,
     Metro and Willamette Valley region though, new units below 120% show a distinct swing towards 5+ unit
     apartments compared to the existing stock at those levels.

     Figure 19: Affordability of Existing Housing Stock by Housing Type and OHNA Region
     Note: each facet sums to 100% for new stock and existing stock, white spaces on the charts indicate estimates that did not
     pass a Statistical reliability test.
                                            Central                          Metro                          Northeast

                        >120%
                      100-120%
                       80-100%
                        60-80%
                        30-60%
                         0-30%
                                                                                                                                     Reliability test
                                       Northern Coast                      Southeast
                                                                                                                                        FALSE
                         >120%                                                                                                       By TRUE
                      100-120%
     Affordabil ity




                       80-100%
                        60-80%                                                                                                       Housing type
                        30-60%                                                                                                       BE Mobile home/other
                         0-30%                                                                                                       WH +5 units
                                                                                                      ur
                                                                                                      =




                                        .                      0%    25%     50%       75%   100%0%   25%     50%       75%   100%   lll Middle housing
                                      Willamette Valley                                                                              WM sFp
                        >120%
                      100-120%
                       80-100%
                        60-80%
                        30-60%
                         0-30%
                                 0%   25%    50%       75% 100%
                                                      Percent of new construction affordable stock


     2c) Housing type mix of all existing housing stock
     Prompt: Housing type mix of all existing housing stock by jurisdiction (ACS 2023 5-year data, place level)

     Data source: ACS 5-year 2023, place level

     Limitations: Usual limitations with Census data for smaller cities. The data visualization uses point estimates
     to display the interquartile range by region or size. It is not possible to include the margin of error (MOE) for
     the estimate because each individual point has its own margin of error (MOE) and including the MOE for each
     would obscure the desired outcome of understanding the range and its midpoint. If you were to provide MOE
     per each point, it might increase the perceived variance by region.




wr             OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                                                          52
        Figure 20: Existing Housing Stock by Housing Type Mix and City Size (% of total existing stock)

        City Size          Unit Type                      Count of Units    Percent
        10k-25k            SFD                                     87,116             62.3%
        10k-25k            Middle housing                          22,712             16.3%
        10k-25k            5+ units                                20,654             14.8%

        10k-25k            Mobile home/other                        9,268              6.6%
        Metro or >25K      SFD                                    551,660             56.3%
        Metro or >25K      Middle housing                         146,667             15.0%
        Metro or >25K      5+ units                               252,467             25.8%

        Metro or >25K      Mobile home/other                       28,211              2.9%



        Figure 21: Existing Housing Stock by Housing Type Mix and OHNA Region (% of existing stock)

                           Unit Type                      Count of Units    Percent
        Central            SFD                                     46,082              70.6%
        Central            Middle housing                           8,456              13.0%
        Central            5+ units                                 7,962              12.2%
        Central            Mobile home/other                        2,(71               4.2%
        Metro              SFD                                    322,174              54.2%

        Metro              Middle housing                          87,386              14.7%
        Metro              5+ units                               174,639              29.4%

        Metro              Mobile home/other                        9,922               1.7%
        Northeast          SFD                                     19,708              62.5%
        Northeast          Middle housing                           4,188              13.3%
        Northeast          5+ units                                 4,673              14.8%
        Northeast          Mobile home/other                        2,940               9.3%
        Northern Coast     SFD                                      7,030              66.2%
        Northern Coast     |Middle housing                          2,107              19.8%
        Northern Coast     5+ units                                 1,171              11.0%
        Northern Coast     Mobile home/other                          317               3.0%
        Southeast          SFD                                      9,355              62.6%
        Southeast          Middle housing                           2,604              17.4%
        Southeast          5+ units                                 2,240              15.0%
        Southeast          Mobile home/other                          739               4.9%


    y
"
wr        OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                             53
        Southwest                          SFD                                           61,174                   64.0%
        Southwest                          Middle housing                                16,238                       17.0%
        Southwest                          5+ units                                      13,808                       14.4%
        Southwest                          Mobile home/other                              4,357                        4.6%
        Willamette Valley                  |SFD                                         173,253                   56.5%
        Willamette Valley                  |Middle housing                               48,400                       15.8%
        Willamette Valley                  |5+ units                                     68,628                   22.4%
        Willamette Valley                  |Mobile home/other                            16,433                        5.4%



        Figure 22: Existing Housing Stock by Housing Type Mix and City Size (distributions of city %s)




                    Mobile   home/other       7




                                +5 units
                                                  ao
                                                                                                  Population size
        Unit type




                                                                                                  {Jk 10k-25k
                                                                                                  {]} Metro or >25K

                       Middle housing                  [|




                                   SFD                                       =“




                                            0%              20%      40%          60%    80%
                                                             % Of housing units




    y
"
wr           OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations
        Figure 23: Existing Housing Stock by Housing Type Mix and OHNA Region (distributions of city %s)


                                       —iii-
                                      -—H—
                                       —ii-
                Mobile home/other     -
                                         O-
                                      i-    e
                                       —




                                                —fij——
                                .                  il                                             Region
                          +5 units         -i-
                                           : fas                                                  {I} Central
         oy                                Oo                                                     {I} Metro
         rang                                                                                     {fk Northeast
         =                                                                                        {It Northern Coast
         >                                     2         2                                        {}   Southeast

                   Middle housing         eS
                                           ‘                                                      H Willamette Valle y


                                                                       a=
                                                                              im—
                                                                              —-
                             SFD                                               —CT}-    .

                                                                                 —Hi-



                                     0%                 20%      40%      60%               80%

                                                         % Of housing units


        2d) New construction for-sale affordability
        Prompt: Analyze affordability of new for-sale housing from sales transactions compared to AMI, analyze by
        OHNA region and city size

        Data source: Property Radar, home sales since 2018 for the state of Oregon of units built 2018 or later.
        Includes all housing types, including condos.

        Limitations: Affordability was calculated based on current estimated home value as of May 2025 to reflect
        changes in price for older sales transactions and since some transactions have a sales value that may be
        inaccurate, such as sales of vacant lots / home sites prior to the construction of the home, non-arms-length
        transactions, etc. Affordability calculations use the same approach used by HUD for CHAS data: “The owner
        affordability estimates in the CHAS data use a ratio of 3.36—that is, a household could afford to purchase a
        home if the home's value is less than or equal to 3.36 of the household's household-size-adjusted income.
        This factor is based on terms for FHA-insured mortgages: 31% monthly payment standard, 96.5% loan-to-
        value ratio, 5.5% interest rate, 1.75% upfront insurance premium, .55% annual insurance premium, and 2%
        annual taxes and hazard insurance.” Affordability calculations are not adjusted for HOA dues. Calculations are
        scaled by bedroom count using HUD’s CHAS methodology (units with 3 or more bedrooms use a single

    y
"
wr           OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                         55
        adjustment factor). The current mortgage interest rates are higher than what is reflected in the CHAS
        methodology, therefore affordability is being overstated in this data-if higher mortgage rates were modeled,
        housing would be broadly less affordable at all levels of income. All housing types are grouped together
        because townhouses and other middle housing are not reliably coded in the data.

        Potentially reliable patterns by region and/or city size: The majority of new for-sale housing is affordable
        only to households earning greater than 120% of AMI across the state; however, there are small variations by
        city size and larger variations by region.

            e     City size: For smaller cities, a slightly larger percentage of new for-sale housing units are estimated to
                  be affordable at 80-100% of AMI compared to in cities >25k and Metro jurisdictions, while a slightly
                  smaller percentage are affordable at >120% of AMI. Other differences are negligible.
            e     Region:
                      ©)    In the Metro and Willamette Valley regions there is a similar distribution of new homes by
                            affordability level, with 85-90% of new homes affordable at >120% of AMI and nearly all others
                            affordable at 100-120% AMI. Both regions have a large number of transactions, making this
                            estimate fairly reliable.
                            In the Central and Southwest regions, over 95% of new for-sale homes appear to be affordable
                            at >120% AMI—higher than in other regions. Nearly all other transactions are affordable at
                            100-120% AMI. Both of these regions have over 1,000 total transactions in the dataset, which
                            may make this finding reliable. Several of the counties in these regions have lower AMIs
                            compared to much of the state, which may be contributing to this pattern.
                            In the Northeast and Northern Coast, it appears that a higher share of new homes is affordable
                            at 80-120% AMI; however, there are many fewer transactions, and this difference may not be
                            reliable given the smaller sample size.
                            Southeast has under 100 total transactions in the dataset which does not allow for any
                            meaningful analysis of patterns.

        Figure 24: Home Sales by Affordability and City Size (% of new construction sales):

        City Size                  Area Median Income Level      Count of Homes Sold       Percent of Homes Sold
        10k-25k                    30-60%                                              1                           0.04%
        10k-25k                    60-80%                                             18                           0.70%
        10k-25k                    80-100%                                          107                            4.18%
        10k-25k                    100-120%                                         300                          11.72%
        10k-25k                    >120%                                          2,134                         83.36%

        Metro or >25K              0-30%                                               1                           0.01%
        Metro or >25K              30-60%                                              6                           0.04%
        Metro or >25K              60-80%                                             10                           0.06%
        Metro or >25K              80-100%                                          192                            1.18%

    y
"
wr        OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                              56
        City Size            Area Median Income Level     Count of Homes Sold         Percent of Homes Sold
        Metro or >25K        100-120%                                     1,884                           11.55%
        Metro or >25K        >120%                                      14,214                            87.17%



        Figure 25: Home Sales by Affordability and OHNA Region (% of new construction sales):

                             Area Median Income Level      Count of Homes Sold         Percent of Homes Sold

        Central              0-30%                                                 0                             0
        Central              30-60%                                                0                             0
        Central              60-80%                                                1                      0.1%
        Central              80-100%                                               0                             0
        Central              100-120%                                             A0                      3.7%
        Central              >120%                                          1,049                        96.2%

        Metro                0-30%                                                 0                             0
        Metro                30-60%                                                1                      0.0%
        Metro                60-80%                                                3                      0.0%
        Metro                80-100%                                            150                        1.5%
        Metro                100-120%                                       1,291                        12.9%
        Metro                >120%                                          8,530                        85.5%

        Northeast            0-30%                                                 0                             0
        Northeast            30-60%                                                0                             0
        Northeast            60-80%                                               17                      3.1%
        Northeast            80-100%                                              15                     13.5%
        Northeast            100-120%                                           150                      27.0%
        Northeast            >120%                                              314                      56.5%

        Northern Coast       0-30%                                                 0                             0
        Northern Coast       30-60%                                                0                             0
        Northern Coast       60-80%                                                0                             0
        Northern Coast       80-100%                                              20                     12.0%
        Northern Coast       100-120%                                             70                     41.9%
        Northern Coast       >120%                                                17                     46.1%

        Southeast            0-30%                                                 0                             0
        Southeast            30-60%                                                0                             0


    y
"
wr        OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                        57
                             Area Median Income Level      Count of Homes Sold        Percent of Homes Sold

        Southeast            60-80%                                               0                            0
        Southeast            80-100%                                              5                      7.71%
        Southeast            100-120%                                             4                      6.2%
        Southeast            >120%                                               56                    86.2%

        Southwest            0-30%                                                0                            0
        Southwest            30-60%                                               0                            0
        Southwest            60-80%                                               0                            0
        Southwest            80-100%                                              6                      0.4%
        Southwest            100-120%                                            42                      2.8%
        Southwest            >120%                                         1,448                       96.8%

        Willamette Valley    0-30%                                                1                      0.0%
        Willamette Valley    30-60%                                               6                      0.1%
        Willamette Valley    60-80%                                               7                      0.1%
        Willamette Valley    80-100%                                             43                      0.8%
        Willamette Valley    100-120%                                        587                        10.6%
        Willamette Valley    >120%                                         4,874                       88.3%




    y
"
wr        OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                      58
     Figure 26: Recent Home Sales by Affordability and City Size (distribution of city %s)



                       >120%




                     100-120%    ia—
                                     i                   -
                                 [L        °
                     80-100%
                                     ih—
     Affordability




                                                                                        Population size
                                                                                        ff} 10k-25k
                                                                                        {J} Metro or >25K
                       60-80%
                                     {i+

                       30-60%    |
                                     |

                        0-30%



                                     6            25%        50%        75%      100%
                                >)
                                x)




                                               % of new for-sale housing units




wr           OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                            59
        Figure 27: Recent Home Sales by Affordability and OHNA Region (distributions of city %s)


                                                               r   °         ; =
                 >120%                                 1




                              a                °           °
              100-120%            —                1




                              °                                                        Region
        =      80-100%     '                                                           {I} Central
        ra                =                                                        4   {I} Metro
         &                                                                             ff}   Northeast
         S                |                                                            {J} Northern Coast
         =      60-80%   , HF                                                          4     Southeast
                                                                                       {J}   Southwest
                                                                                       {}    Willamette Valley


                30-60%




                 0-30%




                         0%              25%           50%             75%     100%

                                      % of new for-sale housing units


        2e) New construction market rate multi-unit rental housing affordability
        Prompt: Analyze affordability of new market-rate multi-unit rental housing from CoStar compared to AMI,
        analyzed by OHNA region and city size

        Data source: CoStar proprietary data as of Q4 2024, records for all market-rate multi-unit rental housing
        included within CoStar’s inventory (see limitations) built since 2018 (Using HUD 2024 AMI limits by county).

        Limitations: Not all development is included in CoStar; smaller developments are more likely to be missed.
        Many developments are missing rent data. Reported asking rents reflect an average by unit type (e.g., studio,
        1BR, 2BR, etc.) for the development. Separation of market-rate vs. affordable housing is based on CoStar’s
        categorization, which is not always accurate. To convert from average asking rents by unit type to % AMI,
        ECOnorthwest estimated the additional utility costs based on a ratio between “gross rent” (including utilities)
        and “net rent” (excluding utilities) from PUMS and applied this ratio to the reported asking rents from CoStar.
        For each development in CoStar, ECOnorthwest calculated a blended average % AMI affordability level based
        on a weighted average of the % AMI for each unit type and the share of those units in the development.




    y
"
wr           OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                       60
     Potentially reliable patterns by region and/or city size: Overall, statewide, the majority of new multi-unit
     rental housing (65-70%) is affordable at between 80-120% of AMI. There are some differences by city size and
     region, though they may not be reliable:

         e     City size: Differences by city size are relatively subtle. Smaller cities have a slightly higher share of
               new multi-unit rental housing that is affordable at >120% of AMI compared to larger and Metro
               jurisdictions and a slightly lower percentage affordable at 100-120% of AMI. There is substantial
               variation at the city level within these groupings.
         e     Region:
                   o     Estimates for some regions—Northeast, Northern Coast, and Southeast—are based on few
                         observations and are unlikely to be reliable.
                   o     Differences between other regions are more likely to be reliable based on the number of
                         observations; however, the imprecision inherent in the approach means that these differences
                         may be overstated, and the variation within regions is substantial.

     Figure 28: New Market Rate Multi-Unit Rental Housing by Affordability Level and City Size (% of new
     construction rentals):

     City Size                   Area Median Income Level        New Rental Units         Percent New Rental Units
     10k-25k                     30-60%                                             19                             1.2%
     10k-25k                     60-80%                                           277                             17.9%
     10k-25k                     80-100%                                          712                            46.1%
     10k-25k                     100-120%                                         283                             18.3%
     10k-25k                     >120%                                            254                             16.4%

     Metro or >25K               30-60%                                           277                              0.8%
     Metro or >25K               60-80%                                         6,036                             18.1%
     Metro or >25K               80-100%                                      14,709                             44.2%
     Metro or >25K               100-120%                                       8,262                            24.8%
     Metro or >25K               >120%                                          3,974                             11.9%



     Figure 29: New Market Rate Multi-Unit Rental Housing by Affordability Level and OHNA Region (% of
     new construction rentals):

                                 Area Median Income Level         New Rental Units             Percent New Rental Units

     Central                     30-60%                                                    0                        0.0%

     Central                     80-100%                                            1,589                         61.4%

     Central                     100-120%                                                786                      30.3%

     Central                     >120%                                                   215                        8.3%


vA
wr     OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                                 61
                            Area Median Income Level         New Rental Units         Percent New Rental Units

     Metro                  30-60%                                              241                        1.0%

     Metro                  60-80%                                          5,228                        22.6%

     Metro                  80-100%                                        11,110                        48.0%

     Metro                  100-120%                                        3,741                        16.2%

     Metro                  >120%                                           2,829                        12.2%

     Northeast              30-60%                                                0                              0

     Northeast              60-80%                                              144                      80.0%

     Northeast              80-100%                                              36                      20.0%

     Northeast              100-120%                                              0                              0

     Northeast              >120%                                                 0                              0

     Northern Coast         30-60%                                                0                              0

     Northern Coast         60-80%                                                0                              0

     Northern Coast         80-100%                                             168                     100.0%

     Northern Coast         100-120%                                              0                              0

     Northern Coast         >120%                                                 0                              0

     Southeast              30-60%                                               19                      47.5%

     Southeast              60-80%                                               21                      52.5%

     Southeast              80-100%                                               0                              0

     Southeast              100-120%                                              0                              0

     Southeast              >120%                                                 0                              0

     Southwest              30-60%                                                0                       0.0%

     Southwest              60-80%                                              250                      23.5%

     Southwest              80-100%                                             200                      18.8%

     Southwest              100-120%                                            369                      34.7%

     Southwest              >120%                                               245                      23.0%

     Willamette Valley      30-60%                                               36                       0.5%

     Willamette Valley      60-80%                                              670                       8.8%

     Willamette Valley      80-100%                                         2,318                        30.5%

     Willamette Valley      100-120%                                        3,649                        47.9%



vA
wr     OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                           62
                                    Area Median Income Level               New Rental Units              Percent New Rental Units

         Willamette Valley          >120%                                                          939                      12.3%



         Figure 30: New Market Rate Multi-unit Rental Housing by Affordability Level and OHNA Region
         100%




          50%



          25%



           0%
                   Central       Metro      Northeast     Northern     Southeast    Southwest     Willamette
                                                           Coast                                    Valley

                                                          Region

                                                  Area Median Income Level


                             O     >120%    o 100-120%.   oO 80-100%     = 60-80%        30-60%




     4
 >
mM         OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                                      63
     Figure 31: New Market Rate Multi-unit Rental Housing by Affordability Level and OHNA Region
     (distributions of city %s)




                         | : ih
                       >120%




                                                    |
                     100-120%




                                                                                              fe)
                                                                                             2.
                                                                                                       =)
                                                                                            J
                                                                                              O
                                                                                                     Central
     Affordability




                                                                                                     Metro
                                                                                                     Northeast
                     80-100%
                                                                                                     Northern Coast
                                                                                                     Southeast
                                                                                                     Southwest
                                                                                                     Willamette Valley
                       60-80%
                                --




                       30-60%
                                -— >




                                              25%      50%       75%              100%
                                         % of new for-rent housing units


     Figure 32: New Market Rate Multi-unit Rental Housing Units by Affordability Level by City
                                                       SIZE       NEW                NEW                 NEW                NEW          NEW
                                        REGION       GROUP      UNITS   30-       UNITS    60-        UNITS     80-        UNITS         UNITS
                                                                  60%                80%                 100%             100-120%       >120%
           Prineville                    Central     10k-25k                  0                  0               135                 0           0

           Pendleton                   Northeast     10k-25k                  0            144                    36                 0           0

           St. Helens                   Nonuieinn    10k-25k                  0                  0               168                 0           0
                                         Coast

           Klamath Falls               Southeast     10k-25k             19                 21                        0              0           0

           Roseburg                    Southwest     10k-25k                  0                  0                    0            89            0
           Ashland                     Southwest     10k-25k                  0                  0                18               29            0

           Central Point               Southwest     10k-25k                  0                  0               152                 0         245


           Lebanon                     Willamette    10k-25k                  0                  0               147               24            0
                                         Valley




4
eS           OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                                                     64
                                                    NEW               NEW                NEW                NEW          NEW
                        REGION                    UNITS   30-       UNITS    60-       UNITS    80-        UNITS         UNITS
                                                    60%               80%                100%             100-120%       >120%

      Dallas           Willamette
                          Valley
                                  |   1 ok-25k                  0             32                      0              0             0

      Cottage Grove | Willamette      10k-25k                   0             80                      0              0             0
                         Valley


      Newport          Willamette
                          Valley
                                  |   1 ok-25k                  0                  0                  0             66             0

      Independence     Willamette     10k-25k                   0                  0             56                 75             9
                          Valley

      Bend               Central      Metro
                                        >25K
                                             or                 0                  0            641               776          207
                                      Met
      Redmond            Central        erro OF
                                        >25K
                                                                0                  0            813                 10             8

      Portland           Metro        nl                  151               3752               4727            2378         1981

      Gresham            Metro        Metro
                                        >25K
                                             or                 0            699                306                 71             0
           .                          Metroor
      Hillsboro          Metro                             90                138               1448               484            120
                                        >25K
                                      Metroor
      Beaverton          Metro                                  0            100               1041               311              0
                                        >25K
       .                              Metroor
      Tigard             Metro          525K                    0             61                454                 77            35

                                      Metroor
      Lake Oswego        Metro          525K                    0                  0                  0             89         545

      Oregon
          8 Cit Y        Metro        Metro
                                        >25K or                 0             21                552                130             7

      Tualatin           Metro        Metro
                                        >25K
                                             or                 0                  0            145                 14             0
                                      Metroor
      Forest Grove       Metro                                  0            135                319                  0             0
                                        >25K
                                      Metroor
      Happy Valley       Metro                                  0             24                789                125             0
                                        >25K
               .   .                  Metroor
      Milwaukie          Metro                                  0                  0            391                 62            32
                                        >25K

      Sherwood           Metro        Metro or                  0                  0             25                  0            79
                                        >25K
                                      Metroor
      Canby              Metro          595K                    0             12                 23                  0             0


      Troutdale          Metro        Metro
                                        >25K
                                             or                 0             18                386                  0             0
                                      Metroor
      Sandy              Metro          95K                     0                  5            195                  0             0

      Fairview           Metro        Metro
                                        >25K
                                             or                 0            137                279                  0             0


W 4
eS    OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                                              65
                                                         NEW             NEW             NEW             NEW          NEW
                            REGION                     UNITS 30-       UNITS 60-       UNITS 80-        UNITS         UNITS
                                                         60%             80%             100%          100-120%       >120%

          Molalla            Metro         Metro
                                             >25K
                                                  or               0           126               30               0           30
                                           Metro or
          Medford          Southwest                               0           250               30            251             0
                                             >25K

                           Willamette      Metro or
          Eugene              Valley         95K                   0            31              139         1348            808


                           Willamette      Metro or
          Salem               Valley         95K                   0            21          1127               714            26


             -      og     Willamette      Metro or
          Springfield        Valley          595K                  0               0               0           261             0


                  .        Willamette      Metro or
          Corvallis           Valley         595K                  0               0               0             17            0


                           Willamette      Metro or
          Albany              Valley         95K               36               12               63            594
                                                                                                                9             96


                           Willamette      Metro or
             i                                                                  12              131             148
          Keizer             Valley          >25K                  0                             3                             0

                           Willamette      Metro or
          McMinnville
               i   i          Valley         595K                  0           221                 0              0            0



          Woodburn         Willamette   | Metro or                 0            18              515            A402            0
                             Valley          >25K

                           Willamette      Metro or
          Newberg            Valley          95K                   0           24 3             14 0              0            0




        2f) Housing type mix of recent affordable housing production
        Prompt: Housing mix of affordable housing production: Analyze data provided by OHCS.

        Data source: Data provided by OHCS reflecting 4% and 9% LIHTC deals that reached financial closing
        (meaning that underwriting is complete and financial documents have been signed) from 2020-2025. The data
        also covers LIFT-funded developments but excludes smaller grant/loan/tax credit deals (like GHAP, HDGP,
        OAHTC, and others). It includes only Multifamily Residential Rental properties and homeownership
        development, with both single site properties and scattered site developments.

        Limitations: The data provided does not include all affordable housing funded by the state, as certain
        funding programs are excluded. Housing type is not consistently described within the data in a way that aligns
        with typical housing type definitions. Instead, housing type was assumed based on the identified “Property
        Use” as either “multi-unit Residential Rental” or “Single Family Homeownership”. Some of both categories
        may take the shape of middle housing development.



    y
"
wr        OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                                      66
        Potentially reliable patterns by region and/or city size: The majority of the recently produced affordable
        housing units have been multi-unit residential units. Single family home units account for a larger share of
        total units in Metro and 25k plus cities. They account for just over 25% of the units in the Central region.

        Figure 33: Recent Affordable Housing Developments by Housing Type and City Size

        City Size               Property Use                          Total Units        Share of Region Units

        10k-25k                 Multi-unit Residential Rental                 1,330                        99%

        10k-25k                 Single Family Homeownership                       20                        1%

        Metro or >25K           Multi-unit Residential Rental                 9,176                        94%

        Metro or >25K           Single Family Homeownership                     606                         6%



        Figure 34: Recent Affordable Housing Developments by Housing Type and OHNA Region:

                                Property Use                          Total Units        Share of Region Units

        Central                 Multi-unit Residential Rental                    761                       12%

        Central                 Single Family Homeownership                     292                        28%

        Metro                   Multi-unit Residential Rental                 6,635                        97%

        Metro                   Single Family Homeownership                     201                         3%

        Northeast               Multi-unit Residential Rental                   292                      100%

        Northern Coast          Multi-unit Residential Rental                   321                      100%

        Southeast               Multi-unit Residential Rental                   200                      100%

        Southwest               Multi-unit Residential Rental                   516                        90%

        Southwest               Single Family Homeownership                         58                     10%

        Willamette Valley       Multi-unit Residential Rental                  1,781                       96%

        Willamette Valley       Single Family Homeownership                         15                      4%




    y
"
wr        OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                          67
     Figure 35: Recent Affordable Housing Developments by Housing Type and City Size




             Metro or >25K
     Group




                    1Ok-25k




                                 0%                    25%                50%                   75%                 100%
                                                                     Share of Units


                                           i   Multi-Family Residential Rental    _   Single Family Homeownership



     Figure 36: Recent Affordable Housing Developments by Housing Type and OHNA Region

             Willamette Valley




      Cc



      g sectencoot
      ne)

     ~




                                      0%                 25%               50%                  75%                 100%
                                                                      Share of Units


                                           ©    Multi-Family Residential Rental   i   Single Family Homeownership




wr          OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                            68
        Figure 37: Recent Affordable For-Rent Housing Units by Bedroom Count and OHNA Region



                                                                                                            oO
                                        1        {L_}




                                                                  l
                      3+ Bedroom                   |    ;

                                            fin—
                                               —

                                                                                                                  Region
          S                             °                     .        a
                                                                       —                           -              {]}   Central
                                                                       ; i               |                   e    {Tk   Metro
          8

          =                2 Bedroom                                         |                                    ff    Northeast
          le                                                                     |                                {[}   Northern Coast
         3                                   °              a                                                     ff    Southeast
         aa}                                                                                                      {]}   Southwest
                                                                                                                  {}    Willamette Valley

                                        ——_                           HE"
                                                                                     l
                Studio/1    Bedroom                                              I

                                              —_   ills: ——-_                                          »
                                        —MEMiaal——-



                                       0%                   25%                  50%         75%           100%
                                             % of new for-rent housing units



        Unit Size
        Unit Size Qualitative Assessment of Impact
        Question: How might unit size / bedroom count metrics impact zoning, land use actions, or other
        choices a city might take to advance the policy objectives?

        The state is considering developing a compliance pathway for unit size (bedroom count) as part of the
        definition of “needed housing” in each city’s CHN. The state’s rules already require cities to evaluate unit size
        and bedroom count, but this new compliance pathway would provide specific “off the shelf” measures that
        could be used as (or potentially be required to be used as) a quantitative reference point in that assessment of
        needed housing.

        As a broad generalization, ECO’s analysis finds that new and existing for sale housing is much more likely to
        have three or more bedrooms, while new and existing for rent housing is more likely to be studio/1 bedroom
        and 2-bedroom units. Meanwhile, household sizes are often larger for lower income households that are likely
        to be renters, creating a mismatch between stock and units available. CHN compliance pathways that seek to


    y
"
wr             OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                                          69
        overcome this mismatch would presumably aim for a larger share of multi-unit units (which are more likely to
        be rental units) to have two or more bedrooms than is currently available in existing or newly constructed
        housing stock. However, the pathway from this quantitative requirement to action is limited, as cities don’t
        typically regulate bedroom count.

        INTERACTION WITH THE HCA/      LAND USE EFFICIENCY
        Findings of needed housing by unit size affect the HCA indirectly if at all. One possibility is that HCAs would
        recognize that for sale product (generally single-unit detached) is more likely to provide larger / higher
        bedroom count units, which could influence unit mix assumptions in the CHN and land capacity assessment
        in the HCA. More likely, though, quantitative definitions of need for larger bedroom count would have no
        impact on the HCA or land use efficiency choices.

        INTERACTION WITH THE HPS / ACTION SELECTION
        Cities are already considering unit size and bedroom count in their CHNs as part of their definition of needed
        housing and are required to tie action selection to that need. It is unclear how adding a quantitative
        compliance pathway would change the type or number of relevant actions selected, with the possible
        exception of increasing focus on this issue.

        There is no easily available regulatory authority that would allow cities to enforce a policy that required
        particular bedroom counts, and the administrative challenge of such a policy would discourage
        implementation. If jurisdictions did try to regulate unit size mix, the inability to set unit mix based on market
        conditions that respond to demand from the target market could discourage development overall, or for the
        housing type(s) impacted.

        It is more likely that jurisdictions would adopt regulatory incentives to encourage larger units. If the need
        were expressed as a share of all need (e.g., need for 3+ bedroom units generally) rather than being linked to a
        housing type (e.g., need for 3+ bedroom multiunit housing units), it could create an inadvertent incentive for
        larger single-unit detached homes. Even if linked to housing type but not affordability, incentives for larger
        multi-unit housing units could create perverse incentives to produce large, expensive units (e.g., townhouse-
        style rentals, large penthouse units, etc.).

        It is possible that providing access to these metrics would decrease the amount of analytical effort for cities.

        ADDITIONAL CONSIDERATIONS

            e   Our analysis found consistency across city size and region for bedroom count for for-sale product, but
                patterns are much harder to discern in for-rent products because of limited data availability in smaller
                cities and more rural areas. This suggests that a consistent statewide compliance pathway could be
                possible.

        LIKELY MARKET / POLICY RESPONSE TO LOW- OR HIGH-END THRESHOLDS (INCLUDING UNINTENDED CONSEQUENCES)

        Without city action,   a compliance pathway in the CHN has no impact on production outcomes because,
        regardless of the aggressiveness of the compliance pathway that might be selected (high or low), developers

    y
"
wr        OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                             70
      are unlikely to read the CHN document and change their assessment of their product.           A compliance pathway
      on bedroom count or unit size would only have an impact on production if it increases jurisdictional focus on
      this issue. However, again, it’s unclear that adding a specific compliance pathway with a quantitative
      requirement increases the likelihood that cities will take action beyond what might occur under current rules.

      Some city actions could have unintended consequences.

      If cities attempted to require developers to construct units with bedroom counts that matched their CHN (and
      it is not clear that cities have the ability to do so), several outcomes are possible:

          e   Fewer units per building and lower overall unit production, as fewer units would fit in the building
              envelope
          e   Potentially reduced financial feasibility as per square foot rents drop, leading to lower overall
              production

      Incentives for larger / higher bedroom count units, if not carefully designed, could drive market production
      toward more expensive rental types, reducing overall affordability. Producing apartments with higher
      bedroom counts in almost all cases reduces affordability due to the HUD guidance on affordability by unit
      type. For example, moving from a 1-bedroom apartment to a 2-bedroom apartment is equivalent to a 15%
      increase in AMI. There are almost no locations in the state where the new construction 2-bedroom rent is
      within 15% of 1 bedroom rent within a specific building, which is indicative of the marginal cost of producing a
      2 bedroom being greater than 15%. The implication because the rent difference is greater than 15% when
      adding a bedroom, is that larger bedroom units are going to be less affordable (a higher AMI).

      HCAs could hypothetically recognize that for-sale product (generally single-unit detached) is more likely to
      provide larger / higher bedroom count units, which could influence unit mix assumptions in the CHN. This
      would be mitigated through guidance or other compliance pathways on unit mix.

      ADDITIONAL CONSIDERATIONS

          e   Overall, it’s unclear that this compliance pathway would result in substantially different outcomes for
              action selection in the CHN, over the current rules. At the same time, unintended consequences are
              relatively limited unless jurisdictions choose to implement firm regulatory actions around bedroom
              count.
          e   Thestate should consider a compliance pathway for bedroom count only if:
                  oO   Itisacritically important policy priority that the state believes deserves focused policy
                       attention. Creating a compliance pathway would emphasize bedroom count as an equally
                       important policy priority to all of the other topics of compliance pathways, and in some ways,
                       it could be counter to other priorities (such as affordability).
                  o    Itis the state’s goal to decrease jurisdictional effort in completing its CHN. A compliance
                       pathway would arguably save some limited effort in the CHN         for cities that choose to use it.
          e   The state might havea    greater overall impact on the availability of rental units with higher bedroom
              count by focusing on its stock of publicly funded affordable units. OHCS could provide additional

W 4
 >
a       OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                               71
                  detail about the interaction of bedroom count with regulated affordable development feasibility and
                  HUD funding requirements.

        The state should consider future guidance about designing incentives for larger units, to help cities avoid
        creating incentives that reduce overall affordability. Cities may be interested in implementing these
        incentives whether or not the state chooses to design a compliance pathway about bedroom count.

        Unit Size Data Appendix
        1) EXISTING HOUSING STOCK UNIT SIZE

        Prompt: What is the unit size distribution of all existing housing (rental and for-sale), and how does it vary by
        OHNA region and by city size?

        Data source: ACS 5-year 2023

        Limitations: Normal limitations associated with ACS data at this level of granularity - higher MOEs with
        smaller geographies and some regions have only 1-3 observations.

        Potentially reliable patterns by region and/or city size: Little to no significant patterns by region. Medium-
        size town (10-25K) permits for 2-unit structures perhaps showing some distinction from Metro/+25K towns,
        though it is a very small portion of overall permits.

        Figure 38: Existing Housing Stock by Unit Size and City Size (% of housing stock):

        City Size               Bedroom Count            Count of Units      Percent of Units
        10k-25k                 Studio/1 Bedroom                   19,820               14.2%
        10k-25k                 2 Bedroom                          41,738               29.9%

        10k-25k                 3+ Bedroom                         78,192               56.0%
        Metro or >25K           Studio/1 Bedroom                  178,488               18.2%
        Metro or >25K           2 Bedroom                         265,410               27.1%

        Metro or >25K           3+ Bedroom                        535,107               54.7%



        Figure 39: Existing Housing Stock by Unit Size and OHNA Region (% of housing stock):

                                Bedroom Count            Count of Units      Percent of Units

        Central                 Studio/1 Bedroom                     6,546              10.0%
        Central                 2 Bedroom                           14,754              22.6%
        Central                 3+ Bedroom                         43,971               67.4%
        Metro                   Studio/1 Bedroom                  125,077               21.1%
        Metro                   2 Bedroom                         156,907               26.4%
        Metro                   3+ Bedroom                        312,137               52.5%

    y
"
wr        OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations
                             Bedroom Count          Count of Units        Percent of Units

        Northeast            Studio/1 Bedroom                     4,606              14.6%
        Northeast            2 Bedroom                            8,906              28.3%
        Northeast            3+ Bedroom                          17,997              57.1%
        Northern Coast       Studio/1 Bedroom                     1,242              11.7%
        Northern Coast       2 Bedroom                            3,433              32.3%
        Northern Coast       3+ Bedroom                           5,950              56.0%
        Southeast            Studio/1 Bedroom                     2,173              18.6%
        Southeast            2 Bedroom                            4,917              32.9%
        Southeast            3+ Bedroom                           7,248              48.5%
        Southwest            Studio/1 Bedroom                    12,962              13.6%
        Southwest            2 Bedroom                           28,663              30.0%
        Southwest            3+ Bedroom                          53,952              56.4%
        Willamette Valley    Studio/1 Bedroom                    45,102              14.7%
        Willamette Valley    {2 Bedroom                          89,568              29.2%
        Willamette Valley    |3+ Bedroom                        172,044              56.1%




    y
"
wr        OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                13
      Figure 40: Existing Housing Stock by Unit Size and City Size (distribution of city %s)




                                                                oO.
                      3+ Bedroom


                                                                of
      count




                                       © 00 |    |+        °                 Population size
                           2 Bedroom                                         {I} 10k-25k
      Bedroom




                                                 |    |                      {ff}   Metro or >25K




                                       -.
                                       tt
                Studio/1    Bedroom




                                           20%            40%    60%   80%
                                                 % Of housing units




y 4
 >
wr        OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                       74
        Figure 41: Existing Housing Stock by Unit Size and OHNA Region (distribution of city %s)



                                                                        —iaa—
                                                                    ;     I     oo



                    3+ Bedroom                                          TH
                                                                     {-
                                                                    —_il_
                                                                        —i

                                                                                           Region
         =                                           7         -                           ff} Central
         8                                            -                                    {I} Metro
         =           2 Bedroom                            I                                {i} Northeast
         re)                                         +i                                    {J}   Northern Coast
         3                            °          -                                         {Southeast
        aa)                                                                                {+} Southwest
                                                                                           {]} Willamette Valley

                                      —[}+—
                                  °       (]}—
                                             t
               Studio/1 Bedroom       —iik
                                    ;
                                  yO
                                  I



                                             20%              40%         60%        80%

                                                     % of housing units


        2) SHARE OF THREE PLUS PEOPLE HOUSEHOLD

        Prompt: Provide city-level data for households and families with 3+ members from prior analysis

        Data: 2023 ACS 5-Year estimates at the place level. Table B25009 provides tenure by household size. We
        summarize households of 3 or more people across tenure. This statistic includes all households (family and
        non-family combined)

        Data Limitations: The data visualization uses point estimates to display the interquartile range by region or
        size. It is not possible to include the margin of error (MOE) for the estimate because each individual point has
        its own MOE, and including the MOE for each (while possible) would obscure the desired outcome of
        understanding the range and its midpoint. If you were to explore MOE per each point, it might increase the
        perceived variance by region. Figure 42 provides an example of how the box and whisker plot compares to the
        estimated distribution if the MOEs are included, for the sake of illustrating this situation.




    y
"
wr            OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                    15
     Figure 42: Share of 3+ Member Households by OHNA Region and City



             60%

      ae)
      2a 50%                                                                                                                                  @
       ~Y
       >
       fe)
      +      40%                                                                                                           if                   |
       )                                  LJ

      Cc5                                                                                                              °                        gr
     KE             |   "                                                                          H                                                f




      tH 30%    °                                                         co                                                      3                 |
                                                                                                                                                8

             20%
                                                                                                   Willamette Valley




                                                                                                                                                                                                    Willamette Valley
                                                         Northern Coast




                                                                                                                                                          Northern Coast
                                                                                       Southwest




                                                                                                                                                                                       Southwest
                                                                           Southeast




                                                                                                                                                                           Southeast
                                           Northeast




                                                                                                                                              Northeast
                        Central




                                                                                                                       Central
                                  Metro




                                                                                                                                      Metro




     Some OHNA regions are made up of less than a handful of cities with populations greater than 10,000. The
     interquartile range (for the box and whisker plot) in such cases, simply visualizes the range of the few points.

     Patterns: The Southeast region has a relatively low share of 3+ people households relative to other regions
     (even when MOEs are taken into consideration). The Southwest region follows a similar pattern but is less
     pronounced. The median share of 3+ people households is higher in the Metro relative to all other regions.
     This does not universally hold for all cities in the Metro. This pattern remains generally consistent for size
     (including Metro) as well.

     Figure 43: Share of 3+ Member Households by City Size

     City Size                            Estimate                            MarginofError                                     Share           Share Margin of Error

     10k-25k                                            43,782                                               1,645|               33.7%                                                            1.2%

     Metro or >25K                                     322,461                                              4,639|                34.6%                                                            0.5%


     Figure 44; Share of 3+ Member Households by OHNA Region

                                          Estimate                          MarginofError                                       Share          Share Margin of Error

     Central                                           21,772                                               1,342                      36%                                                            2%

     Metro                                         192,169                                                 3,499                       34%                                                             1%

4
 >
mr          OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                                                                                                                         76
                                   Estimate         MarginofError     Share    Share Margin of Error

        Northeast                      10,439                   790      36%                       3%

        Northern Coast                  3,285                  420       33%                       4%

        Southeast                       4,285                  505       31%                       4%

        Southwest                      30,296                 1,482      34%                       2%

        Willamette Valley             103,997                 2,632      35%                       1%



        Figure 45: Share of 3+ Member Households by City Size

                             60%
        Share of Household




                             40%




                             20%




                              O%
                                                                                   Metro or >25K




                                              x
                                              Ww)
                                              .
                                              =x
                                              9




    7
"
wr              OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                     ai
     Figure 46: Share of 3+ Member Households by OHNA Region

                          60%
     Share of Household




                          40%   —



                          20%




                           O%




                                                                                                       Willamette Valley
                                                              Northern Coast




                                                                                           Southwest
                                                                               Southeast
                                                  Northeast
                                Central




                                          Metro




     Looking specifically at renter households, an average of around 25 - 30% of renter households have 3+
     members, as shown in Figure 47.




wr             OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                         18
        Figure 47. Share of Renter Households with 3+ Members by OHNA Region and City




                                                                                                                                                &
        Share of Renter Household
                                    on
                                    ~




                                    50%




                                            =i
                                            LI}+
                                               tI


                                           I+

                                           It
                                             |
                                          —H




                                                                                                                 Willamette Valley




                                                                                                                                                                                                            Willamette Valley
                                                                                                                                                                   Northern Coast
                                                                        Northern Coast




                                                                                                                                                                                                Southwest
                                                                                                     Southwest
                                                                                         Southeast




                                                                                                                                                                                    Southeast
                                                            Northeast




                                                                                                                                                       Northeast
                                                                                                                                     Central
                                          Central




                                                                                                                                               Metro
                                                    Metro




        3) NEW CONSTRUCTION FOR-SALE UNIT SIZE
        Prompt: What is the unit size distribution of recently built housing (rental and for-sale), and how does it vary
        by OHNA region and by city size?

        Data source: Property Radar, home sales since 2018 for the state of Oregon of units built 2018 or later.
        Includes all housing types, including condos.

        Limitations: Bedroom count is based on the listing information; some listings may count bedrooms that do
        not meet all code requirements to be legal bedrooms as bedrooms.

        Potentially reliable patterns by region and/or city size: Statewide, over 90% of new homes sold since 2018
        have had 3 or more bedrooms. The same is true in aggregate for both city size categories and all regions.
        There are subtle differences by region but some stem from regions with smaller data sets.



    y
"
wr                   OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                                                                                                            19
        Figure 48: Findings by New Construction For-Sale Housing by Unit Size and City Size (% of new
        construction sales)

        City Size           Bedroom Count           Unit Sales       Percent of Sales

        10k-25k             Studio/1 Bedroom                 30                     1.2%

        10k-25k             2 Bedroom                      189                      TAN

        10k-25k             3+ Bedroom                   2,341                     91.4%

        Metro or >25K       Studio/1 Bedroom               179                      1.1%

        Metro or >25K       2 Bedroom                    1,162                      7.1%

        Metro or >25K       3+ Bedroom                  14,966                     91.8%



        Figure 49: New Construction For-Sale Housing by Unit Size and OHNA Region (% of new construction
        sales)

        Region              Bedroom Count          Unit Sales        Percent of Sales
        Central             Studio/1 Bedroom                     9                 0.83%
        Central             2 Bedroom                        73                    6.70%
        Central             3+ Bedroom                    1,008                   92.48%
        Metro               Studio/1 Bedroom                162                     1.62%
        Metro               2 Bedroom                      829                     8.31%
        Metro               3+ Bedroom                   8,984                    90.07%
        Northeast           Studio/1 Bedroom                     5                 0.90%
        Northeast           2 Bedroom                        16                    2.88%
        Northeast           3+ Bedroom                     535                    96.22%
        Northern Coast      Studio/1 Bedroom                     2                  1.20%
        Northern Coast      2 Bedroom                            3                  1.80%
        Northern Coast      3+ Bedroom                      162                   97.01%
        Southeast           Studio/1 Bedroom                     1                  1.54%
        Southeast           2 Bedroom                            5                 7.69%
        Southeast           3+ Bedroom                       59                   90.77%
        Southwest           Studio/1 Bedroom                 12                    0.80%
        Southwest           2 Bedroom                       112                    7.49%
        Southwest           3+ Bedroom                    1,372                   91.71%
        Willamette Valley   |Studio/1 Bedroom                18                    0.33%
        Willamette Valley   |2 Bedroom                     313                     5.67%


    y
"
wr        OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                              80
       Willamette Valley                |3+ Bedroom                 5,187               94.00%



       Figure 50: New Construction For-Sale Housing by Unit Size and City Size (distribution of city %s)




                                                                          —|||
                       3+ Bedroom


                                                                    Oh
       count




                                                       e ce                           Population size
                            2 Bedroom                                                 {I} 10k-25k
       Bedroom




                                                                                      {J} Metro or >25K
                                         eee




                 Studio/1    Bedroom
                                          ro}
                                          °




                                        0%       25%          50%   75%        100%
                                             % of new for-sale housing units




Wy 4
  >
wr         OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations
        Figure 51: New Construction For-Sale Housing by Unit Size and OHNA Region (distribution of city %s)




                                                                        oe          i
                                                                      —_han
                                                                                l
                      3+ Bedroom                                                        l
                                                                           —hi-
                                                                                tt

                                                                                            Region
         §                                   {i                                             ff}   Central
         Q
         Oo                                  2eee                                           {I}   Metro
                                          |
          =                2 Bedroom    |                                                   {]}   Northeast
          ro)                           h-                                                  {]}   Northern Coast
          =
         ro}                            {75}                    ee                          ff}   Southeast
         ro)                                      1
         aa)                                                                                {+}   Southwest
                                                                                            {}} Willamette Valley

                                        [:            °
                                         '    e


                Studio/1    Bedroom      |
                                        5le
                                        fi                °     fe)


                                        li




                                       0%                 25%            75%         100%
                                                  % of new for-sale housing units


        4) NEW CONSTRUCTION MULTI-UNIT RENTAL HOUSING UNIT SIZE

        Prompt: Analyze unit size (by bedroom) mix of new multi-unit rental housing from CoStar, analyze by OHNA
        region and city size

        Data source: CoStar, multi-unit developments built since 2018

        Limitations: Not all development is included in CoStar; smaller developments are more likely to be missed.
        Not all CoStar records list the number of units by unit size, though most newer developments do.

        Potentially reliable patterns by region and/or city size: The vast majority (over 90% statewide) of new
        multi-unit rental housing is studio, 1- and 2-bedroom units, with less than 10% 3+-bedroom units in
        aggregate. This pattern is the inverse of the pattern exhibited with for-sale units.

                e    City size: The Metro/>25K grouping exhibits a higher share of production of studio/1-bedroom units
                     (60% of all new rental production, compared to 44% for cities in the 10K-25K). However, at the city
                     level, the pattern becomes less clear as the distribution of rental unit production within the
                     Metro/>25K group shows little difference from the 10K-25K group at all unit type levels.
                e    Region:

    y
"
wr             OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                         82
                 o    Estimates for some regions—Northeast, Northern Coast, and Southeast—are based on few
                      observations and are less reliable, though CoStar data for unit size is more reliable in general
                      than data on affordability.
                 o    Among regions with more multiunit developments, Metro and Southwest have lower shares of
                      3+ Bedroom units (<5% in aggregate) than the Willamette Valley and Central regions (10-15%).
                      However, there is substantial variability at the city level within each of the regions due to the
                      smaller number of observations at those levels.

     Figure 52: New Construction Multi-Unit Rental Housing by Unit Size and City Size (% of new rental
     stock):

                                                     Count of New Rental            Percent of New Rental
     City Size                Bedroom Count          Units                          Units

     10k-25k                 Studio/1 Bedroom                               709                           43.50%

     10k-25k                 2 Bedroom                                      1715                          47.55%

     10k-25k                 3+ Bedroom                                     146                            8.96%

     Metro or >25K           Studio/1 Bedroom                            24,331                           59.65%

     Metro or >25K           2 Bedroom                                   13,918                           34.12%

     Metro or >25K           3+ Bedroom                                   2,540                            6.23%



     Figure 53: New Construction Multi-Unit Rental Housing by Unit Size and OHNA Region (% of new rental
     stock):

                             Bedroom Count           Count of New Rental Units           Percent of New Rental Units

     Central                 Studio/1 Bedroom                                1,148                                 38.7%

     Central                 2 Bedroom                                       1,407                                 47.4%

     Central                 3+ Bedroom                                            411                             13.9%

     Metro                   Studio/1 Bedroom                               19,608                                 67.1%

     Metro                   2 Bedroom                                       8,316                                 28.5%

     Metro                   3+ Bedroom                                      1,300                                  44%

     Northeast               Studio/1 Bedroom                                       72                             35.3%

     Northeast               2 Bedroom                                              96                             47.1%

     Northeast               3+ Bedroom                                             36                             17.6%

     Northern Coast          Studio/1 Bedroom                                       96                             47.1%

     Northern Coast          2 Bedroom                                              84                             41.2%

     Northern Coast          3+ Bedroom                                             24                             11.8%


vA
wr     OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                                 83
                                            Bedroom Count            Count of New Rental Units    Percent of New Rental Units

        Southeast                           Studio/1 Bedroom                                 19                          47.5%

        Southeast                           2 Bedroom                                        10                          25.0%

        Southeast                           3+ Bedroom                                       11                          27.5%

        Southwest                           Studio/1 Bedroom                                608                          49.8%

        Southwest                           2 Bedroom                                       587                          48.1%

        Southwest                           3+ Bedroom                                       25                            2.0%
        Willamette Valley                   Studio/1 Bedroom                              3,489                          40.8%
        Willamette Valley                   2 Bedroom                                     4,193                          49.0%
        Willamette Valley                   3+ Bedroom                                      879                           10.3%



        Figure 54: New Construction Multi-Unit Rental Housing by Unit Size and City Size (distribution of city
        %s)




                                        -
                                        iZ-
                      3+ Bedroom




         c
         5
         ro)




                                             ip
         Oo                             °     ——||                   |—                   Population size
         =5                2 Bedroom                                                      {ff} 10k-25k
         ©                                                                          °     {]} Metro or >25K
         ro)
          ®
         mM




                                            Ho
                                        |                fi-
                Studio/1    Bedroom




                                       0%          25%         50%       75%      100%
                                              % of new for-rent housing units




    7
"
wr             OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                                84
       Figure 55: New Construction Multi-Unit Rental Housing by Unit Size and OHNA Region (distribution of
       city %s)



                                     — ii                                                         :
                                     Ie
                                                       |
                   3+ Bedroom                 |

                                         <i}—
                                            E—

                                                                                                       Region
        =                            °                 .       —                     -                 fk    Central
        8                                          ,           a—                                 ©    fk Metro
        =               2 Bedroom                              |                                       fi    Northeast
        S                                                          |                                   {J}   Northern Coast
        o                                 °                2                                           ff}   Southeast
        a                                                                                              {]}   Southwest
                                                                                                       {}    Willamette Valley

                                         es

                                                                    |
             Studio/1    Bedroom                           ;       |
                                                   ——_                  [L$   ——_        e668


                                         —hiiiaa—_




                                    0%            25%              50%         75%              100%
                                          % of new for-rent housing units



       Geographic Location
       Geographic Location Qualitative Assessment of Impact
       Question: How might a compliance pathway related to the geographic location of planned development
       impact the zoning, land use actions, or other choices a city might take to advance the policy objectives?

       The state is considering developing a compliance pathway that defines the “areas of opportunity” where
       cities should plan for greater amounts of housing to be developed. As part of this rule-making effort, the state
       has developed a draft map of these areas and will be working to finalize it over the coming weeks and months.
       Additionally, as part of a separate process, the state is developing an environmental justice map that will
       provide additional inputs to this discussion that have the advantage of community vetting and should be
       incorporated when available.

       We assume that any compliance pathways associated with geographic location would aim to concentrate
       new development and zoned capacity in identified areas with low harms and high assets. Such a pathway


Wy 4
  >
wr          OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                                  85
        might, for example, ask cities to plan for a “low end” or “high end” percentage of OHNA target units (overall
        and/or in specific categories) to be developed in opportunities areas.

        INTERACTION WITH THE HCA/      LAND USE EFFICIENCY
        Efforts to concentrate new development in certain areas have a direct interaction with the HCA and with land
        use efficiency measures. A quantified need for housing in high-opportunity areas could potentially tie to HCA
        estimates of capacity. While the HCA is focused on total capacity and overall land need, choices made about
        land use efficiency measures could increase or decrease opportunities for housing (overall and in specific
        categories) to be built in high-opportunity areas.

        INTERACTION WITH THE HPS / ACTION SELECTION
        A compliance pathway that asks cities to plan for more development in certain geographies would also affect
        action selection in the HPS. For example, incentives might be targeted to development proposed in those
        areas, or affordable housing development might be more likely to be funded if it is in those areas. A quantified
        need could translate to more specific actions in terms of the extent of land use changes.

        DATA CONSIDERATIONS

        While the analysis is necessarily preliminary (as maps are still being finalized), we were able to get a baseline
        read on how patterns of recent development overlap with draft areas of opportunity under the current
        regulatory environment. The analysis reveals spatial distribution differences between the different subsets of
        new housing development:

            e   New for-sale units are predominately located in low harm areas, with more in low asset, low harm
                areas than in high asset, low harm areas.
            e   Market rate rentals are predominately located in high asset areas, and are roughly evenly split
                between High Asset, Low Harm and High Asset, High Harm areas around the state. For the most part,
                these inner-ring “high harm” areas are classified as such because they are adjacent to busy
                commercial corridors containing toxic cleanup sites, bike & ped-involved crashes, urban heat island
                effect, and (especially in the coast and valley areas) flood risk.
            e   Recent affordable housing projects are largely located in high asset areas, with more in High Asset,
                Low Harm areas than High asset, high harm areas.

        At the highest level, as currently defined and mapped, development patterns are already partially aligned
        with the direction of policy intent -- new affordable and market-rate rental housing is largely in high asset
        areas. However, many of them are also in areas of high harm. This raises a question of whether policy
        objectives would be better achieved by removing or reducing harms in places where development is already
        occurring, rather than changing development patterns or the location of zoned capacity.

        The current definition and mapping of high opportunity areas does not necessarily pick up existing single-unit
        detached neighborhoods that may have trees, schools, and parks, but not other features such as access to
        grocery stores, walkable streets, and transit. It also does not include areas that may be concept planned or
        master planned to become complete, high-opportunity areas in the future but where key features are not

    y
"
wr        OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                           86
        present today. As a result, focusing production of multi-unit and affordable housing in high-opportunity areas
        as currently identified could mean less pressure on (or even inadvertently discouraging) jurisdictions to
        expand housing options in existing single-unit detached neighborhoods or to integrate a range of housing
        options into newly developing areas unless combined with other locational considerations.

        The current definition of opportunity areas is partially but not fully aligned with the location preferences in
        the ORCA; however, we understand that OHCS is considering updating those preferences and the
        discrepancies may be resolved through that process and/or future refinements to how opportunity mapping
        is defined. Sending mixed or conflicting signals to affordable housing developers could result in additional
        challenges with affordable housing production.

        Understanding the overlap of these areas of opportunity with communities of color or lower-income
        communities would be necessary, to ensure that city policies and state compliance pathways don’t
        inadvertently contribute to displacement.

        MARKET CONSIDERATIONS

        It appears that, in general, opportunity areas align with where the market is driving production for multi-unit
        housing, less so for for-sale housing. Further efforts to concentrate development in these areas might increase
        the percentage, especially if it includes incentives and intentional investment in infrastructure and other
        development supports. Since most of these areas are in historic centers of cities and along highways, they
        also have the highest concentration of harms (toxic cleanup sites, bike & ped-involved crashes), and those
        harms will not be easily removed.

        To the extent that identified high-opportunity areas overlap with areas with existing high-value development,
        requiring jurisdictions to expand zoning opportunities for middle housing, multi-unit housing, affordable
        housing, etc., this may have less impact due to the challenges of redeveloping high-value existing property.

        If the compliance pathway resulted in cities providing incentives only in areas of opportunity, or in some way
        creating barriers to development in areas of low opportunity, the result could be to lower overall housing
        production.

        ADDITIONAL CONSIDERATIONS

        Given the current state of development of maps (including the EJ tool) and need for additional vetting and
        coordinating with other state agencies, it is difficult to know how a specific quantitative standard would
        ultimately play out at this time.

            e   The data on recent development locations give us only a partial look at recent development trends
                because the datasets are not comprehensive. To arrive at specific percentages in a compliance
                pathway, the state would need further analysis with finalized maps to understand the average land
                area covered by opportunity areas or some other metric to inform these decisions.




    y
"
wr        OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                          87
             e    Because there is no statewide dataset on zoning, we are unable at this time to determine how much of
                  different types of zoning is currently located within identified high-opportunity areas at a statewide
                  level.
             e    The geographic interaction with CFEC deserves additional follow up if this is pursued. When the
                  Opportunity maps are finalized, how do those overlay with the CFAs that have so far been identified?
             e    Opportunity maps based on statewide data will never capture the nuance of local experiences with
                  place. The maps that have been developed so far provide a very good starting place for local planning
                  efforts, but cities would likely find them too “coarse” in their geographic specification to be useful.

       DLCD will need to develop a process to update and maintain the maps over time.

       Geographic Location Data Appendix
       1) RECENT HOUSING DEVELOPMENT IN HIGH OPPORTUNITY AREAS

       Prompt: To what extent has recent housing development for multi-unit, middle housing (if available), and
       affordable housing been located in high-opportunity areas?
             e    Map recently built multi-unit housing based on CoStar data
             e    Map recently funded affordable housing based on data from OHCS
             e    Map recently built for-sale housing based on sales transactions
             e    Overlay these with working draft maps of opportunity areas. Summarize what share of units in each
                  category are located within high opportunity / low harm areas vs. other combinations of opportunity
                  and harm.

       Data: CoStar, Property Radar, and OHCS newly funded affordable housing, draft opportunity maps (with
       assets and harms noted as relative to concentration of harms and assets in the state, not each city relative to
       itself).

       Data limitations: Note this analysis uses a draft version of the opportunity map not fully vetted for this use.
       We have also chosen to use, for ease of interpretation, the simplified two-by-two classification scheme - if an
       area is on average above the state median for assets, and on average below the median for harms, it will fall
       into the “High Asset, Low Harm” category. It is unclear whether      this classification will ultimately be the most
       appropriate way to apply the spatial data for this purpose.

       Patterns: The current iteration of the opportunity map typically displays a pattern, for many UGBs, where
       “High Opportunity, High Harm” areas are located in a UGB’s core area, and “Low Opportunity, Low Harm”
       areas form a ring around the perimeter of the UGB. This is likely because commercial and institutional assets
       tend to be clustered in urban cores, while harms such as wildfire, flood, and landslide risk tend to be situated
       in around the fringes of cities.

       The analysis reveals spatial distribution differences between the different subsets of new housing
       development:




Wy 4
  >
wr        OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                               88
           e   New for-sale units are predominately located in low harm areas, with more in low asset, low harm
               areas than in high asset, low harm areas.
           e   Market rate rentals are predominately located in high asset areas, and are roughly evenly split
               between High Asset, Low Harm and High Asset, High Harm areas around the state.
           e   Recent affordable housing deals are largely located in high asset areas, with more in High Asset, Low
               Harm areas than High asset, high harm areas.

        Figure 56: Recent For-sale Housing Development by Opportunity Class

        Opportunity Class          Count of Units for Sale                Percent of Units for Sale

        High asset, High harm      1,856                                  6.5%

        High asset, Low harm       11,208                                 39.5%

        Low asset, High harm       845                                    3.0%

        Low asset, Low harm        14,500                                 51.0%



        Figure 57: Recent Multi-unit Rental Housing Development by Opportunity Class

        Opportunity Class          Count of Rental Units                  Percent of Rental Units

        High asset, High harm      20,191                                 43.6%
        High asset, Low harm       19,762                                 42.7%
        Low asset, High harm       1,072                                  2.3%
        Low asset, Low harm        5,251                                  11.3%



        Figure 58: Recent Affordable Housing Development by Opportunity Class

        Opportunity Class           Count of Affordable Housing Units      Percent of Affordable Housing Units

        High asset, High harm       4,202                                 30.3%

        High asset, Low harm        8,174                                 59.0%

        Low asset, High harm        153                                    1.1%

        Low asset, Low harm         1,320                                 9.5%



        Accessible Units
        Accessible Units Qualitative Assessment of Impacts
        Question: How might compliance pathways on accessibility impact zoning, land use actions, or other
        choices a city might take to advance the policy objectives?



    7
"
wr        OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                     89
       The state is considering developing a compliance pathway for accessibility as part of the definition of “needed
       housing” in each city’s contextualized housing need (CHN). The state’s rules already require cities to evaluate
       the need for accessible units, but this new compliance pathway would provide specific “off the shelf”
       measures that could be used as (or be required to be used as) a quantitative reference point in that
       assessment of needed housing for people living with disabilities.

       This is a particularly difficult issue to analyze with available data. There is no reliable source of statewide data
       to help us understand the availability of accessible units in the stock, and we can only infer the need for
       accessible units in the population from sources such as the Census. Some relevant findings:

           e   Between 5 - 10+% of the non-institutionalized population identifies as having “independent living
               difficulties” and / or “ambulatory disabilities”, based on census data (see data appendix for details).
           e   There is limited variation in these metrics by region, when considered on average, but large variation
               when evaluated at the city level, and large margins of error in the city-level data.
                   o    Larger cities and those in the Metro region have lower rates of independent living difficulty of
                       ambulatory disability, which may be correlated with the age and non-institutionalized group
                       quarter population demographics in these geographies.
                   o   Wesee clear differences in rates of ambulatory disability or independent living difficulties by
                       income. Statewide, nearly 50% of households with a person with these challenges have
                       incomes below 60% of AMI. We see inverse patterns at upper income levels. This suggests a
                        more urgent need for accessibility in regulated affordable units.
                   o   Wealso found a clear pattern of increased challenge by age (with a noticeable increase
                        between the 65-74 and the 75+ age cohorts), suggesting the need for accessible units will be
                       increasing in the coming years.
           e   It’s unclear how these census designations actually translate to a type of unit that might be needed.
               Not all independent living or ambulatory difficulties require accessible units.
           e   Inthe absence of data about accessible or adaptable units, we’ve attempted an analysis of newly
               constructed units based on available data about building size and form, from which we might be able
               to infer accessibility. This analysis suggests that for the 3-county Metro region a little over half of the
               multi-unit housing units built since 2018 may have been built to Type B adaptable standards, anda
               little under 2% of the multi-unit housing units may have been built to Type A adaptable standards.
               The estimated Type B share is higher than in other parts of the state, but variations in Type A shares
               are unlikely to be reliable given the uncertainty in the data and methodology.

       Despite these data challenges, we know that our market is undersupplied with housing that meets
       accessibility standards relative to need, and that the need is only increasing as our population ages. Given all
       of this, we assume that any compliance pathway the state might design would aim to build from this limited
       available information to set some markers that will help jurisdictions focus on meeting need. A “low end”
       assumption might use the overall low end of the very rough range that our analysis suggests (for example, 5%)
       and a “high end” might push toward an even more aggressive expectation than this census-based analysis



Wy 4
  >
wr       OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                            90
      suggests, given an aging population, city-level variation in census data, and other analysis that goes beyond
      census data often suggest higher ranges.

      Our overall assessment suggests that data are less helpful in designing a compliance pathway for accessibility
      than for perhaps any other area the state is considering. At the same time, we know that we must increase the
      availability of these units to better meet need. Any compliance pathway would necessarily be a policy choice,
      informed by data but not dictated by data, designed to generally increase the supply of accessible units.

      INTERACTION WITH THE HCA/      LAND USE EFFICIENCY
      Likely none, unless jurisdictions recognize that higher-density, elevator served units are more likely to meet
      accessibility needs and adjust assumptions about needed unit mix, which would then affect calculations of
      land need in the HCA. But more likely, there is no direct impact on the HCA.

      INTERACTION WITH THE HPS / ACTION SELECTION
      Creating a compliance pathway on accessibility would increase the focus on the need for actions to support
      the development of accessible units. Further, it would increase “certainty” around planning goals, given lack
      of data availability. City-level data is particularly challenging to use, with high margins of error, so individual
      city-level analysis may be particularly fraught. Additionally, the analysis is time consuming to do well, and an
      off-the-shelf assumption might save cities time. It would also save cities having to defend assumptions that
      data don’t perfectly support, as they could point to state policy goals as the source of their assumptions.

      At the same time, because cities are already required to consider accessibility in defining needed housing in
      their CHN and are already required to consider that need in adopting actions, it’s unclear how a changes CHN
      assumption would translate to different or greater action.

      LIKELY MARKET / POLICY RESPONSE TO LOW- OR HIGH-END THRESHOLDS (INCLUDING POTENTIAL UNINTENDED
      CONSEQUENCES)
      Generally, if jurisdictions respond with regulatory or financial incentives for accessible units, there are fewer
      potential negative impacts. If jurisdictions respond with local requirements for accessible or adaptable units,
      there could be more unintended consequences.

          e   Ifjurisdictions were to set localized requirements for accessible or adaptable units in multi-unit
              developments that are different from building code, this could create several unintended
              consequences, including:
                  o    Increased complexity for developers working across multiple jurisdictions.
                  o    Units that meet Type A standards may make less efficient use of space for someone who does
                       not use a mobility device than other units. If jurisdictions impose requirements for Type A
                       units that go beyond building code, this could make it harder to design small units that can
                       provide lower-cost rental housing options.
                  o    Potential for jurisdictions to set requirements that are not achievable without an elevator
                       (e.g., requiring 50% of units in a 3-story building to be Type B likely could not be met through


W 4
 >
a       OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                            91
                               ground-floor units alone), which would increase the cost of development and make one of the
                               common market-rate housing prototypes that can deliver affordability for middle-income
                               households less financially feasible.
                e   TypeA and Type B standards are not currently applicable to development under the residential code
                    including single-unit detached, townhouses, and side-by-side plexes. In addition, Type A and B
                    standards are less relevant for multi-story units, especially higher-density multi-story units such as
                    townhouses that may not have substantial living areas on the ground floor. Setting too high of a target
                    for Type A and B units could discourage inclusion of these housing types in the housing mix, including
                    housing types that can offer lower-cost homeownership opportunities.
                e   If jurisdictions impose requirements for ground-floor accessibility / visitability for units not covered by
                    commercial building code requirements this could mean many builders would need to develop new
                    floor plans and there would be fewer options for design of entryways. While highly beneficial for those
                    who need them, these features may not be as desirable for households that do not need them at the
                    time they are choosing a home, which could, in some cases, decrease what those households are
                    willing to pay for the unit and make development less feasible.

            ADDITIONAL CONSIDERATIONS

                e   Because of data quality issues and the fluid nature of the need for accessible units (for example,
                    “need” changes with age), any quantitative compliance pathway is likely to be poorly calibrated. But
                    the outcomes and unintended consequences of putting in place a compliance pathway may be
                    limited (whether at the low end or at the high end). The overall goal would simply be to increase
                    overall availability of accessible units and ensure city-level attention to this issue.
                e   Ifthe state is interested in this compliance pathway, some additional analysis designed specifically to
                    understand the likely high-end need for accessible units would be helpful. This analysis would need to
                    look at literature from across the country and extrapolate findings to the state-wide context. Ideally, it
                    would also include interviews with experts in development and with disability advocates. However,
                    even this analysis would come with many caveats, and ultimately, a policy judgement        call would still
                    be needed.
                e   Requirements for individual developments to meet accessibility standards will increase the cost of
                    that development (though the amount of cost increase varies greatly by unit type). Any state-level
                    support to underwrite these costs would help to move the needle.
                e   Notall accessible units are occupied by households that need an accessible unit. Increasing supply of
                    accessible and adaptable units will help with “unit matching” to some extent but will not entirely
                    solve that challenge.
                e   While many households could benefit from adaptability features at some point in their lives,
                    households have to make tradeoffs in finding a place to live, and if they do not need those features at
                    the time they are finding housing, they may be better off to select a home that offers other benefits
                    instead.

            A focus on producing new units meeting Type A and Type B standards as a way to meet accessibility needs
            overlooks the importance of retrofitting the housing that people already live in to meet their needs better.

y       4
    >
wr            OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                           92
       This can provide more benefits to the specific individuals as it does not require them to relocate and may be
       more affordable to them than new housing. Providing more flexibility in how to define the housing needs
       related to accessibility could allow jurisdictions to identify needs for retrofitted housing as part of the overall
       need for accessible housing where that better aligns with their local equitable engagement.

       Accessible Units Data Appendix
       1) PREVALENCE OF DISABILITIES OVERALL

       Prompt: Share of population with an ambulatory disability and independent living difficulties

       Data: 2023 ACS 5-Year estimates at the place level. Subject table $1810 provides disability characteristics for
       the civilian noninstitutionalized population by disability type.

       Data limitations: The universe for this census table is civilian non-institutionalized population and thus
       includes population living in households as well as civilian non-institutional group quarters (such as shelter
       but excluding military quarters). As the presence and population contribution of such group quarters can vary
       from city to city and thus have a variable impact on the estimated share of population with disabilities.

       1a) Independent Living Difficulties
       Patterns: Larger cities and those in the Metro region have lower rates of civilian non-institutionalized
       population with independent living difficulties. This may be correlated with the age and non-institutionalized
       group quarter population demographics in these geographies.

       Figure 59: Noninstitutionalized Population with Independent Living Difficulties by City Size

       City Size             Estimate     MOE           Percent        MOE
       10k-25k                   21,531         1,161           6.8%         0.4%

       Metro or >25K            113,365         3,003        5.0%            0.1%



       Figure 60: Noninstitutionalized Population with Independent Living Difficulties by OHNA Region

       Region                Estimate     MOE           Share          MOE
       Central                    6,479           184           44%          0.5%

       Metro                     61,877         2,281           4.6%         0.2%
       Northeast                  4,791           563           6.6%         0.8%
       Northern Coast             1,742           285           7.3%         1.2%

       Southeast                  2,465           389           7.4%         1.2%
       Southwest                 13,684           906           6.4%         0.4%
       Willamette Valley         43,858         1,783           5.9%         0.2%




Wy 4
  >
wr       OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                           93
       Figure 61: Share of Noninstitutionalized Population Living with Independent Living Difficulties by City
       Size

                                             15%
       Share of Non-Institutionalized




                                                                       fe)
                                                                                  e)
                                                                             @m
                                             10%                                        e
                                        Cc
                                        Oo             fe)

                                        5S

                                        3               “|
                                        =)                                        (e)


                                        ae         °
                                             Ps
                                             on




                                             O%



                                                                                            Metro or >25K
                                                             10k-25k




Wy 4
  >
wr                      OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                 94
            Figure 62: Share of Noninstitutionalized Population Living with Independent Living Difficulties by OHNA
            Region and City
                          15%
             aa
                  ®
                  N
             fe)=                                                                                                               %,




             5                                              =
                  O
                                                                                                              ®         ®
             5= © ox                                                                                                             ,
             -—
             Y
                  c 5                       —                                            ®
             —~
                  coJ                                                                                     ®
                  OoO
             Zo
             =o
                  Oo
              ;
                  ®        5%                                                        ®
                  (@)
             ne
             WY



                                                     +                        >                               +                      >

                                  fF
                                  =
                                       €£$ €
                                       F£
                                       o    +>
                                                     2
                                                     €£€
                                                     +§
                                                                e¢
                                                                €§
                                                                =:     +==    £@
                                                                              &
                                                                                          €
                                                                                         £€   Fa&    &a
                                                                                                    SCS       SB
                                                                                                              €£€ €£€ szFZ
                                                                                                                        a
                                                                                                                                     £ ed
                                  O         S$       £          &       56    £€     OVO            S         £     2       5        €
                                                     5      Uw!       UM     OS                               5   Uw!   UM      OS

                                                     =                        =                               =                  =



            1b) Ambulatory Disabilities
            Patterns: Similar to independent living difficulties, larger cities and those within the Metro region have lower
            rates of civilian non-institutionalized population with ambulatory disabilities difficulties. This may be
            correlated with the age and non-institutionalized group quarter population demographics in these
            geographies.

            Figure 63: Noninstitutionalized Population with Ambulatory Disabilities by City Size

            City Size                   Estimate           MOE               Percent          MOE
            10k-25k                             26,989               1,256           8.5%           0.4%
            Metro or >25K                   127,959                  3,079           5.7%           0.1%


            Figure 64: Noninstitutionalized Population with Ambulatory Disabilities by OHNA Region

            Region                      Estimate           MOE               Share            MOE

            Central                              8,272                 904           5.6%           0.6%

            Metro                               68,587               2,301           5.1%           0.2%

            Northeast                            6,203                 565           8.5%           0.8%


y       4
    >
wr                    OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                                   95
       Region                                                Estimate                    MOE                          Share                             MOE

       Northern Coast                                                 2,053                                 357                           8.6%                   1.5%

       Southeast                                                      3,263                                 403                           9.9%                   1.2%

       Southwest                                                   17,081                             1,039                               8.0%                   0.5%

       Willamette Valley                                           49,489                             1,805                               6.7%                   0.2%



       Figure 65: Share of Noninstitutionalized Population Living with Ambulatory Disabilities by OHNA Region
       and City
                                           16%
       Share of Non-Institutionalized




                                                                                                                                                                  ‘




                                                                                                                                                                                                            re
                                           12%




                                                                                                                                                                  ee
                              Population
                                           ©
                                            x




                                                                                                                                                                   eR



                                           4x                                                                                                 ?                      |                                      i                     :
                                                                                                                          Willamette Valley




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Willamette Valley
                                                                               Northern Coast




                                                                                                                                                                               Northern Coast
                                                                                                              Southwest




                                                                                                                                                                                                                Southwest
                                                                                                Southeast




                                                                                                                                                                                                Southeast
                                                                   Northeast




                                                                                                                                                                   Northeast
                                                 Central




                                                                                                                                              Central
                                                           Metro




                                                                                                                                                         Metro




Wy 4
  >
wr                     OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                                                                                                                                      96
        Figure 66: Share of Noninstitutionalized Population Living with Ambulatory Disabilities by City Size

                     15%
         -
          ®
         IN
          (@)
          Cc
         ©jum        10%
         2- 2§
         —                                                                            |               (e)


          55
         72
                                                                            Fle                             ~
          c     OQ                                                                        eo %
          of                                °                             ————————
         =           5%                                                           .
          Oo                                                                fe)
          ®                             e                                     °                   )
          5                                                                                 fe)
         Cc
         WY

                     O%

                                                                                      =<

                                                                                      w
                                                in                                    A
                                                >                                     re)
                                                S                                     O
                                                ~                                     Oo
                                                                                      =



        ic) Prevalence of Disabilities by Age
        Prompt: Analyze prevalence of ambulatory disabilities by age - at what age is prevalence of ambulatory
        disability significantly higher than in the overall population.

        Data: 2023 ACS 5-Year PUMS, statewide.

        Data limitations: The general universe for this census disability statistics is the total civilian non-
        institutionalized population. For this exercise, we use the closest approximation we can reach using PUMS
        data and consider the prevalence of ambulatory disability by 10-year age bins among the total non-
        institutionalized population. That is to say we exclude institutional group quarters however we are unable to
        exclude population in military quarters when we include non-institutional group quarters.

        Patterns: The population aged 75 years or older have a noticeably higher rate of ambulatory disability than
        the general population. The ambulatory disability rate for the 18+ population as a whole is estimated to be
        8.3%. Populations between 55-64 and 65-74 do see higher prevalence of ambulatory disabilities, relative to
        the population as a whole. That said, the prevalence rate increases fairly linearly up to the 65-74 bin at which
        point there is a significant jump in the ambulatory disability rate.




    y
"
wr            OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                    97
       Figure 67: Share of Noninstitutionalized Population over 18 with Ambulatory Disability by Age

                                                                         Share of Population with Ambulatory                             Percent Point Increase from
                                                                         Disability                                         MOE          Previous Age Bin

          18-35                                                                                                   1.9%]           0.1%

         35-44                                                                                                    2.7%!           0.2%                                  0.9%

         45-54                                                                                                    5.9%]           0.2%                                  3.2%

         55-64                                                                                                   11.5%            0.3%                                  5.6%

         65-74                                                                                                   14.4%            0.3%                                  2.8%

         15+                                                                                                     31.8%            0.7%                                 17.5%

        Population
        Average (18+)                                                                                             8.3%|           0.1%



       Figure 68: Share of Noninstitutionalized Population over 18 with Ambulatory Disability by Age

                                                       40%
       Share of Non-Institutional Population Over 18

                                                       wo
                                                        oO
                                                            fN
               with an Ambulatory Disability




                                                       20%
                                                        (2)
                                                        é




                                                        O%

                                                                 18-35     35-44       45-54             95-64            65-74            75+
                                                                                               Age Bin


       2) DISABILITY AND HOUSEHOLD INCOME
       Prompt: Analyze prevalence of ambulatory and independent living disabilities by income: are households
       with members with these disabilities overrepresented among low-income households in the state?

       Data: 2023 ACS 5-Year PUMS, statewide.




Wy 4
  >
wr                         OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                                                          98
       Data limitations: The general universe for census disability statistics is the total civilian non-institutionalized
       population. For this exercise, however, the unit of analysis is households rather than persons. Households
       with one or more members indicated as having an ambulatory disability are coded as “households with the
       presence of person(s) with ambulatory disability”. Persons in group quarters are excluded from this analysis.
       Region based MFI are used to calculate AMI. A single person can face both ambulatory and independent living
       difficulties. Additionally, a single household can contain person(s) who face either or both disabilities. As such
       a single household may be counted in both household level disability statistics.

       Patterns: The income distribution of households with the presence of person(s) with ambulatory and/or
       independent living difficulties is significantly different from that of all households in the state. These
       households are overrepresented at AMI’s below 80% and underrepresented at >120% AMI income range.

       Summary table (Statewide):

       Figure 69: Share of Households with Person(s) with Disabilities by Income

                                        Households with Presence of                Households with Presence of
                                        Person(s) with Ambulatory                  Person(s) with Independent Living
                    All Household       Disabilities                               Difficulties

       0-30%                   12.3%                                      20.9%                                     21.1%

       30-60%                  16.7%                                      23.5%                                     22.5%

       60-80%                  11.4%                                      13.2%                                      14.1%

       80-100%                 10.4%                                      10.0%                                       9.9%

       100-120%                  9.4%                                       7.1%                                      8.2%

       >120%                   39.7%                                      24.7%                                     24.1%

       Total                    100%                                       100%                                      100%




Wy 4
  >
wr       OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                          99
     Figure 70: Share of Households based on Disability Status by Income

                           40%



                           30
     Share of Households
                                x




                           20%



                           10%



                            O
                                x




                                      0-30%         30-60%      60-80%    80-100%     — 100-120%       >]120%
                                                                Income Bin (AMI)

                                                         Households with                Households with
                                    All Household        Presence of Person(s) with     Presence of Person(s) with
                                                         Ambulatory Disabilities        Independent Living Difficult


     3) ESTIMATED PREVALENCE OF ACCESSIBLE / ADAPTABLE UNITS
     Prompt: Using available CoStar data on development scale and known thresholds for Type A and Type B unit
     requirements, provide a rough approximation of the number or share of units that may be Type A and Type B
     from recent housing production.

     Data: CoStar building records for multiunit developments built in Oregon since 2018, excluding senior
     housing, student housing, vacation rentals, corporate housing, co-ops, and condos.

     Data limitations: The data reflects multiunit housing only. The estimates are very rough approximations
     based on the available data on building form, number of stories, presence of elevators, and number of units.
     They may be over-estimates where town-house style units were not able to be excluded from the data or
     where the number of ground-floor units is less than the number of units on upper levels. In more limited
     situations, these may be under-estimates where the presence of an elevator was not reflected in the data.
     Because they exclude senior housing, which is typically more likely to include accessible and/or adaptable
     units, this is a source of accessible and adaptable housing that is not reflected in the data. Not all multiunit
     housing is included in CoStar’s database, especially for smaller developments and smaller markets.

     Patterns:




wr              OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                     100
          e      City size: Large and Metro cities appear to have a higher percentage of Type B units than other city
                 sizes. The data for smaller cities is less likely to be reliable, and the small, estimated share of Type A
                 units makes these observations particularly unreliable for the smaller cities.
          e      Region: The estimated share of Type B units varies by region based on the prevalence of elevator-
                 served buildings, with higher estimated shares in Metro (over 50%) than in the rest of the state. In the
                 Willamette Valley and Central Oregon, the share is roughly 40% of units assumed to be Type B; there
                 are enough observations to make the data relatively reliable (within the limitations discussed above).
                 Data for the Southeast, Northeast, and Northern Coast regions are particularly spotty and more likely
                 to be unreliable. The variations between regions in the estimated share of Type A units are unlikely to
                 be reliable given the level of uncertainty in the data, particularly for smaller regions.

      Figure 71: Estimated Number of Accessible / Adaptable Units by City Size

       City Size                  Sum ofTypeA        SumofTypeB        SumofTotal         TypeA%             Type B%
                                  Units              Units             Units
       <10k                                    40                892              2,169             1.84%            41.12%
       10k-25k                                  62             1,028              2,970             2.09%            34.61%
       Metro or >25K                        1,025             27,455             53,768             1.91%            51.06%
       Grand Total                          1,127             29,375             58,907             1.91%            49.87%



      Figure 72: Estimated Number of Accessible / Adaptable Units by OHNA Region
                                 SumofTypeA          SumofTypeB        SumofTotal         TypeA%
                                 Units               Units             Units
       Central                             70                1438               3642                1.92%            39.48%
       Metro                                  151            21,406             39,391              1.91%            54.34%
       Northeast                               17                283               833              2.04%            33.97%
       Northern Coast                          15                279                T47             2.01%            37.35%
       Southeast                                2                 51                108             1.85%            47.22%
       Southwest                               39                656              1,936             2.01%            33.88%
       Willamette Valley                      233              5,262            12,250              1.90%            42.96%
       Grand Total                          1,127            29,375             58,907              1.91%            49.87%




y 4
 >
wr      OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                              101
      Figure 73: Estimated Share of Newly Constructed Accessible / Adaptable Units by City Size




                                                                                      Unit type

         ~                                                                            MW TypeB
         £
         O




                               0%                    20%             40%
                                    Estimated percent of new construction   units


      Figure 74: Estimated Share of Newly Constructed Accessible/ Adaptable Units by OHNA Region


               Willamette Valley- (Se
                 Southwest- (S
                 Southeast- (ne
                                                                                    Unit type
      Region




               Northern Coast- (SZ?                                                 Mi Typea
                                                                                    ™) TypeB
                  Northeast- [=
                    Veto- (is
                   Centrl- (se
                          0%                   20%             40%
                            Estimated percent of new construction units



      Affordable Homeownership
      Affordable Homeownership Qualitative Assessment of Impact
      Question: How might compliance pathways on affordable homeownership impact zoning, land use
      actions, or other choices a city might take to advance the policy objectives?

      The state is considering developing a compliance pathway for affordable homeownership as part of the
      definition of “needed housing” in each city’s contextualized housing need (CHN). The state’s rules already

y 4

wr       OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                       102
       require cities to evaluate need by tenure, but this new compliance pathway would provide specific “off the
       shelf” measures that could be used as (or be required to be used as) a quantitative reference point in that
       evaluation.

       The state faces some complicated choices about how to design a potential compliance pathway on affordable
       home ownership.

           e   Identifying the “need” for home ownership is challenging. We know current housing tenure for
               households of various income levels (lower income households are far more likely to be renters), but
               we don’t know where they would [ke to be living. One way to think about this is through revealed
               preferences: we can observe the patterns of those who are less income constrained (above 120% of
               AMI) and assume that lower- and middle-income households “need” access to home ownership
               products at similarly high rates. Another approach would be to choose a “high” or “low” end
               ownership rate by income, based on where people of various incomes are currently living, which is
               necessarily constrained by their available income. The state will need to think through this challenge
               in designing this compliance pathway; choices could result in large swings in the percentages that
               cities are asked to plan for.
           e   Tenure and unit type are tightly interwoven. There will be interaction (whether explicitly recognized in
               a compliance pathway or not) with any unit mix compliance pathway that is implemented. Our
               analysis found that, statewide and among only the subset of the market that is ownership tenure, just
               12% of new construction single-unit detached development is affordable to households below
               100% of AMI, while 59% of new middle housing units were affordable to households below 100% of
               AMI.
       INTERACTION WITH THE HCA/        LAND USE EFFICIENCY
       Any approach to the compliance pathway that affected unit mix choices (for example, increased the
       percentage of middle housing at the cost of multi-unit, to try to increase the supply of ownership units that
       might be affordable) would affect the city’s calculation of land need in the HCA and potentially affect
       decisions about the need for increased zoned capacity.

       INTERACTION WITH THE HPS / ACTION SELECTION
       Creating a compliance pathway on affordable home ownership could increase the focus on the need for
       actions to support these needs. It’s unclear how adding a quantitative metric on affordable homeownership
       would translate directly to changes in city action that would better achieve policy objectives, beyond what’s
       already required in the rules.

       LIKELY MARKET / POLICY RESPONSE TO LOW- OR HIGH-END THRESHOLDS (INCLUDING POTENTIAL UNINTENDED
       CONSEQUENCES)
       In these hypothetical compliance pathway designs, the following outcomes are possible:

           e   Cities might put more resources toward affordable home ownership, potentially at the expense of
               other priorities

Wy 4
  >
wr       OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                         103
            e   Cities might increase their effort in developing smaller-scale or middle housing types, at the expense
                of multi-unit types

        ADDITIONAL CONSIDERATIONS

            e   Because of the relationship between tenure and type, increased focus on affordable home ownership
                in new production risks running counter to other policy objectives that are achieved through
                development of multi-unit housing types. City actions or policies that aim to increase the rate of
                homeownership in existing development (for example, downpayment assistance programs or
                partnerships with land banks) do not carry this risk.
            e   The benefits of home ownership (stability, wealth building, etc.) are important outcomes that are
                meeting a range of policy objectives beyond housing production and affordability.

        Affordable Homeownership Data Appendix
        1) EXISTING HOMEOWNERSHIP RATES BY INCOME LEVEL

        Prompt: Illustrate and analyze differences in the rate of homeownership across income brackets using
        relevant data from the Housing Equity Indicators and any other relevant data.

        Data: HUD’s Comprehensive Housing Affordability Strategy (CHAS) data which relies on 2017-2021 ACS 5-Year
        estimates.

        Data Limitations: This data lag should be considered when using these findings -- they are effectively
        showing pre-pandemic patterns, but this is the only dataset available for this analysis statewide. The CHAS
        dataset provides estimates for total owner and renter households by income bin. These income bins (HAMFI)
        are the median family income calculated by HUD for each jurisdiction, to determine Fair Market Rents (FMRs)
        and income limits for HUD programs. The data visualization uses point estimates to display the interquartile
        range by region or size. It is not possible to include the margin of error (MOE) for the estimate because each
        individual point has its own MOE and including the MOE for each would obscure the desired outcome of
        understanding the range and its midpoint. If you were to provide MOE per each point, it might increase the
        perceived variance by region.

        Some OHNA regions are made up of less than a handful of cities with populations greater than 10,000. The
        interquartile range (for the box and whisker plot) in such cases, simply visualizes the range of the few points.

        Patterns: As expected, homeownership rates go up as AMI increases. The distribution of the regions is fairly
        consistent across AMI bins. The Metro region has high variance across cities across all income bins. The largest
        cities 50k+ have lower median homeownership rates (and a lower variance) across all income bins relative to
        small and mid-sized cities. This pattern is harder to see in analysis that includes Metro with cities over 25k
        population.




    y
"
wr        OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                            104
        Figure 75: Owner-Occupied Units by Income Level and City Size

        City Size        Area Median Income Level Count of Units               Share of Units

        10k-25k          0-30%                                         6,725               6%

        10k-25k          30-50%                                        8,620               8%

        10k-25k          50-80%                                    16,115                 15%

        10k-25k          80-100%                                   11,930                 11%

        10k-25k          >100%                                     62,365                 59%

        25k-50k          0-30%                                         5,915               6%

        25k-50k          30-50%                                        6,420               T%

        25k-50k          50-80%                                    13,660                 14%

        25k-50k          80-100%                                       9,750              10%

        25k-50k          >100%                                     61,390                 63%

        50k+             0-30%                                     24,280                  6%

        50k+             30-50%                                    26,565                  T%

        50k+             50-80%                                    51,300                 14%

        50k+             80-100%                                   37,220                 10%

        50k+             >100%                                   237,120                  63%



        Figure 76: Owner-Occupied Units by Income Level and City Size (including Metro)

        City Size        Area Median Income Level    Count of Units            Share of Units
        10k-25k          0-30%                                         5,120               T%

        10k-25k          30-50%                                        6,255               9%

        10k-25k          50-80%                                       11,020              15%

        10k-25k          80-100%                                       7,365              10%

        10k-25k          >100%                                        43,095              59%

        Metro or >25K_   |0-30%                                       31,800               6%

        Metro or >25K    {30-50%                                      35,350               T%

        Metro or >25K    {50-80%                                      70,055              14%

        Metro or >25K    |80-100%                                     51,535              10%

        Metro or >25K    |>100%                                  317,780                  63%




    y
"
wr        OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                   105
        Figure 77: Owner-Occupied Units by Income Level and OHNA Region

                            Area Median Income Level       Count of Units    Share of Units

        Central             0-30%                                   2,200                 6%
        Central             30-50%                                  2,765                 8%
        Central             50-80%                                  5,655                16%
        Central             80-100%                                 4,235                12%
        Central             >100%                                  20,715                58%

        Metro               0-30%                                  20,360                 T%
        Metro               30-50%                                 22,015                 T%
        Metro               50-80%                                 42,130                14%
        Metro               80-100%                                31,105                10%
        Metro               >100%                                 196,050                63%

        Northeast           0-30%                                      195                5%
        Northeast           30-50%                                   1,360                8%
        Northeast           50-80%                                  2,505                15%
        Northeast           80-100%                                 2,135                13%
        Northeast           >100%                                   9,985                60%

        Northern Coast      0-30%                                     455                 8%
        Northern Coast      30-50%                                    485                 9%
        Northern Coast      50-80%                                     665               12%
        Northern Coast      80-100%                                    740               14%
        Northern Coast      >100%                                   3,030                56%

        Southeast           0-30%                                      685               11%
        Southeast           30-50%                                     810               12%
        Southeast           50-80%                                     960               15%
        Southeast           80-100%                                    550                8%
        Southeast           >100%                                   3,485                54%

        Southwest           0-30%                                   3,010                 6%
        Southwest           30-50%                                  3,825                 8%
        Southwest           50-80%                                   7,380               15%
        Southwest           80-100%                                 4,815                10%
        Southwest           >100%                                  30,720                62%

        Willamette Valley   |0-30%                                  9,415                 6%

    y
"
wr        OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                  106
Willamette Valley                     |30-50%                                                                     10,345                                       T%
Willamette Valley                     |50-80%                                                                     21,780                                      14%
Willamette Valley                     |80-100%                                                                    15,320                                      10%
Willamette Valley                     |>100%                                                                      96,890                                      63%



Figure 78: Homeownership Rate by Income Level and OHNA Region

                                       <= 30% HAMFI                                                       >30% to <=50% HAMFI
       100%

        75%
                           °                                                                          5                                                        .
        50%                                                                7                      °          cy


        25%
              be                            SL =                                                                  6
                                                                                                                            =              fe)
                              ie)

         0%
Oo                             >50% to <=80% HAMFI                                                        >80% to <=100% HAMFI
2 100%
 g                                                                                                °
 3 75x                :                                                                           9          A
aL:

 D sox,
 s
                     o

                                      ms        See
                                                 °  ry
                                                         a       {e)
                                                                                           Sa



                                                                                                  ©         fe)
                                                                                                                            -:  fe)



                                                                                                                                      KH
                                                                                                                                                 fe)



                                                                                                                                                        fe}
                                                                                                                                                              ey
                                                                                                                                                                   °
O 25%
 re)
                      :                                                           o)


5        0%
7)                                      >100% HAMFI                                         Ss=       o               60)       £€+        6            8s     ES
                                                                                                                      4+               ~-              TS          o


                                                                                                      =                      28        2a                      ¢ &
       100%                                                                                 Cc        o               £      tot                       €               G
                                                                                            GS        =               5         SO     2                2      22>
                                      fe)          fe)                                                                Zz
        75% dy SR                                        gt
                                                                                                                             z         ”)              SH      =

                                                                           (e)
        50%

        25%

         0%
               To         OoCc              g      =OH       %         %         £®o   >
               =
               pee
                          6             £         £82                  2         ¢€8
               O          =                 fe}   39         3         3         =>
                                            z            WY            Y         =

                                                                                 Region

                     F=             Central       i      Northeast                     —     Southeast                 _     Willamette Valley

                     FS             Metro         F3     Northern Coast                —     Southwest




      OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                                                                                  107
     Figure 79: Homeownership Rate by Income Level and City Size

                                                         <= 30% HAMFI                                             >30% to <=50% HAMFI
                                 100%


                                 79%
                                                                        o)                                                re)       ©

                                 50%    e                                   -                                                                          ™
                                 25%
                                                                                     mae                                                  °
                                                                                                                                              as
                                                                                                                                              oreo
                                        °                                   °         °                                                        fe)

                                   O%

                                                      >50% to <=80% HAMFI                                         >80% to <=]00% HAMFI
     Share of Owner Households




                                 i
                                 100%


                                 75%




                                 25%


                                   0%

                                                          >100%      HAMFI
                                                                                                                                25k-50k
                                                                                                        10k-25k




                                                                                                                                                     50k+
                                 100%


                                 75h


                                 90%


                                 25%


                                   0%
                                                                  25k-50k
                                            10k-25k




                                                                                          50k+




                                                                                                 Size


                                                                                E53) 10k-25k EQ) 25k-50k EQ) 50k+




wr                  OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                                                     108
        Figure 80: Homeownership Rate by Income Level and City Size

                              <= 30%,                >30% to          >50% to                    >80% to
                                                      <=50%            <=80%                     <=]00%               - 100%
                               HAMFI                   HAMFI           HAMEFI                      HAMFI          HAMFI
              WY

         ©ro) 100%                                                                                                              Oo
         At
              ®                                                                         Oo

              ZS 75%,                                                             °
           O                                                                      re)
          L                                 oO
              LL

              =    50%              of o
                                            oO


         &                                                                    oO

         4s 25%                                  0                                 =
          .
                          :                 0
         &          0%
                                        <                      <                         <                 <                   sé


                              iD        A            Tet        A     T)                     A   iD         \    iD             A


                              S
                              N         re)          ax
                                        2
                                                               re)    “x                 ro)     “s
                                                     5S=
                                                                                                            6                  fo

                              —         O
                                                                2
                                                               ro)
                                                                      5=                 2g
                                                                                        1)
                                                                                                 5S=        &£
                                                                                                           ro)   2—            6
                                                                                                                               ro)
                                        =                      =                         =                 =                   =
                                                                           Size


                                                           E43) 10k-25k EQ) Metro or >25K

        2) OVERALL HOMEOWNERSHIP RATES

        Prompt: Provide city-level data on overall homeownership rates from prior analysis.

        Data: We use HUD’s Comprehensive Housing Affordability Strategy (CHAS) data which relies on 2017-2021 ACS
        5-Year estimates.

        Data Limitations: This data lag should be considered when using these findings -- they are effectively
        showing pre-pandemic patterns, but this is the only dataset available for this analysis statewide. The CHAS
        dataset provides estimates for total owner and renter households by income bin. These income bins (HAMFI)
        are the median family income calculated by HUD for each jurisdiction, to determine Fair Market Rents (FMRs)
        and income limits for HUD programs. The data visualization uses point estimates to display the interquartile
        range by region or size. It is not possible to include the margin of error (MOE) for the estimate because each
        individual point has its own MOE and including the MOE for each would obscure the desired outcome of
        understanding the range and its midpoint. If you were to provide MOE per each point, it might increase the
        perceived variance by region.




    y
"
wr             OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                                   109
        Some OHNA regions are made up of less than a handful of cities with populations greater than 10,000. The
        interquartile range (for the box and whisker plot) in such cases, simply visualizes the range of the few points.

        Patterns: Median overall homeownership is higher in the Metro region and cities greater than 25k population,
        however the range in general is not all that different between different regions and city sizes.

        Figure 81: Overall Homeownership Rate by City Size

                                             Owner Occupied Units         Share of Total Units

         10k-25k                                                 72,845                       58%

         Metro or >25K                                          506,560                       56%


        Figure 82: Overall Homeownership Rate by OHNA Region

                                             Owner Occupied Units         Share of Total Units

         Central                                                 35,560                       62%
         Metro                                                 311,670                        57%

         Northeast                                               16,780                       60%
         Northern Coast                                           5,370                       56%
         Southeast                                                6,490                       48%
         Southwest                                              49,755                        56%
        Willamette Valley                                      153,780                        54%


        Figure 83: Overall Homeownership Rate by City Size

                                    100%
        Share of Owner Households




                                    75%




                                    50%




                                    25%




                                      O%

                                                lOk-25k                       Metro or >25K




    7
"
wr                         OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                        110
        Figure 84: Overall Homeownership Rate by OHNA Region

                                    100%
        Share of Owner Households




                                    79370




                                    50%




                                    25%




                                      O%




        3) OWNERSHIP UNITS BY TYPE, AFFORDABILITY, AND NEW CONSTRUCTION

        Prompt: Provide data on type mix of ownership units affordable at each income bracket, cross-tabbed by
        existing stock vs. new construction. Has there been a shift in what the market produces for ownership units in
        terms of housing type? How does this factor into affordability?

        Data source: 2023 PUMS 5-year

        Limitations: Cross-tabbing by region results in too many unreliable estimates, and no meaningful patterns
        for anything by SFD ownership units (and not much regional difference). We calculated a rule-of-thumb
        statistical reliability test - estimates for which the standard error is more than 30% of the estimated value are
        classified unreliable and are not shown on charts derived from PUMS. PUMS schema limits us to using 2010 or
        2020 as breakpoints for “new construction” definition; we go with 2010 because it affords greater statistical
        reliability.

        Potentially reliable patterns by region and/or city size: New construction (built since 2010) ownership
        units are still overwhelmingly SFD, but middle housing unit production has increased to the point that it is
        nearly twice as prevalent as it is among existing ownership units (increasing from 5% to 9%). 5+-unit
        ownership units make up a very small portion of both existing and new stock, sitting at 2% of each. In terms of
        affordability, there is little difference between the affordability of middle versus 5+ multi-unit ownership units,
        both are roughly equal in terms of the share of stock that is priced at 100% AMI or more.




    y
"
wr                      OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                            111
      Figure 85: Ownership Units by Housing Type (Existing and New Construction)

                                                              Existing stock                                            New construction




                                SFD                                              827,350 (93%)                                             78,830 (89%)


             ®
         S$                                                                                                                                                       Housing type
                                          42,108 (5%)                                                   7,979 (9%)                                            im     +5 units       .
             2 Middle housing
         @                                                                                                                                                        Middle housing
             fe)                                                                                                                                                  !) sFpD
         =


                            +5 units | 16,965 (2%)                                                   2,006 (2%)



                                      0      250,000      500,000      750,000   1,000,000       0           30,000           60,000       90,000
                                                                            # of ownership housing type units


      Figure 86: Ownership Units by Housing Type and Affordability (Existing and New Construction)

                                                         Existing stock (886,423)                                              New construction (88,815)



                                                                                                                                                                     Affordability
                               SFD (827,350)            913      17                                    SFD (78,830)
                                                                                                                                                                        0-30%
                                                                                                                                                                        30-60%
                                                                                                                                                                     60-80%
      Hous ing type




                                                                                                                                                                     ™      80-100%
                      Middle housing (42,108)                                                Middle housing (7,979)
                                                                                                                                                                     BH     100-120%
         -
                                                                                                                                                                     Oo >120%

                                                                                                                                                                     Reliability test
                             +5 units (16,965)                                                       +5 units (2,006)                                                       FALSE
                                                                                                                                                                     fl TRUE


                                                 0%       25%         50%      75%    100%                               0%       25%      50%      75%    100%
                                                                               Percent of ownership housing type stock




y 4
 >
wr                 OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                                                                              112
     HPS Research Appendix
     This appendix provides additional detail on the assumptions, approach, and findings from the feasibility and
     zoning analyses conducted to develop the HPS findings and recommendations. The information was initially
     summarized in slide deck format and has been incorporated into this appendix in that form.



                                 Prototypes: Diverse variety of housing types

                                                                                    Standard middle
                                                                                          housing (for
                                                                                          comparison)


                                                                                              Standard   4-plex




                                                                                                  1 parking
                                                                                                 space per
                                                                                   For sale        unit, no
                                                                                                     yy           7k sf  lot
                                                                                   (MHLD)        major open           __
                                                                                                   space /
                                                                                                  courtyard


          4                                                                                                   <a ECOnorthwest




 >
wr     OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                                     113
                                Prototypes: Affordable & mixed-income housing
                                                                       Neighborhood Scale Density Bonus Test


                                                                                                                Standard, market-rate
                Mixed-Income neighborhood-scale
                                                                                                                 middle housing (for
                        multi-unit housing
                                                                                                                     comparison)


                                     Small multiplex                                                                 Standard 4-plex


              12 units                val .                      7                etltely
                                                                                     0                   F or sale           1 parking
            stacked, 3              parking                    BENS              20% as                  (MHLD),             space per                7k sf lots
               stories             spaces /                     lots             units at             market-rate                   mit
                                         unit                                   80% AMI

        °                                                                                                                                            a ECOnorthwest




                           — Prototypes: mixed-income
                                         Affordable & housing
                                                                         Corridor Scale Density Bonus Test

                                                                                                                                   Market-rate

               Mixed-Income corridor-scale multi-unit housing                                                        medium-scale                    multi-unit
                                                                                                                                     housing
                                                                                                                                    (for comparison)




                          4-5 story
                                                                         6-7 story podium                                   3-story walk-up
                    elevator-served


                               Surface                                            riche                                                   Surface
            60-80 units                         Rental, 20%        90-100          podium        Rental, 20%               :                     :
                   :           parking                 :              :                 ,               A            42 units on          parking          Rental,
            on 0.4-1.1                           of units at       units on        parking        of units at        0.3-0.7 ac             (0-1        market-rate
                                                                  0.5-0.7 ac        (0.7-1        80% AMI                                      ie
                a              aves /oni         80% AMI
                                                                                 spaces /unit)                                        spaces/uni
                           ;


        6                                                                                                                                             ECOnorthwest




y 4
 >
wr    OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                                                                             114
                                                                         Neighborhood-
                  Adaptable middle housing                               scale multi-unit                              Corridor-scale multi-unit housing
                                                                             housing




              .                                   Stacked
            Single-story                                                            .                             4-5 story                                        :
                                             4-plex,                     Small multiplex                                                             6-7 story podium
                  cottages                                                                                 elevator-served
                                         Stacked 6-plex



                                                                                                                      Wood                                      Wood
                        0 parking,                                        12 units                          :         frame,                                 frame over
          For sale           no                        0 parking,        stacked, 3                60-80 units        surface                   90-1 00        parking
         (MHLD) or                         Rental                                        Rental    on 0.4-1.1               "                    units on           "
           rey          courtyard,                     on 5k sf lots     stories, on                   ~             parking                   0.5-07 ac       podium
                       on 5k sf lots                                    5k-9k sf lots                                  (0-1                     ~~              (0.7-1
                                                                                                                   spaces/unit)                             spaces /unit)



                                                                                                                                                                      4

                                                                                                                                                                ,’, ECOnorthwest




         Neve) eyelanctetshis l                               pao eeelle                           Corridor-scale multi-unit housing w/3+ BR
         e multi-unit housing                               multi-unit housing                                        units
           w/3+ BR units                                     w/3+ BR units




                                                               -stor
                                                                                                                 4-5 story                      6-7 story elevator
             Small multiplex                                 3-s tory y walwalk
                                                                            k- -up                     elevator-served                                served



                                                                          wood                                       Wood                                      Wood
                                                                         frame,                            :        frame,                                  frame over
          12 units     5k-10k sf          Rental,      42 units on       surface                  60-80 units       surface          Rental,                  parking          Rental,
        stacked, 3                     more 3+ BR                                                                        "        more 3+ BR                       :        more 3+ BR
          PRP             lots            units         0.4-0.7 ac      parking         uni                         parking          units                    podium           units
                                                                       (0-1 spaces                                    (0-1                                     (0.7-1
                                                                        per unit)                                 spaces /unit)                             spaces/unit)




                                                                                                                                                                ,’, ECOnorthwest
                                                                                                                                                                  4




iN   OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                                                                                                 115
              Feasibility Analysis Approach


          9                                                                     <a ECOnorthwest




                                      Financial Feasibility Constrains Housing Supply


              Expending political will on upzoning Manhattan, Kansas to allow
              Manhattan, New York skyscrapers, does NOT mean that developers
              would build structures that are financially infeasible




Wy 4

wr     OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                    116
                                               Feasibility   Communicated Through Pro Formas


                   One can evaluate policies through the decision-making tools of
                   developers: pro forma models



                                                                         Pro Forma


                                                                                                                 Investors




                                                                                                             aS
                           Landowner            Developer




                                                                                                                   Bank

            1                                                                                                                cf ECOnorthwest




                                               Pro Formas Sensitive to Many                      Localized Factors

       ea                                                                  e   Assume policies allow
                                                                               development
                                                               Policy

        e        Assume                                         v                                    S              e   Calculus reflects
                 prototypical sites                                                                                     developer, investor,
                 whether or not                              Pro Forma                           @           @          & lender interviews
                 they exist in the     Site     —    >                                       r           r
                 block group                                                              Return on
                                                                                           Capital
                                                                                                                    e   Calculus reflects
        e        Calculus reflects              >                              ——                                       localized
                 observed local                                                                                         construction
                 prices and rents     Market                                                                            estimator data,
                                                                                                 Costs                  industry interviews
                                      Demand


            12                                                                                                            io ECOnorthwest




yy 4

wr     OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                                                     117
                                        _Assessment Considers Policy Geographies

                 Assign block groups to
                 jurisdictions and their
                 OHNA categories (e.g..,
                 1OK-25K population)
                  ¢   Some very small jurisdictions
                      (<10,000) were not included
                      in the analysis


                 Assign block groups to
                 UGB opportunity areas
                 (e.g., High asset, Low
                 Harm)                                     Salem (pink) and Keizer (royal blue) block groups
                                                           assigned fo ‘Metro or >25K' category


       13                                                                                                 io ECOnorthwest




                               Feasibility Analysis Tests Prototypical Developments


                 Test financial feasibility of
                 prototype developments on
                 typical sites under local (block
                 group) market conditions
                 whether or not such sites exist
                 in that geography
                 ¢    Single-unit-sized site prices
                      defined by local home prices
                 ¢    Larger 3+ story multi-unit site
                      prices defined by estimated
                      local commercial values
                                                           Small Multifamily               Large Multifamily

            14                                                                                             da ECOnorthwest




wr   OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                                    118
                          —                            _                                                               Prototype         Variants


            Varied the three multifamily prototypes by unit size, parking, and affordability
                      ¢    Neighborhood-scale multi-unit
                      ¢   Medium-scale multi-unit
                      ¢   Corridor-scale multi-unit

            1. Family-sized Units                                 2. Parking Provision                           3. Affordable Units
            Multi-Unit Mix        Typical      Family-sized         .      Considered 0, 0.5,                      .   Considered deed
            Studio                19%           10%                        and 1 parking stall                         restrictions on 20%
            1-Bedroom         = 40%            35%                         per multifamily                             of units targeting to
            2-Bedroom          ——- 35%         35%                         unit                                        households making
            3-Bedroom              6%          20%                                                                     80% or less of area
                                                                                                                       median income

                                                                                                                                                a    ECOnorthwest




                                                                                                                           Market Scenarios

                     Little housing development feasible under current conditions
                     Also consider highly optimistic inputs that yield some feasibility
                                                              Baseline         Favorable
                                  Variable                                                                                    Action
                                                               Inputs            Inputs
                     Adaptable Design Cost Premium                        ‘                  ‘
                     (% change in hard cost)                             0%                OMe   Accs hard cost
                        .            .        =
                     —        ——            ee                           0%           -10%       Adjusts local construction hard costs
                     change in hard costs)
                     Adjust Purchase Price (% change                      a             %           .                  .
                     from local Sint)                                    0%           10%           Adjusts purchase
                                                                                                 Adjust:        h    prices

                     Mortgage Interest Rate (APR)                       6.5%          5.5%       Influences valuation of for-sale affordable units
                                                                                                 Reduced CAP rates reflect lower long term interest
                     New Construction Multifamily CAP
                                                                  -50 bps         -150 bps       rates and lower perceived risk of investment
                     Rate Premium (in basis points)
                                                                                                 (Recent CBRE Multifamily CAP Rates for PDX = 6.00)
                     Rent/Price Impact of Relatively                   A                    oy   Adjusts purchase prices and rents by percent input by
                               3                                    -10%                   0%
                     Low Parking (% change)                                                      user


                                                                                 =
                                                           Applicable for All Results Reported Here                                             =
       16                                                                                                                                       »’, ECOnorthwest




wr   OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                                                                        119
                                ee                                                                         2. Feasibility                    Analysis Results

                                                                                                e    Neighborhood-scale multi-unit housing
                                 Diverse variety of housing types
                                                                                                e    Compact middle housing

                                % of cities and % of block groups where development might optimistically be feasible if allowed

               Prototype                         Medium Cities:          Medium Cities:               Large & Metro            Large & Metro Cities        PDX: High Asset, Low
                                                 Anywhere                High Asset, Low              Cities (ex PDX):         (ex PDX): High Asset,       Harm Areas
                                                                         Harm Areas                   Anywhere                 Low Harm Areas

               Compact cottages/detached         24% cities.             24% cities                   76% cities               68% cities                  86% BG


               Compact quadplex                   0% cities              0% cities                    6% cities                3% cities                   0-1% BG
                                                 0% BG                   0% BG                        1% BG                    0-1% BG

               Compact sixplex                    0% cities              0% cities                    12% cities               6% cities                   2% BG
                                                 0% BG                   0% BG                        2% BG                    2% BG

               Neighborhood-scale multi-unit — 4-8% cities               4% cities                   44% cities               41% cities                  47-51% BG
                                                  0-1% BG                1% BG                        9%   BG                 11-12% BG
                                                  More feasible with lower parking ratios




                                                                                                                                                                   <a ECOnorthwest




                                                      oe                                                   2. Feasibility                    Analysis Results

                           Affordable & mixed-income                                        e       Mixed-income neighborhood-scale multi-unit
                           housing                                                          e       Mixed-income corridor-scale multi-unit housing

                       % of cities and % of block groups where development might optimistically be feasible if allowed

               Prototype                          Medium Cities:         Medium Cities:               Large & Metro            Large & Metro Cities (ex       PDX: High Asset,
                                                  Anywhere               High Asset, Low              Cities (ex PDX):         PDX): High Asset, Low          Low Harm Areas
                                                                         Harm Areas                   Anywhere                 Harm Areas

               Mixed-income neighborhood-         0% cities              0% cities                   26-32% cities            24-29% cities                   36-40% BG
               scale multi-unit (A)               0% BG                  0% BG                       (5-6% BG                 7% BG

               More feasible than standard        0% cities              0% cities                   26-3
                                                                                                       ay 32% cities         | 5-6% cities                    36-40%      BG
               quadplex?                          0% BG                  0% BG                       56% BG                    7% BG

               Mixed-income corridor-scale        0% cities              0% cities                   6-32% cities            | 6-29% cities                   4-44% BG
               multi-unit (C)                     0% BG                  0% BG                       -1-6% BG                  1-7% BG

               More feasible than                 0% cities              0% cities                    0-6% cities              0-6% cities                    0-6% BG
               medium-scale multi-unit (B)?       0% BG                  0% BG                        [5 & 6 stories only]   = [5 & 6 stories only]
                                                                                                      0-2% BG                  0-2% BG



                                                                                                                                                                   |
          18                                                                                                                                                       ,’, ECOnorthwest




    A
"
wr      OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                                                                                       120
                                                                                                             2. Feasibility Analysis Results
                                                                                             e       Adaptable middle housing
                          Accessible housing                                                 e       Neighborhood-scale multi-unit housing
                                                                                             e       4+ story multi-unit housing
                    % of cities and % of block groups where development might optimistically be feasible if allowed
                 Prototype                                   Medium Cities:     | Medium Cities:          Large & Metro Cities    | Large & Metro Cities            PDX: High
                                                             Anywhere             High Asset,Low          (ex PDX): Anywhere        (ex PDX): High Asset,           Asset, Low
                                                                                  Harm Areas                                        Low Harm Areas                  Harm Areas

                 Adaptable cottages/detached plexes


                 Stacked quadplex                            4% cities           4% cities
                                                             Y% BG               1% BG

                 Stacked sixplex                             12% cities          8% cities
                                                             0-1% BG             2% BG

                 Neighborhood-scale multi-unit               4-8% cities         4% cities
                                                             0-1% BG             1% BG

                 Corridor-scale (4+ story) multi-unit        0-8% cities         0-4% cities
                                                             0-1% BG             0-1% BG

                                                             Feasible with 5-stories & zero parking     | More feasible with fewer stories; lower parking ratios


                                                                                                                                                                          v4
          9                                                                                                                                                               ,’, ECOnorthwest




                                                                                                            2. Feasibility Analysis Results
                          Diversity of unit sizes /
                          fanivesizediaite                                                       e   Multi-unit housing with 3+ bedroom units

                     % of cities and % of block groups where development might optimistically be feasible if allowed

              Prototype                                 Medium Cities:     | Medium Cities: High          Large & Metro           Large & Metro Cities (ex.        | PDX: High Asset, Low
                                                        Anywhere             Asset, Low Harm              Cities (ex. PDX):       PDX): High Asset, Low              Harm Areas
                                                                             Areas                        Anywhere                Harm Areas

              Neighborhood-scale multi-unit             0-4% cities         0-4% cities
              with 3+ BR                                0-1% BG             0-1% BG

              Feasible as bonus for                     0-4% cities         0-4% cities
              neighborhood-scale?                       0-1% BG             0-1% BG
              Medium-scale multi-unit with 3+           0-8% cities         0-4% cities
              BR                                        0-1% BG             0-1% BG

              Corridor-scale multi-unit with 3+         0% cities           0% cities
              BR                                        0% BG               0% BG

              Feasible as bonus for                     0% cities           0% cities                                                                               2-19% BG
              corridor-scale?                           0% BG               0% BG
                                                        Most feasible at 5-stories; Generally more feasible with less parking

          20                                       .                                                                                                                     0 ECOnorthwest




    7
<
wr      OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                                                                                                 121
               Zoning Analysis Approach


          21                                                                                                    a ECOnorthwest




                                             _                            3. Zoning Analysis Approach

     ra         1.   Obtained GIS data of zoning from city web maps for 4 example cities
                      o   Eugene
                      °o Salem
                      © Hood River
                      o Ashland
               2.    Calculated acreage and percent of total acreage by zone
               3.    Reviewed city zoning codes to collect and code key attributes of zones that allow housing such as:
                      © allowed uses/housing types
                      © max height
                      © minimum lot size, density minimum and maximums (DU/AC and FAR)
                      © building / lot / impervious coverage maximums, minimum open space/landscaping
                      © minimum parking ratios
               4.    Compared same prototypes as feasibility analysis to these standards to determine if they would likely
                     be allowed
                      o Included modest tolerance ranges (i.e., 10%) for density and impervious coverage
                      © Did not review setbacks, step-backs, detailed design standards, bonus entitlements, etc.
               5.    Summarized % of acres within the city where a given prototype is likely allowed
                      o Some prototypes have multiple variations that were checked separately, resulting in a range of
                          acreages depending on the prototype details (e.g., parking ratio)
          22                                                                                                      <» ECOnorthwest




wr   OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                                       122
                                                                                     3. Zoning Analysis Results: Tualatin
               Row   Labels                             |    Min of % of Acres       Average of % of Acres     Max of % of Acres

                      Adaptable Cottages                                    7%                            7%                   7%   Notes:
                      SF with two ADUs                                      6%                            6%                   6%       Standard middle
                      Stacked Quadplex                                          7%                        7%                   7%       housing, compact
                      Stacked Sixplex                                           7%                        7%                   7%       middle housing, and
                                                                                                                                        adaptable middle
                -     Compact cottages                                          7%                        7%                   7%       housing are broadly
                      Compact Quadplex (townhomes)                              1%                        1%                   1%
                                                                                                                                        allowed, but not
                      Compact Sixplex (townhomes)                               1%                        1%                   1%
                                                                                                                                        6-plexes
                                                                                                                                        Narrow (and low)
                ~~    Multiunit Corridor Scale 4-story                      0%                            0%                   0%
                      Multiunit Corridor Scale 5-story                      0%                            0%                   0%
                                                                                                                                        allowed density ranges
                      Multiunit Corridor Scale 6-story                      0%                            0%                   0%       for multi-unit housing
                      Multiunit Corridor Scale 7-story                      0%                            0%                   0%       preclude most
                                                                                                                                        multi-unit prototypes in
                      Multiunit Medium Scale                                0%                            0%                   0%       most zones, including a
                                                                                                                                        “High Density High Rise
                      Multiunit Neighborhood scale                          0%                            0%                   0%       Residential” zone
                                                                                                                                        No min parking
                      Duplex with 1-Car Garages                             9%                           9%                   9%        requirements citywide
                      SF with 2-Car Garages                                 6%                           6%                   6%
                      Standard Cottages                                    47%                          47%                  47%
                      Standard Side-by-Side quadplex                       47%                          47%                  47%
                                                                                                                                               iG ECOnorthwest
               Grand Total                                                  0%                            4%                 47%




                                                                                       3. Zoning Analysis Results: Salem

               Row   Labels                         |       Min of % of Acres        Average of   %of Acres    Max of % of Acres    Notes:


                     Adaptable Cottages                                     7%                          7%                     7%       Standard middle
                     SF with two ADUs                                      41%                        41%                    41%        housing, compact
                     Stacked Quadplex                                      38%                        38%                    38%        middle housing, and
                     Stacked Sixplex                                        7%                          7%                     7%       adaptable middle
                                                                                                                                        housing are broadly
                     Compact cottages                                       7%                          7%                     7%       allowed, but 6-plexes
                     Compact Quadplex (townhomes)                           7%                          7%                     7%       are generally limited to
                     Compact Sixplex (townhomes)                            7%                          7%                     7%       areas that allow
                                                                                                                                        multi-unit
                     Multiunit Corridor Scale 4-story                       7%                          7%                     7%
                                                                                                                                        Multi-unit prototypes
                     Multiunit Corridor Scale 5-story                       7%                          7%                     7%
                     Multiunit Corridor Scale 6-story                       6%                          6%                     6%
                                                                                                                                        are generally allowed
                     Multiunit Corridor Scale 7-story                       0%                          0%                     0%       only in commercial /
                                                                                                                                        mixed-use zones due
               "     Multiunit Medium Scale                                 7%                          7%                     7%       to max density, height
                                                                                                                                        limits, and/or open
                     Multiunit Neighborhood scale                           7%                          7%                     7%       space requirements in
                                                                                                                                        residential zones
                    Duplex with 1-Car Garages                              50%                        50%                    50%        No min parking
                    SF with 2-Car Garages                                  42%                        42%                    42%
                                                                                                                                        requirements citywide
                    Standard Cottages                                      56%                        56%                    56%
                    Standard Side-by-Side quadplex                         56%                        56%                    56%
            24 Grand Total                                                  0%                        12%                    56%               <a ECOnorthwest




     4
",
wr       OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                                                                       123
                                                                               3. Zoning Analysis Results: Hood River

         —         Row    Labels                         |       Min of % of Acres        Average of % of Acres    Max of % of Acres   Notes:
                                                                                                                                           Parking requirements
                          Adaptable Cottages                                    0%                           0%                   0%       preclude the multi-unit
                          SF with two ADUs                                      0%                           0%                   0%       prototypes analyzed in
                          Stacked Quadplex                                      0%                           0%                   0%
                                                                                                                                           all zones
                          Stacked Sixplex                                       0%                           0%                   0%
                                                                                                                                           Not subject to middle
                          Compact cottages                                      0%                           0%                   0%       housing requirements
                          Compact Quadplex (townhomes)                          0%                           0%                   0%       beyond duplexes -
                          Compact Sixplex (townhomes)                           0%                           0%                   0%       while middle housing is
                                                                                                                                           allowed in all
                          Multiunit Corridor Scale 4-story                      0%                           0%                   0%       residential zones, open
                          Multiunit Corridor Scale 5-story                      0%                           0%                   0%       space requirements,
                          Multiunit Corridor Scale 6-story                      0%                           0%                   0%
                                                                                                                                           lot coverage and in
                          Multiunit Corridor Scale 7-story                      0%                           0%                   0%
                                                                                                                                           some cases max
                          Multiunit Medium   Scale                              0%                           0%                   0%       density preclude the
                                                                                                                                           prototypes analyzed
                          Multiunit Neighborhood scale                          0%                           0%                   0%       Max density limits and
                                                                                                                                           heights preclude taller
                          Duplex with 1-Car Garages                            47%                          47%                  47%       and denser multi-unit
                          SF with 2-Car Garages                                41%                          41%                  41%       housing
                          Standard Cottages                                     0%                           0%                   0%
                          Standard Side-by-Side quadplex                        0%                           0%                   0%
             25    Grand Total                                                  0%                           2%                 47%                  © ECOnorthwest



                                                                                          3. Zoning Analysis Results: Ashland

                    Row     Labels                           |    Min of % of Acres       Average of % of Acres    Max of % of Acres
                                                                                                                                       Notes:
                            Adaptable Cottages                                   0%                           0%                  0%       Not subject to middle
                            SF with two ADUs                                         5%                       5%                  5%       housing requirements
                            Stacked Quadplex                                         1%                       1%                  1%       beyond duplexes -
                            Stacked Sixplex                                          1%                       1%                  1%       while other middle
                                                                                                                                           housing types are
                            Compact cottages                                     0%                           0%                  0%       allowed in some
                            Compact Quadplex (townhomes)                             1%                       1%                  1%
                                                                                                                                           residential zones, max
                            Compact Sixplex (townhomes)                              1%                       1%                  1%
                     -|
                                                                                                                                           density, lot coverage,
                            Multiunit Corridor Scale 4-story                     0%                           0%                  0%       and landscaping
                            Multiunit Corridor Scale 5-story                     0%                           0%                  0%       requirements preclude
                            Multiunit Corridor Scale 6-story                     0%                           0%                  0%       the prototypes
                            Multiunit Corridor Scale 7-story                     0%                           0%                  0%       analyzed
                                                                                                                                           Max density limits and
                     ~~     Multiunit Medium Scale                               0%                           0%                  1%       heights preclude taller
                                                                                                                                           and denser multi-unit
                            Multiunit Neighborhood scale                         0%                           0%                  1%       housing
                            Duplex with 1-Car Garages                            8%                           8%                  8%
                            SF with 2-Car Garages                               44%                         44%                  44%
                            Standard Cottages                                    0%                           0%                  0%
                            Standard Side-by-Side quadplex                           5%                       5%                  5%
              26    Grand Total                                                  0%                           2%                44%                  <* ECOnorthwest




     4
",
wr       OHNA Rulemaking - Compliance Pathway Considerations                                                                                                           124
