                                                                                                          DAN     JOHNSON

                                                                                                                   DIRECTOR

CLACKAMAS
  COUNTY                                               DEPARTMENT       OF   TRANSPORTATION         AND   DEVELOPMENT

                                                                                    DEVELOPMENT       SERVICES     BUILDING
                                                                150   BEAVERCREEK   ROAD         OREGON   City,   OR   97045




   September 12, 2024                                       BCC Agenda Date/Item:

   Board of County Commissioners
   Clackamas County

          Approval to Quitclaim a Permanent Easement for Road Purposes to Oregon
         Department of Transportation. No fiscal impact. No County General Funds are
                                           involved.

      Previous Board          9-10-24: Request for Consent
      Action/Review           4-4-19: Signing of Intergovernmental Agreement for Right of Way
                              services between the State of Oregon and the County of Clackamas for
                              the CRC Mobility Improvements project.
      Performance             Building a strong infrastructure.
      Clackamas
      Counsel Review          Yes — HH                      Procurement                     No
                                                            Review
      Contact Person          Carol Hager                   Contact Phone                   503.742.4674

   EXECUTIVE SUMMARY: Clackamas County Development Agency began construction of the
   CRC Mobility Improvements Project (the Project) in December of 2019 and completed
   construction in December 2022. Permanent easements for the project were acquired in the
   name of Clackamas County.

   Per the Right of Way Services Agreement signed with the Oregon Department of Transportation
   in April 2019 “certain portions of SE 82"? Avenue and SE Sunnyside Road right of way will be
   acquired by Agency for relinquishment to STATE.” The attached materials illustrate +/- 574 sq
   ft portion of right of way being transferred from the County to the State of Oregon. This right of
   way currently contains portion of the onramp to I-205 which is controlled by the state. The
   attached Quitclaim deed completes the required transfer.

   RECOMMENDATION: Staff respectfully recommends that the Board of County Commissioners
   approve the granting of a Quitclaim Deed from Clackamas County to the State of Oregon.


   Respectfully submitted,


    are     Gohnaon                                                   For Filing Use Only


   Dan Johnson, Director
   Dept of Transportation & Development


                   P. 503.742.4400        F. 503.742.4272         WWW.CLACKAMAS.US
Grantor:  Clackamas County                 | State of Oregon
         150 Beavercreek Road              |
         Oregon City, OR 97045             |
Grantee: State of Oregon                   |
         Department of                     |
          Transportation                   |
                                           |
After Recording Return to:                 |
Clackamas County Engineering               |
150 Beavercreek Rd.                        |
Oregon City, OR 97045                      |
                                           |
Until a change is requested, all           |
taxes shall be sent to: No Change      _   |
                                           |
                                             | Board Agenda No.:
Road Name:    SE Sunnyside Road            | Approval Date:

       QUITCLAIM          of Property for Use as Permanent Right      of Way   for Road Purposes



KNOW ALL PERSONS BY THESE PRESENTS, THAT, Clackamas County, a political subdivision of
the State of Oregon, by and through its Elected Officials (Grantor), for value received, hereby releases
and quitclaims to the State of Oregon, by and through its Department of Transportation, (Grantee), and
Grantee’s heirs, successors and assigns, all of Grantor's rights and interest to that certain property
situated in Clackamas County, Oregon, and being more particularly described and depicted as Parcel 1
in Exhibits A and B attached hereto and by this reference made a part hereof.

The true consideration for this transfer is as set forth in that Right of Way Services Agreement for
CRC Mobility Improvements, Misc. Contracts and Agreements No. 32561, fully executed on April 19,
2019.

Statutory Land Use Disclaimer: Before signing or accepting this instrument, the person transferring
fee title should inquire about the person’s rights, if any, under ORS 195.300, 195.301 and 195.305 to
195.336 and Sections 5 to 11, Chapter 424, Oregon Laws 2007, Sections 2 to 9 and 17, Chapter 855,
Oregon Laws 2009, and Sections 2 to 7, Chapter 8, Oregon Laws 2010. This instrument does not allow
use of the property described in this instrument in violation of applicable land use laws and
regulations. Before signing or accepting this instrument, the person acquiring fee title to the property
should check with the appropriate city or county planning department to verify that the unit of land
being transferred is a lawfully established lot or parcel, as defined in ORS 92.010 or 215.010, to verify
the approved uses of the lot or parcel, to determine any limits on lawsuits against farming or forest
practices, as defined in ORS 30.930, and to inquire about the rights of neighboring property owners, if
any, under ORS 195.300, 195.301 and 195.305 to 195.336 and Sections 5 to 11, Chapter 424, Oregon
Laws 2007, Sections 2 to 9 and 17, Chapter 855, Oregon Laws 2009, and Sections 2 to 7, Chapter 8,
Oregon Laws 2010.




                              [Signatures and acknowledgement on following page]




      Quitclaim of Property                                                            Page 1
In witness whereof, the above named Grantor has hereunto set Grantor's hand to this document on
this                     day of               2024.



Clackamas County:


By:
        Tootie Smith, Chair
        Clackamas County Board of County Commissioners




STATE   OF OREGON             )
                              ) ss.
County of Clackamas           )



This instrument was acknowledged before me this        day of                             2024,

by Tootie Smith as the Chair of the Clackamas County Board of County Commissioners on behalf of

Clackamas County, Oregon.




                                                                Notary Public for State of Oregon

                                                                My Commission Expires:




      Quitclaim of Property                                                          Page 2
Acceptance


State of Oregon, by and through its Department of Transportation:



By:
        Georgine Gleason, State Right of Way Manager




STATE OF OREGON                )

County of Marion               )


This instrument was acknowledged before me this         day of                              2024,

by Georgine Gleason, State Right of Way Manager on behalf of State of Oregon.




                                                                 Notary Public for State of Oregon

                                                                 My Commission Expires:




      Quitclaim of Property                                                           Page 38
                                            EXHIBIT A

Clackamas Regional Center
Mobility Improvement Project                                              County Project No. DA-03
September 9, 2022

Page 1 of 2

PARCEL        1 (Permanent Right-Of-Way Easement For Road Purposes)

A parcel of land, as shown on attached Exhibit “B”, lying in the Southwest One-Quarter of the
Southeast One-Quarter of Section 33, Township | South, Range 2 East, of the Willamette
Meridian, Clackamas County, Oregon, and being a portion of a Permanent Right of Way
Easement for Road Purposes recorded as Document No. 2020-081672, Clackamas County Deed
Records, said parcel being that portion of said Document No. 2020-081672 lying easterly of the
following described line;

   Beginning at a point 58.08 feet left of Existing S.E. Sunnyside Road Centerline Station “SS”
   16+87.23;
   Thence southerly, in a straight line, to a point 120.34 feet left of Existing S.E. Sunnyside
   Road Centerline Station “SS” 16+88.40;


The stationing used to describe this parcel is based on the Existing Centerline of S.E. Sunnyside
Road, being more particularly described as follows:

A roadway located in the Southeast One-Quarter of Section 33, Township        1 South, Range 2 East,
of the Willamette Meridian in Clackamas County, Oregon, the centerline of which is more
particularly described as follows:

Beginning at a3 inch brass disk in monument well, set per Oregon State Highway Drawing No.
9B-18-14, at Existing S.E. Sunnyside Road Centerline Station “SS” 6+92.23, said monument
also being shown as Station 10+116.512 meters (331+90.66 feet) on Post-Construction Record
of Survey recorded as SN2005-164, Clackamas County Survey Records;

Thence S87°51°44’W, 1207.77 feet to Existing S.E. Sunnyside Road Centerline Station “SS”
19+00.00 and the terminus of this centerline, from which a 2-1/4 inch bronze disk at the One-
Quarter Section Corner common to said Section 33 in Township 1 South, Range 2 East and
Section 4 in Township 2 South, Range 2 East per U.S.B.T. Entry 2002-106, Clackamas County
Survey Records bears $17°34°15”W, 312.39 feet.

This legal description, along with the Basis of Bearings thereof, is based on the Oregon
Coordinate Reference System (OCRS) Portland Zone. The south line of the Southwest One-
Quarter of said Section 33 was held to be $89°35'48"E per SN2018-216, Clackamas County
Survey Records, as measured between the above-described One-Quarter Section Corner common
to said Section 33 in Township | South, Range 2 East and Section 4 in Township 2 South, Range
EXHIBIT A CONTINUED — Page 2 of 2
September 9, 2022

2 East per said U.S.B.T. Entry 2002-106 and the Section Corner common to said Sections 32 and
33 in Township 1 South, Range 2 East and Sections 4 and 5 in Township 2 South, Range 2 East
per U.S.B.T. Entry 2001-011, Clackamas County Survey Records.

The parcel of land to which this description applies contains 574 square feet more or less.




                                           REGISTERED        —
                                         PROFESSIONAL
                                        LAND SURVEYOR

                                   Digitally Signed
                                             OREGON
                                             July 15. 2003
                                     JOHN T. CAMPBELL
                                               60070

                                      RENEWS:         12/31/2023
                                                   EXHIBIT           °B”

     SE SUNNYSIDE             ROAD
                                                                                                  ™      #35" 16400
                                                             ss” 17+00
                 =                 =_=>



          "SS"       18+00




                                                   STA:"SS” 16+87.23
TT    —                                            OFF: 58.08" L




                                DOCUMENT     NO.   2020—081672




                                          STA: "SS" 16+88.40 _-
                                          OFF: 120.34’   L


                                            ONE   MONARCH CENTER, LLC
                                                DOC. NO. 99-103793
                                               22E04B SUPP.—O02000
                                              12550 SE 93RD AVENUE




LEGEND

Gv                       PERMANENT RIGHT—OF—WAY
                         EASEMENT FOR ROAD PURPOSES
                         + 574 SQ.FT.
                                                                                          Harper                   "=
                                                                                                                      SCALE




                                                                                          Houf Peterson
                                                                                          Righellis Inc.
                                                                      ENGINEERS*PLANNERS
                                                                 LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTS
                                                                                    * SURVEYORS

 SEE ATTACHED                                                    205 SE Spokane Street,     Suite 200,     Portland, OR       97202
                                                                 phone:    503.221.1131   www.hhpr.com = fax:     503.221.1171
 LEGAL DESCRIPTION                                               CLA-—79        JTC        09/09/2022            PAGE     1    OF     1
                                                                  Misc. Contracts and Agreements
                                                                                        No. 32561
                                    INTERGOVERNMENTAL AGREEMENT
                                      FOR RIGHT OF WAY SERVICES
                                        CRC Mobility Improvements

THIS AGREEMENT is made and entered into by and between the STATE OF OREGON,
acting by and through its Department of Transportation, hereinafter referred to as “State”;
and COUNTY OF CLACKAMAS, acting by and through its elected officials, hereinafter
referred     to as   “Agency,”      both   herein   referred   to individually    or collectively     as     “Party”     or
“Parties.”

RECITALS

1.   By the authority granted in Oregon Revised Statute (ORS) 190.110, 283.110, 366.572
     and 366.576, state agencies may enter into agreements with units of local government or
     other state agencies for the performance of any or all functions and activities that a Party
     to the agreement, its officers, or agents have the authority to perform.

     By the authority granted in ORS 366.425, State may accept deposits of money or an
     irrevocable letter of credit from any county, city, road district, person, firm, or corporation for
     the performance of work on any public highway within the State. When said money or a
     letter of credit is deposited, State shall proceed with the Project. Money so deposited shall
     be disbursed for the purpose for which it was deposited.

     That certain portions of SE 82™ Avenue                 and SE Sunnyside          Road      right of way will be
     acquired by Agency for relinquishment to STATE.                The terms of this agreement shall pertain
     only to those      rights of way acquired          by Agency within the project limits that are to be
     relinquished to STATE.          That certain portions of the project are under the jurisdiction and
     control of Agency and          Agency may enter into an agreement for the acquisition of real
     property.

     Highway 68, is a part of the state highway system under the jurisdiction and control of the
     Oregon                  Transportation                Commission                    (OTC).

     This Agreement        shall define     roles and     responsibilities   of the   Parties    regarding     the     real
     property to be used as part of right of way for road, street or construction of public
     improvement. The scope and funding is further described in IGA Agreement number
     32508. Hereinafter, all acts necessary to accomplish services in this Agreement shall be
     referred to as "Project."

     As of this time there are no local public agencies (LPAs) certified to independently
     administer federal-aid projects for right of way services. Therefore, State is ultimately
     responsible for the certification and oversight of all right of way activities under this
     Agreement (except as provided under “Agency Obligations” for LPAs in State’s certification
     program for consultant selection).

NOW THEREFORE, the premises being in general as stated in the foregoing Recitals, it is
agreed by and between the Parties hereto as follows:


R/W Services IGA (April 17, 2016)                                                                                      -1-
TERMS OF AGREEMENT

1.   Under such authority, to accomplish the objectives in Agreement               No. 32508,     State and
     Agency agree to perform certain right of way activities shown in Special Provisions - Exhibit
     A, attached hereto and by this reference made a part hereof. For the right of way services
     State performs on behalf of the Agency, under no conditions shall Agency's obligations
     exceed a maximum of $8,000, including all exoenses, unless agreed upon by both Parties.

     The work shall begin on the date all required signatures are obtained and shall be
     completed no later than December 18, 2021, on which date this Agreement automatically
     terminates unless extended by a fully executed amendment.

     The process to be followed by the Parties in carrying out this Agreement is set out in Exhibit
     A.

     It is further agreed both Parties will strictly follow the rules, policies and procedures of the
     Uniform Relocation Assistance and Real Property Acquisition Policies Act of 1970, as
     amended, ORS Chapter 35 and the “State Right of Way Manual.”

STATE OBLIGATIONS

1.   State shall perform the work described in Special Provisions - Exhibit A.

2.   With the exception of work related to appraisals, State shall not enter into any subcontracts
     for any of the work scheduled under this Agreement without obtaining prior written approval
     from Agency.

     State shall perform   the service     under this Agreement       as an independent       contractor and
     shall be exclusively responsible for all costs and expenses related to its employment of
     individuals to perform the work under this Agreement including, but not limited to, retirement
     contributions, workers compensation, unemployment taxes, and state and federal income
     tax withholdings.

     State’s right of way contact person for this Project is David Mendelson, Right of Way Project
     Manager,   123   NW   Flanders      Street,   Portland,   OR   97209,   503-731-8451),     or assigned
     designee   upon individual’s absence.         State shall notify the other Party in writing of any
     contact changes during the term of this Agreement.

AGENCY OBLIGATIONS

1. Agency shall perform the work described in Special Provisions - Exhibit A.

2.   Agency certifies, at the time this Agreement is executed, that sufficient funds are available
     and authorized for expenditure to finance costs of this Agreement within Agency's current
     appropriation or limitation of current budget. Agency is willing and able to finance all, or its
     pro-rata share of all, costs and expenses incurred in the Project up to its maximum.



 32561
3.   Agency’s needed right of way services, as identified in Exhibit A, may be performed by
     qualified individuals from any of the following sources:

     a.   Agency staff,
     b.   State staff,
     c.   Staff of another local public agency, as described in ODOT’s Right of Way Manual
          and approved by the State’s Region Right of Way Office;
     d.   Consultants from State’s Full Service Architectural and Engineering (A&E) Price
          Agreement 2 Tier Selection Process. Tier 2 procurements must be requisitioned
          through    State’s Local Agency    Liaison    (LAL) with solicitation process administered             by
          State Procurement Office. Forms and procedures for Tier 2 process are located at:
          http://www.oregon.qgov/ODOT/CS/OPO/docs/fs/tier2quide.doc;
     e.   “Appraiser services procured by Agency from State’s Qualified Appraiser List (on line
          at http://www.oregon.gov/ODOT/HWY/ROW/Pages/index.aspx);
     f.   *Other right of way related services procured by Agency from any source of qualified
          contractors or consultants.

     * Selections may be based on price alone, price and qualifications, or qualifications alone
     followed by negotiation. Federally funded procurements by Agency for right of way
     services must be conducted under State’s certification program for consultant selection
     and must comply with requirements in the LPA A&E Requirements Guide (and must use
     the State’s standard A&E Contract Template for LPAs which may be modified to include
     State-approved provisions required by Agency). State and local funded procurements
     by Agency must be in conformance with applicable State rules and statutes for A&E
     “Related Services” (and Agency may use Its own contract document).

4.   If Agency      intends to use Agency    staff, staff of another local public agency,              consultants
     (except for consultants on State’s Qualified Appraiser List), or contractors to perform right
     of way services scheduled under this Agreement, Agency must receive prior written
     approval from State’s Region Right of Way Office.

5.   The LPA A&E         Requirements Guide and A&E Contract Template referenced above under
     paragraph           3     are     available        on           the       following        Internet      page:
     http:/Awww.oregon.gov/ODOT/CS/OPO/Pages/ae.aspx#Local                        Public Agency       (LPA)   Cons
     ultant_ Templates and Guidance Docs.

6. Agency or its subcontractor will strictly follow the rules, policies and procedures of the
   Uniform Relocation Assistance and Real Property Acquisition Policies Act of 1970, as
   amended, ORS Chapter 35 and the “State Right of Way Manual.”

7.   Agency represents that this Agreement             is signed      by personnel         authorized to do so on
     behalf of Agency.

8.   Agency’s right of way contact person for this Project is Sharan Hams-LaDuca Right of Way
     Program        Manager,   Clackamas    County     Department          of Transportation,150      Beavercreek
     Road,           Suite      325        Oregon            City,          Oregon           97045,        503-742-
     4675,shamsladuca@co.clackamas.or.us,              or assigned designee upon individual's absence.
                                                                                                   -3-
 32561
  Agency shall notify the other Party in writing of any contact information changes during the
  term of this Agreement.




32561
PAYMENT FOR SERVICES AND EXPENDITURES:

1.     In consideration for the services performed by State (as identified in the attached Exhibit
       A), Agency      agrees   to pay     or reimburse   State    a maximum        amount     of $8,000.     Said
       maximum      amount      shall    include   reimbursement     for   all   expenses,     including     travel
       expenses. Travel expenses shall be reimbursed to State in accordance with the current
       Oregon    Department     of Administrative     Services’   rates. Any     expenditure    beyond      federal
       participation will be from, or reimbursed from, Agency funds. Payment in Agency and/or
       federal funds in any combination shall not exceed said maximum,                unless agreed upon by
       both Parties.

     . State shall upon execution of this Agreement, forward to Agency either: 1) a request to sign
       an irrevocable limited power of attorney to access the Local Government                 Investment Pool
       account of the Agency, or 2) a letter of request for an advance deposit. Agency shall make
       any advance deposit to the State’s Financial Services Branch, in an amount equal to the
       estimate of costs to be incurred by State for the Project. The preliminary estimate of costs is
       $8,000. Additional deposits, if any, shall be made as needed upon request from State and
       acceptance by Agency. Requests for additional deposits shall be accompanied by an
       itemized statement of expenditures and an estimated cost to complete Project.

       a. Agency agrees to pay or reimburse all salaries and payroll reserves of State employees
          working on Project, direct costs, costs of rental equipment used, and per-diem
          expenditures, plus 10 percent surcharge on salary costs to cover administrative costs of
          Right of Way Section.

       b.   State shall present invoices for 100 percent of actual costs incurred by State on behalf
            of the Project directly to Agency’s right of way contact for review and approval. Such
            Invoices shall be in a form identifying the Project, the agreement number, invoice
            number or account number, and shall itemize all expenses for which reimbursement is
            claimed. Invoices shall be presented for periods of not less than one (1) month
            duration, based on actual expenses incurred.

       c.   Upon completion of right of way acquisition and receipt from State of a final itemized
            statement, Agency shall pay an amount which, when added to said advance deposit,
            will equal 100 percent of the final total actual cost. Any portion of deposits made in
            excess of the final total costs of Project shall be refunded to Agency.

GENERAL PROVISIONS:

1. This Agreement may be terminated by either Party upon thirty (80) days' notice, in writing
   and delivered by certified mail or in person, under any of the following conditions:

       a.   If either Party fails to provide services called for by this Agreement within the time
            specified herein or any extension thereof.

       b.   If either Party fails to perform any of the other provisions of this Agreement or so fails
            to pursue the work as to endanger performance of this Agreement in accordance with
                                                                                                               _5-
32561
          its terms, and after receipt of written notice fails to correct such failures within ten (10)
          days or such longer period as may be authorized.

     c.   If Agency fails to provide payment of its share of the cost of the Project.

     d.   If State      fails to     receive   funding,   appropriations,     limitations   or other     expenditure
          authority     sufficient    to allow   State,   in the   exercise   of its reasonable        administrative
          discretion, to continue to make payments for performance of this Agreement.

     e.   If federal or state laws, regulations or guidelines are modified or interpreted in such a
          way that either the work under this Agreement is prohibited or State is prohibited from
          paying for such work from the planned funding source.

2.   Any termination of this Agreement shall not prejudice any rights or obligations accrued to
     the Parties prior to termination.

3.   Agency acknowledges and agrees that State, the Oregon Secretary of State's Office, the
     federal government, and their duly authorized representatives shall have access to the
     books, documents, papers, and records of Agency which are directly pertinent to this
     Agreement for the purpose of making audit, examination, excerpts, and transcripts for a
     period of six (6) years after final payment. Copies of applicable records shall be made
     available upon request. Payment for costs of copies is reimbursable by State.

4.   Agency shall comply with all federal, state, and local laws, regulations, executive orders
     and ordinances applicable to the work under this Agreement,                     including, without limitation,
     the provisions of ORS 279B.220, 279B.225, 279B.230,                              279B.235 and 279B.270
     incorporated herein by reference and made a part hereof. Without limiting the generality
     of the foregoing, Agency expressly agrees to comply with (i) Title VI of Civil Rights Act of
     1964; (ii) Title     V and Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973; (iti) the Americans with
     Disabilities Act of 1990 and ORS 659A.142; (iv) all regulations and administrative rules
     established pursuant to the foregoing laws; and (v) all other applicable requirements of
     federal and state civil rights and rehabilitation statutes, rules and regulations.

5.   All employers that employ subject workers who work under this Agreement in the State of
     Oregon shall comply with ORS 656.017 and provide the required workers’ compensation
     coverage unless such employers are exempt under ORS 656.126. Employers Liability
     insurance with coverage limits of not less than $500,000 must be included. Both Parties
     shall ensure that each of its subcontractors complies with these requirements.

6.   If any third party makes any claim or brings any action, suit or proceeding alleging a tort
     as now or hereafter defined in ORS 30.260 ("Third Party Claim") against State or Agency
     with respect to which the other Party may have liability, the notified Party must promptly
     notify the other Party in writing of the Third Party Claim and deliver to the other Party a
     copy of the claim, process, and all legal pleadings with respect to the Third Party Claim.
     Each Party is entitled to participate in the defense of a Third Party Claim and to defend a
     Third Party Claim with counsel of its own choosing.                 Receipt by a Party of the notice and
    copies required in this paragraph and meaningful opportunity for the Party to participate in
                                                                                            -6-
 32561
     the investigation, defense and settlement of the Third Party Claim with counsel of its own
     choosing are conditions precedent to that Party's liability with respect to the Third Party
     Claim.

7.   With respect to a Third Party Claim for which State is jointly liable with Agency (or would
     be if joined in the Third Party Claim), State shall contribute to the amount of expenses
     (including attorneys' fees), judgments, fines and amounts paid in settlement actually and
     reasonably incurred and paid or payable by Agency in such proportion as is appropriate
     to reflect the relative fault of State on the one hand and of Agency on the other hand in
     connection      with     the   events        which   resulted     in   such    expenses,       judgments,       fines     or
     settlement amounts, as well as any other relevant equitable considerations. The relative
     fault of State on the one hand and of Agency on the other hand shall be determined by
     reference to, among other things, the Parties' relative intent, knowledge, access to
     information and opportunity to correct or prevent the circumstances resulting in such
     expenses, judgments, fines or settlement amounts. State’s contribution amount in any
     instance is capped to the same extent it would have been capped under Oregon law,
     including the Oregon Tort Claims Act, ORS 30.260 to 30.300, if State had sole liability in
     the proceeding.

8.   With respect to a Third Party Claim for which Agency is jointly liable with State (or would
     be if joined in the Third Party Claim), Agency shall contribute to the amount of expenses
     (including attorneys' fees), judgments, fines and amounts paid in settlement actually and
     reasonably incurred and paid or payable by State in such proportion as is appropriate to
     reflect the relative fault of Agency on the one hand and of State on the other hand in
     connection      with     the   events        which   resulted     in   such    expenses,       judgments,       fines     or
     settlement amounts, as well as any other relevant equitable considerations. The relative
     fault of Agency on the one hand and of State on the other hand shall be determined by
     reference to, among other things, the Parties' relative intent, knowledge, access to
     information and opportunity to correct or prevent the circumstances resulting in such
     expenses, judgments, fines or settlement amounts.                        Agency's contribution amount             in any
     instance is capped to the same extent it would have been capped under Oregon law,
     including the Oregon Tort Claims Act, ORS 30.260 to 30.300, if it had sole liability in the
     proceeding.

9.   The   Parties    shall     attempt      in    good   faith   to   resolve      any   dispute    arising   out    of     this
     Agreement.      In addition, the Parties may agree to utilize a jointly selected                          mediator or
     arbitrator (for non-binding arbitration) to resolve the dispute short of litigation.

10.When federal funds are involved in this Agreement, Exhibits B and C are attached hereto
   and by this reference made a part of this Agreement, and are hereby certified to by
   Agency.

11.When     federal funds are involved in this Agreement,                          Agency,   as a recipient of federal
     funds, pursuant to this Agreement with the State, shall assume sole liability for Agency’s
     breach of any federal statutes, rules, program requirements and grant provisions
     applicable to the federal funds, and shall, upon Agency’s breach of any such conditions
     that requires the State to return funds to the Federal Highway Administration, hold
                                                                                                                             -7-
 32561
   harmless and indemnify the State for an amount equal to the funds received under this
   Agreement; or if legal limitations apply to the indemnification ability of Agency, the
   indemnification amount shall be the maximum        amount of funds available for expenditure,
   Including any available contingency funds or other available non-appropriated funds, up to
   the amount received under this Agreement.

12.The Parties hereto agree that if any term or provision of this Agreement is declared by a
   court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, unenforceable, illegal or in conflict with any
   law, the validity of the remaining terms and provisions shall not be affected, and the rights
   and obligations of the Parties shall be construed and enforced as if the Agreement did not
   contain the particular term or provision held to be invalid.

13. This Agreement may be executed in several counterparts (facsimile or otherwise) all of
    which when taken together shall constitute one agreement binding on all Parties,
   notwithstanding that all Parties are not signatories to the same counterpart. Each copy of
   this Agreement so executed shall constitute an original.

14.This Agreement and attached exhibits and Agreement No. 32508 constitute the entire
    agreement between the Parties on the subject matter hereof. There are no
   understandings,   agreements,    or   representations,   oral   or written,    not   specified   herein
   regarding this Agreement. No waiver, consent, modification or change of terms of this
   Agreement shall bind either Party unless in writing and signed by both Parties and all
   necessary approvals have been obtained. Such waiver, consent, modification or change,
   if made, shall be effective only in the specific instance and for the specific purpose given.
   The failure of State to enforce any provision of this Agreement               shall not constitute a
   waiver by State of that or any other provision.

THE PARTIES, by execution of this Agreement, hereby acknowledge that their signing
representatives have read this Agreement, understand it, and agree to be bound by its terms
and conditions.


                                   Signature Page to Follow




32561
COUNTY OF CLACKAMAS,            by and           STATE OF OREGON, by and through
through                                          its Department of Tr.ae

                                                           MWA!              (ut
its elected      ials

By                                               Suae Right of Way Manager
     Ono
                                                 Date    f | \S | Fj
Date     Lf “4    = DOI
                                                 APPROVAL RECOMMENDED
By Maus          Rastnlee,
                                                 By     Aha     Holpenny
                                                 Region 1 Right of Way Manager
Date     U-H-2oO19              VL.|\       .
                                                 Date     4/12/19
APPROVED       AS TO LEGAL SUFFICIENCY
                                                 By
By
                                                 Date
Date
                                                 APPROVED AS TO LEGAL SUFFICIENCY
Agency Contact:
Sharan Hams-LaDuca                               By (insert N/A if not applicable)
 Right   of      Way     Program     Manager,    Assistant Attorney General
Clackamas         County     Department     of
Transportation,150    Beavercreek   Road,        Date
Suite 325 Oregon City, Oregon 97045
503-742-4675                                     APPROVED
shamsladuca@co.clackamas.or.us                   (If Litigation Work Related to Condemnation is
                                                 to be done by State)
State Contact:
David Mendelson                                  By (insert N/A if not applicable)
123 NW    Flanders Street , Portland, Oregon     Chief Trial Counsel
97209
503-731-8451                                     Date
David.Mendelson@odot.state.or.us




32561
                                        SPECIAL PROVISIONS EXHIBIT A
                                             Right of Way Services

                               THINGS TO BE DONE BY STATE OR AGENCY

1.   Pursuant to this Agreement, the work performed on behalf of the Agency can be performed
     by the Agency, the Agency’s consultant, the State or a State Flex Services consultant, as
     listed under Agency Obligations, paragraph 3 of this Agreement. The work may be
     performed by Agency staff or any of these representatives on behalf of Agency individually
     or collectively provided they are qualified to perform such functions and after receipt of
     approval from the State’s Region Region 1 Right of Way Manager.

2.   With        the   exception   of   work   related     to   appraisals,    State    shall    not   enter   into   any
     subcontracts for any of the work scheduled                 under this Agreement without obtaining prior
     written approval from Agency.

Instructions: Insert either: State, Agency, or N/A on each line.

A. Preliminary Phase

             Agency shall provide preliminary cost estimates.
     —




             Agency shall make preliminary contacts with property owners.
     no




          . Agency shall gather and provide data for environmental documents.

     4.      Agency shall develop access and approach road list.

     5.      Agency shall help provide field location and Project data.

B. Acquisition Phase

     1.     General:

            a.   When    doing the Acquisition work, as described in this Section, Agency shall provide
                 State with a status report of the Project monthly.

                 Title to properties acquired shall be in the name of the Agency.



                 The Agency shall adopt a resolution of intention and determination of necessity in
                 accord with ORS      35.235   and ORS       35.610,  authorizing acquisition and
                 condemnation,     such   approval       will be conditioned     on    passage     of a resolution     by
                 Agency substantially in the form attached hereto as Exhibit D, and by this reference
                 made a part hereof. If the Oregon Department of Justice is to handle condemnation
                 work, prior approval evidenced by Chief Trial Counsel, Department of Justice,
                 signature on this Agreement is required; and authorization for such representation
                                                                                                -10-
 32561
             shall be included in the resolution adopted by the Agency. Prior approval by Oregon
             Department of Justice is required.

   2.   Legal Descriptions:

        a.    Agency shall provide sufficient horizontal control, recovery and retracement surveys,
             vesting deeds, maps and other data so that legal descriptions can be written.

        b.   Agency     shall   provide   construction   plans   and   cross-section    information     for the
             Project.

        c.    Agency shall write legal descriptions and prepare right of way maps. If the Agency
             acquires any right of way on a State highway, the property descriptions and right of
             way maps shall be based upon centerline stationing and shall be prepared in
             accordance with the current “ODOT Right of Way & Rail/Utility Coordination
             Contractor Services Guide” and the “Right of Way Engineering Manual.” The
             preliminary and final versions of the property descriptions          and    right of way    maps
             must be reviewed and approved by the State.

        d.   Agency shall specify the degree of title to be acquired (e.g., fee, easement).

   3.   Real Property and Title Insurance:

        a.    Agency shall provide preliminary title reports, if State determines they are needed,
             before negotiations for acquisition commence.

        b.   Agency shall determine sufficiency of title (taking subject to). If the Agency acquires
             any right of way on a State highway, sufficiency of title (taking subject to) shall be
             determined in accordance with the current “State Right of Way Manual’ and the
             “ODOT Right of Way & Rail/Utility Coordination Contractor Services Guide.” Agency
             shall clear any encumbrances        necessary to conform to these requirements, obtain
             Title Insurance policies as required and provide the State copies of any title policies
             for the properties acquired.

        c.   Agency shall conduct a Level 1 Initial Site Assessment, according to State
             Guidance, within Project limits to detect presence of hazardous materials on any
             property purchase,      excavation or disturbance of structures, as early in the Project
             design as possible, but at        a minimum     prior to property acquisition or approved
             design.

        d.    Agency shall conduct a Level 2 Preliminary Site Investigation, according to State
             Guidance, of sufficient scope to confirm the presence of contamination, determine
             impacts to properties and develop special provisions and cost estimates, if the
             Level 1 Initial Site Assessment indicates the potential presence of contamination
             that could impact the properties.



                                                                                                          -1{1-
32561
             e      lf contamination      is found,        a recommendation         for     remediation     will   be
                   presented to State.

        e.    Agency) shall be          responsible        for proper treatment           and    cost of any       necessary
             remediation.

        f.       Agency shall conduct asbestos, lead paint and other hazardous materials surveys
             for    all    structures   that   will   be    demolished,      renovated          or   otherwise     disturbed.
             Asbestos surveys must be conducted by an AHERA                           (asbestos hazard emergency
             response act) certified inspector.

  4.    Appraisal:

        a.       Agency shall conduct the valuation process of properties to be acquired.

        b.       Agency shall perform the Appraisal Reviews to set Just Compensation.

        c.    Agency shall recommend Just Compensation, based upon a review of the valuation
             by qualified personnel.

  5.    Negotiations:



        a. Agency shall tender all monetary offers to land-owners in writing at the compensation
           shown in the appraisal review. Agency shall have sole authority to negotiate and
             make         all settlement offers. Conveyances taken for more or less than the approved
             Just Compensation will require a statement justifying the settlement. Said statement
             will include the consideration of any property trades, construction obligations and
             zoning or permit concessions.

        b.    State and Agency shall determine a date for certification of right of way and agree to
             cosign the State’s Right of Way Certification form. State and Agency agree
             possession of all right of way shall occur prior to advertising for any construction
             contract, unless exceptions have been agreed to by Agency and State.

        c.       Agency agrees to file all Recommendations for Condemnation at least seventy (70)
             days prior to the right of way                 certification   date    if negotiations        have    not    been
             successful on those properties.

  6.    Relocation:

        a.   Agency         shall   perform    any     relocation     assistance,     make           replacement        housing
             computations, and do all things necessary to relocate any displaced parties on the
             Project.

        b.       Agency shall make all relocation and moving payments for the Project.

                                                                                                                          ~{2-
32561
        c.   Agency shall facilitate the relocation appeal process.

C. Closing Phase

   1. Agency shall close all transactions.     This includes drawing of deeds, releases and
      satisfactions necessary to clear title, obtaining signatures on release documents, and
      making all payments. If State is working as a consultant for the Agency, State shall
      submit all signed Final Report packets, information required by the Uniform Act, and
      agreements to the Agency.

   2.    Agency     shall record conveyance        documents,    only upon     acceptance   by appropriate
        agency.

D. Property Management

   1. Agency shall take possession of all the acquired properties. There shall be no
      encroachments of buildings or other private improvements allowed upon the State
      highway right of way.

   2.    Agency shall dispose of all improvements             and     excess   land consistent with   State
        prevailing laws and policies.

E. Condemnation

   1. Agency        may offer mediation   if the     Agency     and    property owners   have   reached   an
        impasse.

   2.    Agency shall perform all administrative functions in preparation of the condemnation
        process, such as preparing final offer and complaint letters.

   3.   Agency shall perform all legal and litigation work related to the condemnation process.
        Agency is responsible for passage of a resolution substantially in the form attached
        hereto as Exhibit D, and by this reference made a part hereof, specifically identifying the
        property being acquired.

   4.   When State shall perform legal or litigation work related to the condemnation process,
        Agency acknowledges, agrees and undertakes to assure that no member of Agency's
        board or council, nor Agency's mayor, when such member or mayor is a practicing
        attorney,   nor Agency's attorney nor any member              of the law firm of Agency's attorney,
        board or council member, or mayor, will represent any party, except Agency, against the
        State of Oregon,    its employees or contractors, in any matter arising from or related to
        the Project which is the subject of this Agreement.

F. Transfer of Right of Way to State

   When right of way is being acquired in Agency’s name, Agency agrees to transfer and State
   agrees to accept all right of way acquired on the State highway. The specific method of
                                                                                                      -13-
32561
  conveyance will be determined by the Agency and the State at the time of transfer and shall
  be coordinated by the State’s Region Right of Way Manager. Agency agrees to provide the
  State all information and file documentation the State deems necessary to integrate the
  right of way into the State’s highway system. At a minimum, this includes: copies of all
  recorded conveyance documents used to vest title in the name of the Agency during the
  right of way acquisition process, and the Agency's Final Report or Summary Report for
  each acquisition file that reflects the terms of the acquisition and all agreements with the
  property owner(s).

G. Transfer of Right of Way to Agency

  When right of way is being acquired in State’s name, State agrees to transfer and Agency
  agrees to accept all right of way acquired on the Agency’s facility, subject to concurrence
  from FHWA at the time of the transfer. The specific method of conveyance will be
  determined by the State and the Agency at the time of transfer and shall be coordinated
  by the State’s Region Right of Way Manager.         If requested, State agrees to provide
  Agency information and file documentation associated with the transfer.




                                                                                         -14-
32561
            RESOLUTION EXERCISING THE POWER OF EMINENT DOMAIN EXHIBIT D
                                 Right of Way Services



WHEREAS         (insert title of agency) may exercise the power of eminent domain pursuant to (Agency's
charter)      (statutes   conferring     authority)    and   the    Law   of the     State    of Oregon   generally,   when    the
exercise of such power is deemed necessary by the (insert title of agency)’s governing                                   body to
accomplish public purposes for which (insert title of agency) has responsibility;

WHEREAS (insert title of agency) has the responsibility of providing                            safe transportation    routes for
commerce, convenience and to adequately serve the traveling public;

WHEREAS the project or projects known as (insert Project name) have been planned in accordance
with appropriate engineering standards for the construction, maintenance or improvement of said
transportation infrastructure such that property damage                    is minimized, transportation promoted, travel
safeguarded; and

WHEREAS          to accomplish     the    project     or projects     set forth     above     it is necessary   to acquire     the
interests in the property described in “Exhibit A,” attached to this resolution and, by this reference
incorporated herein; now, therefore

BE IT HEREBY RESOLVED by (Agency's Council, Commission, or Board)

1.   The foregoing statements of authority and need are, in fact, the case.                        The project or projects for
     which the property is required and is being acquired are necessary in the public interest, and the
     same have been planned, designed, located, and will be constructed in                             a manner which will be
     most compatible with the greatest public good and the least private injury;

2.   The power of eminent domain is hereby exercised with respect to each of the interests in property
     described in Exhibit A. Each is acquired subject to payment of just compensation and subject to
     procedural requirements of Oregon law;

3.   The (insert title of agency)’s staff and the (Agency's Attorney, Counsel, or District's Counsel                           (or)
     (The     Oregon      Department      of Transportation         and   the      Attorney    General)   are   authorized    and
     requested to attempt to agree with the owner and other persons in interest as to the
     compensation to be paid for each acquisition, and, in the event that no satisfactory agreement
     can be reached, to commence and prosecute such condemnation proceedings as may be
     necessary to finally determine just compensation or any other issue appropriate to be determined
     by a court in connection with the acquisition. This authorization is not intended to expand the
     jurisdiction of any court to decide matters determined above or determinable by the (Agency's
     Council, Commission, or Board).

4.   (insert title of agency) expressly reserves its jurisdiction to determine the necessity or propriety of
     any acquisition, its quantity, quality, or locality, and to change or abandon any acquisition.

            DATED this           day of                               , 20



                                                                                                                             -15-
 32561
