©               NORTH      CLAC KAMAS                                                 Scott Archer, Director
                PARKS & RECREATION DISTRICT                               North Clackamas Parks and Recreation District
                                                                                     150 Beavercreek Road
                            Administration                                           Oregon City, OR 97045



    June 20, 2019

    Board of County Commissioners
    Clackamas County
    Board of North Clackamas          Parks and   Recreation   District

    Members     of the Board:

                    Approval of an Intergovernmental Agreement with City of Milwaukie
                            for Creation of a Framework Plan for Dogwood Park

                         Outlines responsibilities and requirements of both the City and the
     Purpose/Outcomes | District in the City-led process to create a Framework Plan for Dogwood
                         Park as part of the South Downtown Revitalization Project.
     Dollar Amount and | $10,000 one-time payment, ongoing maintenance costs once project is
     Fiscal Impact       completed.
     Funding Source             NCPRD      Proposed Budget for FY 19-20 — General Fund
     Duration                   Through July 1, 2021
     Previous Board             N/A
     Action
     Strategic Plan             e     Build public trust through good government
     Alignment                  e     Ensure safe, healthy and secure communities
     Contact Person             Scott Archer, NCPRD       Director, 503-742-4421


    BACKGROUND:
    North Clackamas Parks and Recreation District (NCPRD), a division of Business & Community
    Services, is seeking approval of an Intergovernmental Agreement (IGA) with the City of Milwaukie
    (City) for creation of a framework plan for Dogwood Park (Park). The Park is a 1.06-acre park
    located at 11299 SE Main St, Milwaukie, OR 97222.

    All parks within the City of Milwaukie are owned by the City, and managed, maintained and
    operated by NCPRD through an existing IGA. The City is currently in the process of making
    significant development and right-of-way improvements adjacent to and within the existing Park;
    it is redeveloping its south downtown area including a new housing development and moving the
    Farmer's Market to Main Street. These changes will also impact Dogwood Park. By undertaking
    creation of a framework plan for the area, NCPRD and the City will determine and coordinate
    future enhancements to the Park and the adjacent properties. The City will manage the framework
    plan process.

    This agreement establishes the terms for both parties in supporting creation of a framework plan
    for the park. NCPRD will contribute $10,000 as a match to the City’s $10,000 contribution, that
    combined will be used to fund creation of the framework plan.

    County Counsel has reviewed and approved the language in this agreement.




           P (503)     742-4421       | F (503)   742-4349     | sarcher@ncprd.com        | ncprd.com
Page 2 of 2




RECOMMENDATION:
Staff recommend the Board approve this Intergovernmental Agreement between        North
Clackamas Parks and Recreation District (NCPRD) and City of Milwaukie for creation of a
framework plan for Dogwood Park.

ATTACHMENT:
Intergovernmental Agreement between City of Milwaukie and North         Clackamas   Parks   &
Recreation District for Creation of a Framework Plan for Dogwood Park


Respectfully submitted,




Scott Archer, Director
North Clackamas    Parks and   Recreation   District
                          INTERGOVERNMENTAL AGREEMENT BETWEEN
          CITY OF MILWAUKIE AND NORTH CLACKAMAS PARKS AND RECREATION DISTRICT
                   FOR CREATION OF A FRAMEWORK PLAN FOR DOGWOOD PARK


THIS INTERGOVERNMENTAL AGREEMENT (“Agreement”) is made and entered into by and
between the City of Milwaukie (“City”),       a municipal corporation, and the North Clackamas Parks
and Recreation District (“District”),   a county service district formed under ORS Chapter 451,
effective as of the last date of signature indicated below (“Effective Date”).

                                                RECITALS

     A.   Dogwood Park is a city park in downtown Milwaukie owned by the City and operated
          and maintained by the District; and

     B.   City is in the process of redevelopment of its downtown, including land adjacent to
          Dogwood     Park; and

     C.   Development by the City of land adjacent to Dogwood Park will require certain
          enhancements to the park and provides a good opportunity for the City and District to
          work collaboratively to reevaluate and update the infrastructure and layout of Dogwood
          Park; and

     D.   In order to facilitate such an endeavor, a framework plan is necessary to establish the
          responsibilities of City and District regarding the reevaluation and update of Dogwood
          Park; and

     E.   To fund the development of a framework plan for Dogwood         Park, District agrees to
          transfer $10,000 to the City; and
     F.   City agrees to use the $10,000 transferred by District to develop a framework plan for
          Dogwood     Park; and

     G.   By the authority granted in Oregon Revised Statues (ORS) 190.010 et seq., local
          government agencies may enter into cooperative agreements with other units of local
          government to further economy and efficiency, on terms and conditions.

NOW THEREFORE, it is agreed by and between City and District as follows:

                                        TERMS    OF AGREEMENT

1.   Description of Agreement.     District shall transfer $10,000 to the City for its use for
     professional services to develop a framework plan for Dogwood         Park. The framework plan
     will outline new enhancements for Dogwood        Park and coordinate with uses for the adjacent




Dogwood    Park
Intergovernmental Agreement
     development and right-of-way.        The outcome of the framework plan will inform City and
     District about responsibilities for infrastructure defined in the framework plan.

2.   Effective Date, Duration, and Termination. This Agreement shall become effective on the date all
     required signatures are obtained and shall expire on July 1, 2021 unless extended or otherwise
     terminated as follows:


             a.   This Agreement may be suspended or terminated prior to the expiration of any
                  term by:
                     i.   Written notice provided, or without cause, by either party no less than 90
                          days prior to the date of termination;
                    ii.   Written notice, in the case of a default under the terms of this Agreement,
                          giving no less than 21 days’ notice of the alleged default, with opportunity
                          to cure within the 21-day period; or
                   iii.   Mutual written agreement by the City and District.
             b.   Termination of this Agreement shall not discharge the obligations of the District
                  accrued prior to termination.
             c.   If this Agreement is terminated for any reason, the indemnity obligations in
                  Paragraph __       shall survive.


3.   Amendment       Provisions. The terms of this Agreement may be amended         by mutual
     agreement of the parties. Any amendment shall be in writing, shall refer specifically to this
     Agreement, and shall be executed by the parties.

4.   Compliance with Applicable Law. City and District will comply with all federal, state and
     local laws, regulations, executive orders and ordinances applicable to the services provided
     under this Agreement. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, City and District
     expressly agree to comply with (i) Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964; (ii) Section V or the
     Rehabilitation Act of 1973; (iii) the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 and ORS 659.425;
     (iv) the Fair Labor Standards Act; (v) the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970; (vi) all
     regulations and administrative rules established pursuant to the foregoing laws; and (vii) all
     other applicable requirements of federal and state civil rights and rehabilitation statutes,
     rules and regulations.


5.   Indemnification.      Subject to the Oregon Constitution and the limits of the Oregon Tort
     Claims Act, each party agrees to indemnify, defend and hold harmless the other party and
     its officers, agents, employees and elected officials from any and all liability, loss, and costs,
     except for attorney’s fees as described in paragraph 6 below, arising out of or resulting from
     the acts of their officers, agents, employees, and elected officials, including intentional or
     willful misconduct, in the performance of this Agreement.



Dogwood   Park
Intergovernmental Agreement
6.   Notice.      Any notice required or permitted to be given shall be given in writing, shall be
     effective when actually received, and may be given by email, hand delivery, or by mail
     delivery addressed to the parties as follows:


     Milwaukie:
     City Liaison
     Leila Aman
     10722 SE Main Street
     Milwaukie, Oregon 97222
     Email: amanl|@milwaukieoregon.gov


     District:
     District Liaison
     Kathyrn Krygier
     150 Beavercreek Road
     Oregon City, OR 97045
     Email: kkrygier@ncprd.com


     These addresses may be changed by written notice to the other parties.


     Attorney Fees.       In the event an action, lawsuit or proceeding, including appeal therefrom, is
     brought for failure to fulfill or comply with any of the terms of this Agreement, each party
     shall be responsible for their own attorney fees, expenses, costs and disbursements for said
     action, lawsuit, proceeding or appeal.

     No Waiver. The failure by any party to enforce any provision of this Agreement shall not
     constitute a waiver by that party of that provision or of any other provision of this
     Agreement.


     Severability. Should any provision or provisions of this Agreement be construed by a court
     of competent jurisdiction to be void, invalid or unenforceable, such construction shall affect
     only the provision or provisions so construed, and shall not affect, impair or invalidate any of
     the other provisions of this Agreement which shall remain in full force and effect.


10. Applicable Law.        This Agreement shall be governed by and construed in accordance with
     the laws of the State of Oregon.

11. Merger.       This writing is intended both as the final expression of the Agreement between the
     parties with respect to the included terms and as a complete and exclusive statement of the
     terms of the Agreement.        No modification of this Agreement shall be effective unless and
     until it is made in writing and signed by both parties.
Dogwood    Park
Intergovernmental Agreement
12. Counterparts. This Agreement may be executed in two or more counterparts, each of
    which shall be deemed an original, but all of which together shall constitute one and the
    same instrument.


13. Binding Effect. This Agreement constitutes the entire agreement between City and District
    on the subject matter hereof.   There are no understandings, agreements, or
    representations, oral or written, not specified herein regarding this Agreement.    No waiver,
    consent, modification or change of the terms of this Agreement will bind either party unless
    in writing and signed by all parties and all necessary approvals have been obtained.       Such
    waiver, consent, modification or change, if made, will be effective only in the specific
    instances and for the specific purpose given. This Agreement is personal to City and District
    and is not intended to confer upon any other person or entity any rights or remedies
    whatsoever.

The parties by execution of this Agreement, hereby acknowledge that each has the authority to
sign and bind City and District respectfully and that each party shall be bound by its terms and
conditions.



CITY OF MILWAUKIE




Ann Ober, City Manager                                               Date
City of Milwaukie




NORTH CLACKAMAS        PARKS AND RECREATION DISTRICT




Jim Bernard, Chair                                                   Date
Board of Clackamas County Commissioners,
acting as the Governing Board for North Clackamas Parks & Recreation District




Dogwood   Park
Intergovernmental Agreement
