                                                                                                              ewe   NT Oe




 U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development                                                            ly             5
                                                                                                             con DEV ot

                                                    Region VIII,D                    Phone: 1-800-543-9378
 Homeownership       Center                         1670 Broadway Street             Fax: 303-672-5040
 Director’s Office                                  Denver, Colorado 80202-4801      Web: www.hud.gov




To.             ||                                                                March 5, 2024
Mr. Daniel -




Dear Mr. Ley,

        The U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (“HUD”’) is authorized by
regulation to issue a limited denial of participation (“LDP”) to any participant in its programs
whenever the Department has adequate evidence of cause for such an action. The purpose of this
letter is to notify you that HUD has adequate evidence from which to conclude that you should be
excluded immediately from direct or indirect participation in all programs under the jurisdiction of
the Department's Assistant Secretary for Housing.          Pursuant to 2 C.F.R. §§ 2424.1110(a)(2), (4)
and (7), the reasons for issuing this LDP are as follows: irregularities in your past performance in a
HUD program; failure to honor your contractual obligations; and making a false certification in
connection with a HUD program.

      The following specific actions constitute the evidence supporting these conclusions:

       On or about May        18, 2023,   you signed a Sales Contract to purchase          a HUD-owned property
       ‘ocated :t Si                                                              ject property”) for
       $102,518. At paragraph 8 on the Sales Contract, you indicated that you were buying as an
       owner-occupant. On the same day, you signed an Individual Owner-Occupant Certification
       Addendum to the Sales Contract stating that you would occupy the subject property as your
       primary residence for at least 12 months. The Sales Contract is enclosed as Exhibit A and
       the Individual Owner-Occupant Certification Addendum is enclosed as Exhibit B.

       The sale of the subject property closed, as a cash purchase, on June 14, 2023, as
       shown by the Settlement Statement, Exhibit C.

       It    appears evident that your primary residence and mailing address is P|
       Co                                         the same address you had when you
       purchased the subject property. You continue to claim the homestead exemption
       for a                       as shown on the Natchitoches Assessor 2024 Assessment
       Listing, Exhibit D. It has now been approximately nine months since you
       purchased the subject property, yet the subject property is still not your primary
       residence.
         Based on the above facts, we conclude that at the time of closing on the subject property
that you did not intend to occupy the subject property as your primary residence. You made a false
certification in connection with a HUD program and did not honor your contractual obligations to
live in the property as your primary residence for 12 months. These actions thwarted the efforts of
legitimate owner-occupants to purchase an affordable home and for legitimate investors (1.e., those
willing to wait out the owner-occupant bid period to pass without an offer) to have their chance to
bid as honest investors. Together, your actions are considered an irregularity. Therefore, there is
adequate evidence to issue an LDP to you.

       This LDP is effective as of the date of this notice and will remain in effect for a period of one
year or such shorter period as may be approved by this Department based upon resolution of the
grounds for the denial. During this time, you are prohibited from participating in all programs
under the jurisdiction of the Department's Assistant Secretary for Housing.

       Under the LDP regulations, participation in these programs is defined as receipt of any
benefit or financial assistance through grants, contractual arrangements, loan guarantees, insurance,
or procurement contracts. 2 C.F.R. § 2424.1140(b). This broad definition of participation means
that you may not participate in any program under the jurisdiction of the Department's Assistant
Secretary for Housing in virtually any capacity including, but not limited to, borrower, real estate
agent or broker, purchaser of a HUD-held property or any property with a HUD-insured or
Secretary-held mortgage, fee appraiser, consultant, or any other business relationship with a
participant in such programs.

      This LDP extends to the jurisdiction of this office, which includes the States of Arkansas,
Colorado, Iowa, Kansas, Louisiana, Minnesota, Missouri, Montana, Nebraska, New Mexico, North
Dakota, Oklahoma, South Dakota, Texas, Utah, Wisconsin, and Wyoming. You are advised,
however, that other offices of HUD are notified of our action and may act accordingly.
See 2 C.F.R. § 2424.1110(c).

       You may request an informal conference for reconsideration of this action by writing to this
office within 30 days of your receipt of this notice. If an informal conference is requested, you
have a right to have it held within 15 days of the Department’s receipt of the request. The
conference may be held in person or telephonically at the Department’s discretion. At the
conference, you may be represented by counsel and may present all relevant information and
materials to the official designated to conduct the conference. The Department will advise you in
writing of its reconsideration decision no later than 20 days after the conference or 20 days after
receipt of any materials which you are allowed to submit, whichever is later.

       If the post-conference decision modifies or affirms the LDP, you may request a formal
hearing before a Departmental hearing officer pursuant to 2 C.F.R. § 2424.1130(a). A written
request for a formal hearing must be submitted to the address below within 30 days of receiving the
post-conference notice.

       You may also request a formal hearing instead of the informal conference, by submitting a
written request for the hearing within 30 days of your receipt of this notice. A request for a formal
hearing must be sent to:
               Debarment Docket Clerk
               U.S. Department of Housing & Urban Development
               451 Seventh Street, SW
               B-133 Portals 200
               Washington, DC 20410-0500

        This notice shall serve as the Department's complaint in any formal hearing in this matter.
You can find the regulations regarding limited denials of participation at 2 CFR Part 2424,
Subpart J, and the hearing process regulations at 24 CFR Part 26. All regulations are available
online at www.ecir.gov.

        This LDP does not prevent the Department or another entity from seeking other remedies
against you under other applicable federal, state or local statutes.

      HUD ’s    contact in Denver with regard to this letter is Laura Bullock, Director, Quality
Assurance Division, at iii
                                           Sincerely,




                                           Amy Trujillo
                                           Director
                                           Denver Single Family Homeownership Center

Enclosures
