        THE CASE FOR LINKING NONECONOMIC DAMAGES                               IN
             EMPLOYMENT CLAIMS TO TITLE VII CAPS

                                    By Timothy Rote



Under the laws enforced by EEOC, it is illegal to discriminate against someone
(applicant or employee) because of that person's race, color, religion, sex
(including gender identity, sexual orientation, and pregnancy), national origin,
age (40 or older), disability or genetic information. It is also illegal to retaliate
against a person because he or she complained about discrimination, filed a
charge of discrimination, or participated in an employment discrimination
investigation or lawsuit.
The law forbids discrimination in every aspect of employment.

There is a range of relief available in a retaliation case:

Preliminary relief. The EEOC has the authority to sue for temporary or preliminary
relief while completing its processing of a retaliation charge. This asks the court to
stop retaliation before it occurs or continues.

Compensatory and punitive damages. Money damages are paid to compensate the
victim and to punish the employer for retaliation. However, punitive damages are
only available against private employers, not against the government.

Other Relief. Under all the statutes enforced by the EEOC, relief may also include
equitable relief such as back pay, front pay, or reinstatement into a job. The
Commission also seeks changes in employer policies and procedures, managerial
training, reporting to the Commission, and other measures designed to prevent
violations and promote future compliance with the law.

                    Remedies For Employment Discrimination

Whenever discrimination is found, the goal of the law is to put the victim of
discrimination in the same position (or nearly the same) that he or she would have
been if the discrimination had never occurred.

The types of relief will depend upon the discriminatory action and the effect it had
on the victim. For example, if someone is not selected for a job or a promotion
because of discrimination, the remedy may include placement in the job and/or
back pay and benefits the person would have received.

The employer also will be required to stop any discriminatory practices and take
steps to prevent discrimination in the future.

A victim of discrimination also may be able to recover attorney's fees, expert
witness fees, and court costs.

Remedies May Include Compensatory & Punitive Damages

Compensatory and punitive damages may be awarded in cases involving
intentional discrimination based on a person's race, color, national origin, sex
(including pregnancy, gender identity, and sexual orientation), religion, disability,
or genetic information.

Compensatory damages pay victims for out-of-pocket expenses caused by the
discrimination (such as costs associated with a job search or medical expenses) and
compensate them for any emotional harm suffered (such as mental anguish,
inconvenience, or loss of enjoyment of life).

Punitive damages may be awarded to punish an employer who has committed an
especially malicious or reckless act of discrimination.

Limits On Compensatory & Punitive Damages

There are limits on the amount of compensatory and punitive damages a person
can recover. These limits vary depending on the size of the employer:

   ¢   Foremployers with 15-100 employees, the limit is $50,000.

   ¢   Foremployers with 101-200 employees, the limit is $100,000.

   ¢   Foremployers with 201-500 employees, the limit is $200,000.

   ¢   Foremployers with more than 500 employees, the limit is $300,000.



The award of noneconomic damages is intended to compensate, while punitive
damages are intended to punish, but not to destroy an employer.
               OREGONS      CAP ON NONECONMIC             DAMAGES

Oregon’s cap on noneconomic damages on employment claims is $500,000.

Multnomah County juries commonly award damages to employee litigants that are
ten times higher than the Title VII caps and ten times higher than Oregon’s Bureau
of Labor and Industry (BOLI) awards.

Juries also find in favor of the employee 85% of the time and are reversed on
appeal more than 75% of the time.

Unfortunately jurors all too often see this as a lottery opportunity and a form of
punishment even when punitive damages are not allowed.

Like most states Oregon has a robust small business community, which represents
disproportionately high percentage of overall employment. But unlike big
businesses, very few small businesses have equity and capital anywhere near
$500,000.

Title VII remedies addresses this very issue by caping damages based on employee
size and while imperfect, it is a good place to start for Oregon.



 LITIGATION IS AN IMPERFECT VEHICLE AND WE MUST BE EVER
                   CAUTIOUS OF ITS ABUSE

This author can offer you a perspective of how imperfect and costly can be
between two parties, over 15 years.

In 2003 an IT manager for one of my companies attempted to extort a raise and to
support that extortion he withheld computer programming owned by his employer.
By withheld programming I mean that the employee denied its existence and no
trace of known prior programs and code, necessary to process and report daily
100,000 bits of data.

After he was fired he filed a complaint with the ODJ and me claiming his employer
was over-billing clients. The ODJ requested evidence. No evidence was provided
and the ODJ shut down its investigation. The evidence offered by the employee
was a Spreadsheet showing adjustments to hours, no clients were identified, the
source of the spreadsheet was identified by the employee as from an email the
employee received, the email was never provided, the recipients of the email never
identified and the employee’s email account absent from the computer and hard
drive he returned on his last day. The spreadsheet alleged $400 in adjustments by a
company that generated $5 Million a year in revenue. And I found no one to
corroborate the $400 in adjustments or the spreadsheet.

The employee remained committed to not providing the software needed to process
daily reports and after his last day the employer had to shut down for ten days to
recreate the programming. Later we would find the programming on a hard drive
the former employee had returned on his day. That hard drive had been reformatted
by the employee, that code destroyed.

There were a number of legal maneuvers by opposing counsel and the long and
short of this is that it took seven years to get this case to arbitration at a cost of
three years of profit.

Not long after the arbitration started I discovered the arbitrator and opposing
counsel had been partners together for 14 years. Neither had disclosed the conflict.
But upon raising the conflict, the arbitrator resigned. His former partner said he
could not do so and so he agreed to return over our objections. Upon returning he
refused to consider our evidence of more than 1,000 documents, the testimony of
ten witnesses and the reports and testimony of three computer forensic experts.

This story has continued with the litigation. The litigants were exposed. A short
time after the arbitrator ignored our evidence he became Chairman of the
Disciplinary Board of the Oregon State Bar. Our complaints to the OSBar went to
him and did not see the light of day thereafter.

The former IT manager lives in New Jersey and worked from there during his
tenure as an employee for one of my companies. He believes Oregon is a much
better place to litigate employee claims than New Jersey.
This experience would be hard on any small business. We can curb this abuse by
linking noneconomic damage awards in employment cases to the Title VII caps on
compensatory and punitive damages.

The reasoning behind the caps is to punish but not destroy the employer. Let’s
bring reason back into the equation and amend HB 2014 to cap damages in
employment claims following the Title VII mandates.
