                                                                                                                                                                          Agenda/Notes
                                                                                            Office of Governor Kotek — Racial Justice Council (RJC)
                                                                                                                  January 16, 2025 — Zoom Webinar
                                                                                                                                      3:00-5:00 p.m.

CHAIR
                                  Governor Tina Kotek

MEMBERS
                                  Ana Molina                                      Jesse Beason                                                           Marisa/Mariesa Zapata
 PPS | P< | P< | <1 P< |< | PS




                                                                                                                       PPS | PT P< | P< | P< |
                                  Angela Uherbelau                                Jimmy Howard                                                           Mark Jackson


                                                                     ><) ><] P<
                                                                    [P<]
                                  Annie Valtierra-Sanchez                         Josie Silverman-Mendez                                                 Paul Solomon
                                  Cynthia Richardson                              Kim McCarty                                                            Reyna Lopez
                                  James Cador                                     Latiffe Amado                                                          Shay Huber
                                  Janice Mason                                    Marcus C Mundy                                                         Tristen Edwards
                                  James Parker                                    Maria Elena Guerra “Meg”                                               Tiffany Monroe
                                                                    MIPS]



                                  Jenny Pool Radway                               Marin Arreola


OTHER                               ATTENDEES
                                  Andre Bealer                                    Johnna Timmes                                                          Shana McConville




                                                                                                                         PK [PS | PT P< | P< | P< | P<
                                  Ami Goswami                                     Johnna Papaefthimiou                                                   Taylor Smiley Wolfe
                                  Bob Livingston                                  Karin Power                                                            Valerie Colas
                                  Bryan Longoria                                  Kelly Brooks                                                           Vince Porter
                                  Chris Warner                                    Kristina Narayan                                                       Yasmin   Solorio
                                  Doug Grafe                                      Matthew Tschabold                                                      Leah Feldon
                                  Danny Moran                                     Maya Crawford Peacock                                                  Kate Nass
                                  Javier Cervantes                                Morgan Gratz-Weiser
                                  Jesse Hyatt                                     Rachael Moser




                                 Topic/Lead                                             Notes/Main Points                                                                   Decisions/
                                                                                                                                                                          Action Items
 Welcome                                                               Javier calls for roll call and initiates meeting.
 Introductions
 Roll Call
                                                                Johnna Timmes and Ami Goswami provide introduction.
 New Staff
 Presentation
                                                     Annie: What are “Marginalized organizations”?
 Education Initiative
 Director,                            Johnna         Ami: Working with organizations like Naya, Latino Network, IRCO. Working
 Timmes
                                                     with populations that really need a voice.

 Community
 Engagement
 Manager, Ami
 Goswami



                                                                         Director Leah Feldon provides introduction.
 Director of DEQ
 Presentation
                                                     Director Feldon: Lived in Ohio. Sociology major. Found myself coming to
 Director, Leah                                      Oregon for environmental work. Been at DEQ for 19 years, getting to know
                     more people and its refreshing to see the new ways of thinking people are
                     brining to the agency. Lots of people come to DEQ because they are excited for
                     the mission and environmental protection. Thers an obvious strong tie between
                     environmental work and racial justice and that is environmental justice.

                     Marin: What are your priorities this year as an agency?

                     Director Feldon: When it comes to wildfire, there’s an expectation that our
                     agencies are working together to respond and prepare for wildfires. DEQ has an
                     active role in monitoring smoke and informing communities when they’re going
                     to, or experiencing, unhealthy air. DEQ is largely that smoke impact. We want to
                     try to do more going forward in assisting communities prepared, more on the
                     smoke side. Knowing when there’s unhealthy smoke coming or know what to do
                     with their home or how to keep fresh air circulating. One of DEQ’s mandates
                     and a priority for us is ensuring Oregon meets federal air quality standards.
                     Certain permits under Clean Air Act and the state gets to decide what the plan
                     here is.

                     Governor: When bad things happen, theirs multiple agencies coming together.
                     And these are always good questions to elaborate on.

                     Kim: What communication or authorities do you have with utility companies
                     who are often responsible for these fires?

                     Director Feldon: Great question. As far as planning black outs, burn outs, or
                     etc.. DEQ does not have jurisdiction. The Public Utility Commission specifically
                     regulates rates and then there's requirements in terms of how they're going to
                     derive their energy. In terms of DEQ's role, we regulate the emissions from
                     utilities. Whatever emissions come out of combustion or creating their energy,
                     we regulate those emissions.

Sanctuary Promise
Training for State   Jonna: | advise the Governor on emergencies and Just-In-Time training. Oregon
Employees            was the first Sanctuary State. Almost had unanimous approval when passed. The
State Resilience     law has been in place for a long time, was re-upped in 2021. Never had a
Officer, Jonna       statewide training that was uniform across state agencies on how to apply it — in
Papaefthimiou        part is because how and how often certain agencies encounter it.

                     Given for changes that are coming fast, we need to ensure every state employee
                     is familiar with the law and knows how to follow it.

                     For Oregon public employees, if they receive a request form federal law
                     enforcement, they have to report it and share with DOJ. Then they have to deny
                     that request unless there is a court order that specifies. We are providing a short
                     training that will roll out tomorrow, Friday afternoon.

                     The training directs people to ask questions, who needs the information, and
                     acknowledge it is a consequential decision and to step away to confirm with your
                     manager and make a decision together if you need to respond right away, or at
                     all.
                     The training will be mandated to complete in 30 days. This is going to all
                     executive branch employees. We anticipate feedback from employees and
                     agencies. Were standing in a learning place and will take feedback and adjust.
                     Second module will be sent out later this year after adjustments.

                     Marin: Is this this going to be available for Boards and Commissions?

                     Jonna: Yes, it will be provided to all.
                      Marin: For contractors, does that include anyone who has contracts with the
                      state?

                      Jonna: Its clear that the law applies to them, training will roll out with them
                      soon. For example, those on call, or those who work both with federal and state,
                      we are trying to tea up those one-off situations and adjusting that.

                      Josie: We have a great focus with Healthier Oregon. Lots of concerns with data
                      sharing with federal government and how we get out in front of how information
                      is being shared. Not exactly tied to sanctuary laws but are hoping for more
                      community outreach.

                      Jonna: Folks at DAS are working with DOJ and civil rights division. There
                      should be alignment in terms of message. We need so many different messengers
                      but having that core coming from DOJ is super helpful. Goal is for people to
                      know obligations under the law and reaffirm the core value for the state and
                      maintain trust and community.

                      Governor: Making sure that as a state, particularly DOJ, communities have
                      accurate information being shared out. Be careful not to be giving legal advice
                      and ensuring people know their rights. Theres definitely lots of concern. Thanks
                      for your questions. Will keep you in the loop with how things are going.


                      Governor: Want to give everyone a thank you for the work on the GRB. The
GRB/RJC
                      budget is now out. Legislative session officially starts work next Tuesday.
Priorities Overview
                      Danny will share on process of the session and how we can be involved.

                              Javier shares   “RJC GRB and RJC Priorities Doc with Amounts”

                      Angela: Can you speak on more on the evaluation for summer learning? Curious
                      on what is going to be evaluated and what lens will be used. Especially for
                      longstanding neglect for some of our populations.

                      Governor: Have not had the chance to read the summer learning report. When
                      the summer money was allocated, there was a report requested. We will get back
                      to you on that answer.

                      Marin: Behavioral health has a 50-million-dollar allotment. Is that money
                      between OHA and the HECC?

                      Governor: Yes, it is. HECC to work with community colleges to build pipelines
                      for programs to help build workplans. Evenly split between OHA and HECC.

                      Meg: On economic opportunity, I don’t see anything in infrastructure. I believe
                      Oregon Business Development was supposed to get money for affordable
                      housing.

                      Governor: Yes, that is to continue technical assistance program. Jan might know
                      more about that. There is money on the housing list for infrastructure.

                      Meg: Thank you I see it on number four.

                      Governor: Yes, | think that’s it, thank you.

                      Jan: The technical assistance is specifically (small business tech assistance
                      program) has been a program for a number of year but due to covid was
                      unfunded. Was not prioritized. Thanks, governor, for including it in your
                      recommended budget. Last batch was over 9 million. Hopefully will create
                      evergreen programs for continuous service and overall ecosystem that is
                      necessary and needed in our state.

                      Governor: Playing a lot of catch up for items that were one-time funded.

                      Jenny: With HECC piece, Future Ready Oregon — are you hoping it will offer
                      new iterations of grant application to continue workforce development work
                      youve been doing?

                      Governor: Don’t believe we’ll see a lot of new. Kate, do you remember money
                      on future ready?

                      Kate: This is basically making sure we do everything that was already allocated.
                      Timing issue of when money gets out the door. This is not new and making sure
                      they can continue the work they have been doing.

                      Jenny: Summer learning allocations, does this include summer programs?

                      Governor: Hoping to continue all of those programs.

                      Kate: This list is all general fund or corporate activity tax. Theres a lot on what
                      we had to balance but it’s not related to summer learning.

                      Governor: We got 30, but we had asked for 50. This is all general fund and not
                      SSA fund.

                      Jenny: Summer learning is working worth school districts or CBO as well. We
                      are the only organization, including school districts, who does the summer
                      learning piece we apply for as a CBO.

                      Governor: School district specific. Frankly not as much as I would like to see.
                      Should advocate with legislators on these. On more thing on Future Ready.
                      There will be a mid-biennial adjustment in 2026 and maybe that’s another
                      opportunity to bump or have a conversation about.

                      Jan: Just to share with the group we have lifted up a workgroup around Future
                      Ready. Continuing conversation. We are meeting with Jennifer Purcell to keep
                      the work going. If you’re interested in attending, please let Andre or Marin
                      know.

                      Meg: I would like to join.

                      Jan: Great.


Legislative Process   Danny: My focus areas tend to be education, public safety, wildfire and a few         Schedule
                      other areas. A quick update on where we are with legislative session, last Friday     OLIS
Overview
                      marked the first time that all pre session file bills posted on the Oregon            training.
Deputy Legislative    legislative website, also known as OLIS. Tomorrow is the final deadline for
Director, Danny       legislators to submit a request to the legislative council to have legislation
Moran                 drafted. They can introduce bills. The capitol is still under construction and will
                      continue to be very tight on space. Virtual options to still engage should in-
                      person be limited.

                      It's important to note in your mind both what you want to see past this session
                      and flagging bills that may be of concern that you do not want to see pass.
                      Noting when you see language early in the process that can be problematic for
                      one reason or another so there's positive advocacy. You're encouraged to always
                      reach out to the governor's office legislative team when there's interest in
                      engaging as a council and if you want more information on what you're hearing.
Please never hesitate to reach out we're always happy to have a conversation.
Some important dates are:

        Jan. 17 (Fri.) - Deadline for Legislators to request new LCs
        Jan. 21 (Tues.) - 2025 Legislative Session Begins
        Feb. 25 (Tues.) - Deadline for introducing new bills
        Feb. 26 (Wed.) - March Revenue Forecast
        April 9 (Wed.) - First Chamber Deadline (Bills must be voted out of
        committee by this date or they die)
        May 14 (Wed.) - May Revenue Forecast
        May 23 (Fri.) - Second Chamber Deadline (Bills must be voted out of
        their second-chamber committee
        June 29 (Sun.) - Constitutional Sine Die (End of Session)


Marin: How do we work together to schedule time for advocacy work?

Danny: Will put my info in the chat, Danny MORAN@oregon.      gov. I can show
you how to utilize OLIS. You can get information on how to get an agenda or
notification on bills.

Marin: Would be wonderful if we can do a training.

Governor: We should do that. Reminder we are doing off-month check-in’s.

Danny: Will connect with Javier and Andre of when that works best.

Jan: It would be helpful for the group to have an understanding on lobbying.
What are priorities as a collective group we are in support of or tracking? Might
be helpful to also see if Minority Caucus could visit us in one of our meetings.
Also to give visibility to that group on RJC as a collective. There used to be a
cartoon on how a bill becomes a law in Oregon. If you have any cheat sheets on
that would be wonderful. Would be great to have dates as well in an email.

Tristen: Building off what Jan was saying about our list of priorities, I'm curious
if there is like a formal process that we need to go through to get like a formal
RJC endorsement? I remember in 2024 when we were working on the restorative
justice grant program funding, I gave a presentation and then wrote out
submitted a letter. Wondering if that was the formal process? How do you go
about saying the RJC endorses whatever issue that we're working on?

Governor: Really great question. We haven't formalized any, I think that was a
little of an ad hoc approach and I think it worked well. There's a lot that goes on
during session so we will get back to everyone on that. To Jan’s point, I don’t
think we will have enough time to get through it today - but what are the
priorities? Is it, do we want to formally say “these are our priorities” as a council
or do you want to do it more committee driven? Trying to figure that out I think
will be important.

Latiffe: Is bill tracker different than OLIS? Do they serve similar functions?

Governor: Those are different, now BillTracker is more of an internal system
that if you have access to, you can determine how to track legislation, upload
amendments, but that's an internal process that helps you all track the thousands
of bills that may be moving through the process. OLIS is all public. That is how
you will also see committee agendas post, that's where you'll be able to stream
different committee meetings, go back and look at archived meetings as well.
We will definitely set up time to train. There's a lot on there and it's not always
intuitive but it's something that once   you get the hang   of it, I do feel like it can
                      feel straightforward. We are really lucky in Oregon we have a really great
                      information system that once you get the hang of it really provides a lot of
                      transparency, so we'll make sure everyone gets their tutorial on that.

                      Ana: For committees tracking different bills that are interest of them, but it's
                      probably not a broader RJC priority, how do the committees engage? Are there
                      any guidelines around that? Let's say there's a hearing and you can provide
                      testimony for a bill that the committee's interested in, could they submit
                      testimony as a committee or should is it more like the individuals?

                      Danny: | think just being proactive in defining that difference if you’re
                      speaking in an individual capacity rather than an RJC capacity is really important
                      to limit confusion. I think it's easy to presume people know that “I'm just
                      speaking in my individual capacity” but I think that's something we all we
                      should not always assume. A process 1s being developed for the RJC council.
                      Until then, I think if you're working on individual bills, it would be good to just
                      clarify that you're maybe doing that in your individual capacity.

                      Andre: We will work on formalizing something for this group and will share
                      with you all.

                      Governor: Having the full Council make decisions will save us a lot of
                      heartache and I don't expect there'll be a lot of disagreement, it's just having that
                      the Council as a whole agrees on this is a good way to go.


                                          Criminal Justice Reform Committee— Tristen:
Committee Report
                      The delivery models are complex, as is the structure of public defense in Oregon.
Out (5 minute each)
                      Our next meeting will be focusing on learning more about what those things are.
                      Eventually we'll be bringing in some subject matter experts to talk to us about
                      the different delivery models so that we can put together a cohesive and
                      intelligent position on what we think is appropriate. We are supporting the
                      Justice Reinvestment Equity Program. The last thing that we are working on Is
                      support for the Aranda fix. An action item we have is to put together a one-pager
                      to make that comprehensible.

                                                  Education Committee — Mark:
                      Still trying to flush out our key priorities but we do have a real strong focus on
                      accountability with a few sub areas such as student outcomes, academic
                      achievement, wellness and belonging, and closing opportunity and achievement
                      gaps.

                                          Economic Opportunity Committee — James:
                      Requesting Business Oregon report to the EOC on a regular basis. One-pager on
                      the progress of outcomes. Making sure we continue to see alignment despite
                      national challenges. Future Ready Oregon and technical assistance, such as
                      semiconductor and clean tech. Looking at funding expiration and the need for a
                      vision to sustain and expand the program. Train more individuals from
                      underrepresented communities and integrate them to priority sectors, and
                      COBID certification reforms.

                                            Environmental Equity Committee — Ana:
                      We're excited to see the pesticide certification education in the governor's
                      budget. We learned from Chandra on the water package, and I think there is
                      interest from some of the committee members to kind of like look through that
                      list. For water equity, how we can keep track of that bill or if there's any support
                      needed. Checking in on community resilience hubs and who was awarded grants.
                      ODOE will talk to us on their priorities and how they intersect with the
                      committee.
                                 Health Equity and Human Services Committee — Josie:
                    Areas of focus for our committee are behavioral health, access, traditional health
                    workers, and CCO 3.0 procurement. We have outlined a work plan for the next
                    year and assigned some leads/volunteers for those priority areas. The guidance
                    around to what extent do we carry those priorities forward as a committee as
                    opposed to an alignment with the RJC is going to be needed guidance. Very
                    encouraging to see a lot of folks volunteer to lean in and those areas.

                                  Housing and Homelessness Committee — Kim and Meg:
                    Kim: The preservation of Oregon’s existing affordable housing with the props
                    519 and 20. Focused on hearing from OHCS and their focus on racial equity.
                    Culturally responsive property management is especially important. Tribal
                    homelessness investments, eviction prevention, and rehousing and sustaining
                    shelters is especially important -we hope to be working more on that.
                    Homeownership preservation is another priority especially as it pertains to
                    BIPOC housing providers and support of the homeownership coalition. That also
                    includes down payment assistance.

                    Meg: Let's keep in mind that none of the work in housing can be done if we don't
                    work all together, all these different committees are very important for sustaining
                    housing. We can put people in housing but if we don't provide the resources - I'm
                    talking about education, workforce, mental health, and health in general this
                    wouldn't be possible. Want to highlight support cultural specific organizations
                    doing culturally competent property management.



Racial Justice
                    Governor: Its important for the council to have a workplan. Are there legislative     Prioritizations
Council Work Plan
                    priorities, goals, objectives, timelines that you'd like to see? Who will be the      and
Priorities
                    leads on those responsibilities. Where do we want to be in December as a group.       endorsements
                    This is an open forum, we’ll take notes and come back with the workplan for the       for February
Discussion
                    year.                                                                                 meeting.

                    Latiffe: Would be interested in what are the measures of success to make or
                    continue those recommendations for next year, based on what we were able to
                    continue or not. What are we trying to achieve.

                    Governor: Yes, and how do we quantify that.

                    Annie: The council is made up of people outside of your office — we have
                    regional touch, or entity touches and can bring the perspective outside the office.
                    For me that’s important in terms of how we create systemic shift in racial equity
                    and how we advocate across the state that we can share with other members and
                    what it looks like. Because there are different communities we serve and
                    bringing that to you. Racial justice lens is important to keep in mind and is
                    valuable.

                    Angela: Want to echo and re-affirm comment earlier and focusing on outcomes.
                    I do think, yes, more money is always needed, and as a state spend a lot of
                    money and don’t get outcomes we need on the money we spend. Hope that as a
                    council tying that to accountability and how we embed that in our budget asks.

                    Jan: We need to safeguard out state from bad actors. For example, I’ve heard of
                    people starting litigation against businesses and POC business against
                    frivolously things and being cognizant, people aren’t talking about that. How do
                    we as RJC lift up our voice and exert support. This council needs a collective
                    voice, we need to give counsel to the committees. This council 1s really
                    important to speak in unison ad have insight and transparency in what we all are
                    supporting.
            James: Want to set a bold vision on where we want to be in 10 years. How does
            the state serve all Oregonians. How do we set very real and measurable
            objectives.

            Governor: Sometimes you need people to tell you how you can improve. To
            have this group is helpful and its nice to have allies in that work.

            Andre: Everyone is here because you are a leader and bring something of value.
            Don’t want people to shy away from brining ideas. Everyone should feel free to
            be yourself and bring what you need to bring to these conversations. Our team 1s
            here to support, to move your priorities forward. We have a challenge ahead of
            us, but this is where we can make positive changes.
            Governor: If you have items for the next agenda, please let us know and we can
            add those. We’ll definitely get the OLIS training set up. Next meeting is
            February 27" and we will go through prioritizations and endorsements. The full
            two hour RJC meeting is March with an invite to Speaker Fahey and President
            Wagner for updates.




Materials
                    e   RJC GRB    and RJC Priorities Doc with Amounts
