                                 U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT
                                                  WASHINGTON, DC 20410-7000


 OFFICE OF THE ASSISTANT SECRETARY FOR
 COMMUNITY PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT




 MEMORANDUM FOR:                     All Community Planning and Development Field Office Directors,
                                      Deputy Directors, and Program Managers

 FROM:                               John Gibbs, Acting Assistant Secretary for Community Planning
                                       and Development (D)

 SUBJECT:                            Availability of Waivers and Suspensions of the HOME Program
                                      Requirements in Response to COVID -19 Pandemic

      This memorandum provides guidance and the necessary statutory suspensions and regulatory
 waivers to enable HOME participating jurisdictions (PJs) affected by the Coronavirus Disease 2019
 (COVID-19) pandemic to use HOME funds to address immediate housing needs and to help
 prevent spread of the virus. The memorandum is divided into two sections. Section I addresses PJs
 located in areas covered by a major disaster declaration made under Title IV of the Robert T.
 Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act (Stafford Act). Section II describes
 regulatory waivers available to all HOME PJs, not just those included in a major disaster
 declaration. Provisions that are not specifically suspended or waived remain in full effect.

       CPD Field Offices shall inform PJs of the availability of these suspensions and waivers. A PJ
 that intends to implement the HOME statutory suspensions and/or regulatory waivers identified
 below, must send written notification via e-mail to the CPD Division in its local HUD Field Office
 before it implements the waiver or suspension. This written notification must identify which
 suspensions and/or waivers the PJ plans to use.

 Waiver and Suspension Authority

      Section 290 of the Cranston-Gonzalez National Affordable Housing Act of 1990 (NAHA), as
 amended, authorizes HUD to suspend HOME statutory requirements to assist PJs in addressing the
 damage in an area for which the President has issued a major disaster declaration under Title IV of
 the Stafford Act and to assist them in disaster recovery.

       Upon determination of good cause, in accordance with 24 CFR 5.110, HUD may waive
 regulatory provisions subject to statutory limitations. These provisions provide HUD the authority
 to make waiver determinations for the HOME program.

I. Statutory Suspensions and Regulatory Waivers Available Only to Major Disaster Areas

      Pursuant to the authority provided in Section 290 of NAHA and 24 CFR 5.110, I hereby find
 good cause, as stated in the justifications that follow, to suspend the statutory provisions and waive
 the related regulatory provisions described below for PJs covered by a major disaster declaration
 under Title IV of the Stafford Act as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. These suspensions and
 waivers are also available to any PJ that receives a major disaster declaration related to the COVID-



                                         www.hud.gov       espanol.hud.gov
                                                                                                    2


19 pandemic after the date of this memorandum. These suspensions and waivers are intended to
provide maximum administrative flexibility to PJs and better assist low-and very low-income
households as they deal with the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic.


1.   10% Administration and Planning Cap

     Requirement:     Limitation on the Use of HOME Funds for Administrative Costs

     Citations:       Section 212(c) of NAHA and 24 CFR 92.207

     Explanation:     These provisions limit the amount of HOME funds that a PJ may use for
                      administrative and planning costs associated with its HOME award. A PJ
                      may expend up to 10 percent of its annual HOME allocation, plus any
                      program income received, for administrative and planning costs. These
                      provisions are suspended to enable the PJ to expend up to 25 percent of its
                      FY 2019 and FY 2020 allocations and program income received for
                      administrative and planning costs.

     Justification:   This suspension is required to provide the PJ adequate funds to pay for the
                      increased cost of administering HOME-related activities to address the
                      effects of COVID-19, including attempts to prevent the spread of the
                      virus. The suspension is also intended to relieve the PJ of the burden of
                      identifying other general funds to pay HOME administrative and planning
                      costs at a time when the State and local tax revenues that provide general
                      operating revenue are decreasing.

     Applicability:   This suspension and waiver applies to the FY 2019 and FY 2020 HOME
                      allocations of PJs that are covered by a major disaster declaration.

2.   CHDO Set-aside Requirement

     Requirement:     Set-aside for Community Housing Development Organizations (CHDOs)

     Citations:       Section 231 of NAHA and 24 CFR 92.300(a)(1)

     Explanation:     These provisions establish a set-aside for CHDOs. The PJ must use 15
                      percent of each annual allocation of HOME funds only for housing owned,
                      developed, or sponsored by CHDOs.

     Justification:   The suspension and waiver are required to relieve the PJ of requirements that
                      may impede the obligation and use of funds to expeditiously assist families
                      affected by the COVID-19 pandemic. Suspension of the CHDO set-aside
                      will immediately make additional HOME funds available for activities such
                      as tenant-based rental assistance for which CHDO set-aside funds cannot be
                      used.
                                                                                                   3


     Applicability:   The CHDO set-aside requirement is reduced to zero percent for the fiscal
                      year 2017, 2018, 2019, and 2020 allocations of State and local PJs.


3.   Limits and Conditions on CHDO Operating Expense Assistance

     Requirement:     Operating Assistance for Community Housing Development Organizations
                      (CHDOs)

     Citations:       Section 212(g) and 234(b) of NAHA; 24 CFR 92.208 and
                      24 CFR 92.300(e) and (f)

     Explanation:     Section 212(g) of NAHA and 24 CFR 92.208 limit the amount of CHDO
                      operating assistance that a PJ may provide to 5% of each annual HOME
                      allocation. Section 234(b) of NAHA and 24 CFR 92.300(f) limit the amount
                      of CHDO operating assistance, in combination with certain other forms of
                      assistance, that each CHDO may receive to the greater of 50% of its annual
                      operating budget or $50,000. 24 CFR 92.300(e) requires a CHDO receiving
                      operating assistance that is not currently receiving CHDO set-aside funding
                      for a specific project to be expected to receive such funding within 24
                      months.

                      These statutory provisions are suspended and regulatory provisions are
                      waived to permit a PJ to provide up to 10% of its FY 2019 and FY 2020
                      HOME allocations as operating assistance to CHDOs and to permit a CHDO
                      to receive funding to fill operating budget shortfalls, even if the amount
                      exceeds the higher of $50,000 or 50% of its annual operating budget.
                      Furthermore, PJs will not be required to include a provision in the written
                      agreement with the CHDO that the CHDO is expected to receive CHDO set-
                      aside funds within 24 months of receiving the additional operating
                      assistance, as required in 24 CFR 92.300(e).

     Justification:   The suspension and waiver of these requirements is required to ensure that
                      CHDOs are able to maintain operations and retain staff capacity to own,
                      develop and sponsor housing with CHDO set-aside funds to serve
                      communities impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic.

     Applicability:   PJs in areas covered by a major disaster declaration may use up to 10% of
                      their FY 2019 and FY 2020 allocations for CHDO operating assistance. A
                      CHDO receiving increased operating assistance must use the assistance to
                      maintain organizational capacity during the COVID-19 pandemic. CHDOs
                      may receive increased operating assistance under these suspensions and
                      waivers through June 30, 2021.
                                                                                                       4


4.    Matching Contribution Requirements

      Requirement:     Reduction of Matching Contributions

      Citation:         24 CFR 92.218 and 92.222(b)

      Explanation:     The provisions of 24 CFR 92.218 and 24 CFR 92.222(b) require all HOME
                       PJs to contribute throughout the fiscal year to housing that qualifies as
                       affordable housing under the HOME program. The contributions must total
                       no less than 25 percent of the HOME funds drawn from the PJ’s HOME
                       Investment Trust Fund Treasury account. The COVID-19 pandemic has
                       drastically reduced economic activity, reducing state and local tax revenues
                       and placing financial strain on PJs as they deliver urgently needed public
                       health, emergency housing, education, community and social services.
                       Reducing the matching requirement for PJs in areas covered by a major
                       disaster declaration by 100 percent for FY 2020 and FY 2021 will ease the
                       economic burden on PJs and eliminate the need for them to identify other
                       sources of match for HOME activities.

      Justification:   Given the urgent housing and economic needs created by COVID-19, and
                       the substantial financial impact the PJ will face in addressing those needs,
                       waiver of these regulations will relieve the PJ from the need to identify and
                       provide matching contributions to HOME projects.

      Applicability:   This match reduction applies to funds expended by a PJ located in
                       Presidentially declared-disaster area between October 1, 2019 and
                       September 30, 2021.

II.      Regulatory Waivers Available to All Participating Jurisdictions

     The following regulatory waivers are available to all PJs, not just those PJs covered by a major
disaster declaration under Title IV of the Stafford Act. Pursuant to the authority provided in 24
CFR 5.110, I hereby waive the HOME regulatory requirements specified below for all HOME PJs.

1.    Citizen Participation Reasonable Notice and Opportunity to Comment

      Citation:        24 CFR 91.105(c)(2) and (k) (Local governments), 24 CFR 91.115(c)(2) and
                       (i) (States), and, 24 CFR 91.235(e) (Insular areas) 24 CFR 91.401
                       (Consortia)

      Explanation:     The regulations at 24 CFR 91.105(c)(2) and (k) (Local governments), 24
                       CFR 91.115(c)(2) and (i) (States), 24 CFR 91.235(e) (Insular Areas), and 24
                       CFR 91.401 (Consortia) set forth the citizen participation requirements for
                       PJs. For substantial amendments to the consolidated plan, the regulations
                       require the PJ to follow its citizen participation plan to provide citizens with
                       reasonable notice and opportunity to comment. The citizen participation
                                                                                                       5


                      plan must state how reasonable notice and opportunity to comment will be
                      given. This waiver will permit PJs amending their plans as a result of the
                      COVID-19 pandemic to reduce the comment period to 5 days.

     Justification:   Given the unprecedented economic disruptions caused by the COVID-19
                      pandemic, PJs may need to expeditiously reprogram HOME funds to
                      activities that more directly meet their immediate housing needs, including
                      reprogramming funds to cover increased administrative costs or away from
                      other development activities. Requiring these PJs to complete the required
                      public comment period would cause undue delays in the face of urgent and
                      growing need. PJs must have the ability to respond immediately to the
                      unprecedented housing need caused by the COVID-19 pandemic.

     Applicability:   This waiver is in effect for any necessary substantial amendments to FY
                      2020 and earlier consolidated plans or action plans.

2.   Income Documentation

     Requirement:     Source Documentation for Income Determinations

     Citations:       24 CFR 92.203(a)(1) and (2), 24 CFR 92.64(a) (Insular Areas)

     Explanation:     These sections of the HOME regulation require initial income
                      determinations for HOME beneficiaries by examining source documents
                      covering the most recent two months. 24 CFR 92.64(a) applies these
                      requirements to Insular Areas.

     Justification:   This waiver permits the PJ to use self-certification of income, as provided at
                      §92.203(a)(1)(ii), in lieu of source documentation to determine eligibility for
                      HOME assistance of persons requiring emergency assistance related to
                      COVID-19. Many families affected by actions taken to reduce the spread of
                      COVID-19, such as business closures resulting in loss of employment or lay-
                      offs, will not have documentation that accurately reflects current income and
                      will not be able to qualify for HOME assistance if the requirement remains
                      effective.

     Applicability:   The waiver applies to individuals and families that have lost employment or
                      income either permanently or temporarily due to the COVID-19 pandemic
                      and who are applying for admission to a HOME rental unit or a HOME
                      tenant-based rental assistance program. This waiver also applies to homeless
                      individuals and families who are applying for admission to a HOME rental
                      unit or a HOME tenant-based rental assistance program. Timely provision
                      of this assistance will reduce the spread of COVID-19.

                      If a PJ chooses to use this waiver availability, the PJ must ensure that self-
                      certified income takes into consideration all income, including any
                                                                                                    6

                      unemployment and emergency benefits the applicant will receive.
                      However, for purposes of an applicant’s self-certification, emergency tax
                      relief (commonly referred to as stimulus payments) is not to be included as
                      an emergency benefit. Also, the PJ must arrange to conduct on-site rent
                      and income reviews within 90 days after the waiver period. The PJ must
                      include tenant income certifications in each project file. This waiver
                      remains in effect through December 31, 2020.

3.   On-Site Inspections of HOME-assisted Rental Housing

     Requirement:     Ongoing Periodic Inspections of HOME-assisted Rental Housing

     Citation:        24 CFR 92.504(d)(1)(ii) and 24 CFR 92.64(a) (Insular Areas)

     Explanation:     These provisions require that during the period of affordability PJs perform
                      on-site inspections of HOME-assisted rental housing to determine
                      compliance with the property standards at §92.251 and to verify the
                      information submitted by the owners in accordance with the income and rent
                      requirements of §92.252. On-site inspections must occur at least once every
                      three years during the period of affordability. 24 CFR 92.64(a) applies these
                      requirements to Insular Areas.

     Justification:   Waiving the requirement to perform ongoing on-site inspections will help
                      protect PJ staff and limit the spread of COVID-19. To protect PJ staff and
                      reduce the spread of COVID-19, this waiver extends the timeframe for PJs to
                      perform on-going periodic inspections and on-site reviews to determine a
                      HOME rental project’s compliance with property standards and rent and
                      income requirements.

     Applicability:   The waiver is applicable to ongoing periodic inspections and does not waive
                      the requirement to perform initial inspections of rental properties upon
                      completion of construction or rehabilitation. Within 120 days of the end of
                      this waiver period, PJs must physically inspect units that would have been
                      subject to on-going inspections during the waiver period. The waiver is also
                      applicable to on-site reviews to determine a HOME rental project’s
                      compliance with rent and income requirements if the project owner is unable
                      to make documentation available electronically. The waiver is in effect
                      through December 31, 2020


4.   Annual Inspection of Units Occupied by Recipients of HOME Tenant-Based Rental Assistance
     (TBRA)

     Requirement:     Annual Inspections of TBRA Units
                                                                                                   7


     Citation:        24 CFR 92.504(d)(1)(iii); 24 CFR 92.209(i) requirement for annual
                      re-inspections and 24 CFR 92.64(a) (Insular Areas)

     Explanation:     These provisions require PJs to annually inspect each unit occupied by a
                      recipient of HOME TBRA. 24 CFR 92.64(a) applies these requirements to
                      Insular Areas.

     Justification:   Waiving the requirement that these annual inspections be performed
                      according to schedule will protect the health of both inspectors and TBRA
                      tenants by observing physical distancing recommendations to limit the
                      spread of COVID-19.

     Applicability:   The waiver is applicable to annual HQS inspections required to occur from
                      the date of this memorandum through December 31, 2020. At the end of this
                      waiver period, PJs must inspect units that would have been subject to HQS
                      inspections during the waiver period within 120 days of the expiration of the
                      waiver. In addition, PJs shall make reasonable efforts to address any tenant-
                      reported health and safety issues during the waiver period.

5.   Four-Year Project Completion Requirement

     Requirement:     Four-Year Project Completion Deadline

     Citation:        24 CFR 92.205(e)(2) and 24 CFR 92.64(a) (Insular Areas)

     Explanation:     The provision requires that projects assisted with HOME funds be completed
                      within 4 years of the date that HOME funds were committed. If the project
                      is not complete, in accordance with the definition of “project completion” at
                      24 CFR 92.2, by the deadline, the project is involuntarily terminated in
                      HUD’s Integrated Data Information System (IDIS), and the PJ must repay
                      all funds invested in the project. The regulations permit a PJ to request an
                      extension of the deadline for up to one-year. 24 CFR 92.64(a) applies these
                      requirements to Insular Areas.

     Justification:   This waiver is necessary to provide additional time to permit completion of
                      HOME-assisted projects that may be delayed as a result of the impact of
                      COVID-19 on project timelines. These delays may occur as a result of
                      worker illnesses or efforts to reduce the spread of COVID-19, such as
                      smaller construction crews or delays in local permitting or inspections due to
                      government office closures.

     Applicability:   This waiver applies to projects for which the 4-year project completion
                      deadline will occur on or after the date of this memorandum. The
                      completion deadlines for covered projects are extended to December 31,
                      2020.
                                                                                                      8



6.   Nine-Month Deadline for Sale of Homebuyer Units

     Requirement:     Qualification as Affordable Housing: Homeownership

     Citation:        24 CFR 92.254(a)(3) and 24 CFR 92.64(a) (Insular Areas)

     Explanation:     This provision requires that a homebuyer housing unit developed with
                      HOME funds have a ratified contract for sale to an eligible homebuyer
                      within 9 months of the date of completion of construction or rehabilitation.
                      If there is no ratified sales contract with an eligible homebuyer within 9
                      months of completion of construction or rehabilitation, the housing must be
                      rented to an eligible tenant in accordance with §92.252. 24 CFR 92.64(a)
                      applies these requirements to Insular Areas.

     Justification:   Many PJs will not be able to meet this deadline due to the effect the
                      COVID-19 pandemic will have on the ability of eligible households to
                      qualify for mortgages as a result of income losses or the inability to
                      schedule inspections, titles searches, or closings during periods of business
                      closures. The waiver is necessary to prevent the loss of homeownership
                      opportunities for HOME-eligible families and temporarily suspend the
                      required corrective action of repayment of HOME funds or conversion of
                      the homebuyer units to rental housing.

     Applicability:   The waiver applies to projects for which the 9-month homebuyer sale
                      deadline occurs on or after the date of this memorandum and extends the
                      deadline for those projects to December 31, 2020. This waiver does not
                      apply to the remaining requirements of the regulation, including that a
                      homebuyer must receive housing counseling, and that a PJ must determine
                      eligibility of a family by including the income of all persons living in the
                      housing.

7.   Use of HOME Funds for Operating Reserves for Troubled HOME Projects

     Requirement:     Troubled HOME Projects

     Citations:       24 CFR 92.210(a) and (b) and 24 CFR 92.64(a) (Insular Areas)

     Explanation:     24 CFR 92.210 establishes provisions to permit HOME rental projects that
                      are not financially viable (i.e., projects for which operating costs
                      significantly exceed operating revenue) to be preserved through the use of
                      HOME funds to recapitalize project reserves. 24 CFR 92.210(a) requires
                      HUD to review market needs, available resources, and the likelihood of
                      long-term viability of the project before approving this use of HOME
                      funds. 24 CFR 92.210(b) requires a written memorandum of agreement
                      between HUD and the PJ as a precondition of this funding and certain
                                                                                                9


                 limitations on the amount of funding. 24 CFR 92.64(a) applies these
                 requirements to Insular Areas.

Justification:   The waiver is necessary to enable PJs to take rapid action to preserve the
                 financial viability of HOME-assisted affordable rental projects currently
                 under a HOME period of affordability. Because existing tenants in HOME
                 units may be unable to meet their rent obligations due to the economic
                 impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, HOME rental projects may experience
                 operating deficits due to the sudden decrease in rental revenue.

Applicability:   The waiver applies to HOME-assisted rental projects currently within the
                 period of affordability established in the HOME written agreement. PJs will
                 not be required to obtain HUD approval or execute a memorandum of
                 agreement with HUD before providing this assistance. PJs may only
                 exercise this waiver authority when the project owner agrees to forego: 1)
                 any distributions of residual receipts resulting from the project throughout
                 the waiver period and for a period of 6 months thereafter; 2) any right under
                 the existing lease agreement or State or local law to pursue legal action
                 against tenants of HOME-assisted units for non-payment of rent and the
                 collection of any fees associated with late payments without prior approval
                 of the PJ; and 3) any adverse credit reporting against tenants of HOME-
                 assisted units for nonpayment of rent or fees without prior approval of the
                 PJ.

                 The PJ may provide additional HOME funds to recapitalize operating deficit
                 reserves for HOME-assisted rental projects if the PJ determines that the
                 project is experiencing operating deficits related to the economic effects of
                 the COVID-19 pandemic during the waiver period. The PJ may only
                 provide this assistance to projects experiencing operating deficits that will
                 not be covered by insurance or other sources (e.g., other private, local, state,
                 or federal funds).

                 The maximum amount of HOME assistance that may be provided is equal to
                 the total of the project’s operating expenses, previously scheduled payments
                 to a replacement reserve, and actual debt service (excluding debt service of
                 loans in forbearance) multiplied by the proportionate share of HOME-
                 assisted units to the total number of units in the project for the period
                 beginning on April 1, 2020 and ending on December 31, 2020. Project
                 operating expenses may be demonstrated by one of the following:

                    The Owner’s most recent year to date financials for the project;
                    Certified project-level accounting records covering the most recent 3
                     months; and
                    Copies of project-level bank statements covering the most recent 3
                     months.
                                                                                                    10


                      Project operating expenses may also be adjusted due to COVID-19-related
                      expenditures and foregone expenses due to social distancing measures and
                      other COVID-19-related impacts. An owner may demonstrate these
                      expenses with recent receipts, copies of work orders, revised budgets that
                      have been certified by the project owner as true, accurate representations of
                      current expenditures.

                      In order to take advantage of this waiver, PJs must amend the HOME written
                      agreement with the project owner to include the amount of HOME funds that
                      will be provided to an operating reserve (i.e., the proportion of total costs
                      attributable to HOME units as described in the paragraph above), the costs
                      eligible to be paid with HOME funds in the operating reserve (i.e., operating
                      expenses, scheduled payments to a replacement reserve, and qualifying debt
                      service), and the documentation the PJ is required to maintain to demonstrate
                      the allowable amounts and eligibility of costs paid with the HOME funds in
                      the operating reserve.

                      The written agreement must specify that the owner must forego: 1) any
                      distributions of residual receipts during the period this waiver is in effect and
                      for a period of 6 months thereafter; 2) any right under the existing lease
                      agreement or State or local law to pursue legal action against tenants of
                      HOME-assisted units for non-payment of rent and the collection of any fees
                      associated with late payments without prior approval of the PJ; and 3) any
                      adverse credit reporting against tenants of HOME-assisted units for
                      nonpayment of rent or fees without prior approval of the PJ.

                      Within 6 months following the waiver period, the PJ must review the
                      project’s records of actual revenue and operating expenses, total amount of
                      HOME funds expended from the operating reserve, and the eligibility of
                      expenses by examining invoices and receipts. The written agreement must
                      require the project owner to repay any expenditures for costs determined to
                      be ineligible and any balance of HOME funds remaining in the reserve after
                      December 31, 2020. Any HOME funds repaid to the PJ must be deposited
                      in the local HOME account and reported as program income in IDIS.

                      The waiver is effective through December 31, 2020.

8.   Timeframe for a Participating Jurisdiction’s Response to Findings of Noncompliance

     Requirement:     Corrective and Remedial Actions

     Citations:       24 CFR 92.551(b)(1) and 24 CFR 92.64(a) (Insular Areas)

     Explanation:     24 CFR 92.551(b)(1) requires that if HUD determines preliminarily that a PJ
                      has not met a provision of the HOME regulations, the PJ must be notified
                      and given an opportunity to respond within a time period prescribed by
                                                                                                11


                      HUD, not to exceed 30 days. 24 CFR 92.64(a) applies this requirement to
                      Insular Areas.

    Justification:    The waiver is necessary to permit HUD to provide PJs with an extended
                      period to respond to findings of noncompliance in recognition of the
                      unanticipated circumstances created by the COVID-19 pandemic. While
                      HUD must continue its oversight function for the HOME Program, requiring
                      PJs to respond to all findings of noncompliance within 30 days may interfere
                      with a PJ’s ability to address the unprecedented housing needs caused by the
                      COVID-19 pandemic.

    Applicability:    The waiver applies to all findings of HOME regulatory noncompliance
                      issued from the date of this memorandum through December 31, 2020. In
                      the notice of findings, HUD will specify a time period for the PJ’s response
                      based on the nature of the noncompliance and required corrective action(s).
                      HUD may also, upon request by the PJ, extend time periods imposed before
                      the date of this memorandum.

     Questions regarding this waiver should be directed to Virginia Sardone, Director, Office of
Affordable Housing Programs (OAHP), or your OAHP desk officer. Participating jurisdictions and
other HOME Program participants should contact the CPD Division of their local HUD Field
Office.
