 g
     ye
          eet   on )                U.S. DEPARTMENT    OF HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT
‘
 *
=*                  «5
                         a                            WASHINGTON, DC   20410-5000

=on MMM
      By N DEVE 9
                    f2
OFFICE OF PUBLIC AND INDIAN HOUSING



Special Attention of:                                                  PIH Notice 2024-16
Office Directors of Public Housing;
Regional Directors: Public Housing                                     Issued:      May 28, 2024
Agencies

                                                                       Expires:     This notice remains in
                                                                       effect until amended, superseded, or
                                                                       rescinded.

                                                                       Cross References:


                                                                       Notices: PIH 2024-10, PIH 2022-18, PIH
                                                                       2022-14, PIH 2021-10, PIH 2021-08, PIH
                                                                       2020-04, PIH 2020-01, PIH 2019-08, PIH
                                                                       2019-01/H-2019-02, PIH 2018-12, PIH
                                                                       2018-09, PIH 2017-20, PIH 2017-06, PIH
                                                                       2015-17, PIH 2013-28, PIH 2011-28

                                                                       Regulations: 24 CFR 982.507, 24 CFR
                                                                       983.303, (CFR), Title 2, Subtitle A, Chapter
                                                                       II, Part 200, Subpart F, 2 CFR Part
                                                                       200.430(b), 24 CFR Part 888, 982, 983,
                                                                       985, Docket No. FR-5855-F-03, 24 CFR
                                                                       982.503(b)(1)(ii), 24 CFR 982.152(d), 24
                                                                       CFR 983.261

                                                                       Statutes: Public Law 106—569, Public Law
                                                                       118-42, Public Law 105-276, Public Law
                                                                       117-328, Public Law 116- 260, division L
                                                                       of Public Law 114-113, Public Law 106—
                                                                       569, 42 U.S.C. 5170 et seq., 44 U.S.C.
                                                                       3501-3520, 42 U.S.C. 1437 et seq., 42
                                                                       U.S.C. 8013


SUBJECT:                     Implementation of the Federal Fiscal Year (FFY) 2024 Funding Provisions for
the Housing Choice Voucher Program
                                                         Table of Contents
1.   PURPOSE ...........ccccsssssssssssssssssssscssssssssnsesssnscsscssccssccsscssscsscssessssssesssssessessssssssssssssssscssscssssssssees 3
2.   ORGANIZATION .............ccccccccccscsscssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssscsssssssssccsscssessesssssssssssssssssssnees 3
3.   SUMMARY. ..............ccccccccsccsccccccescsscsssessesssssssssssssssssssssssssssessssssssssssccssscsscesesssssssssessesssssssseeees 3
4.   CALCULATION                  OF CY 2024 HAP RENEWAL                               FUNDING .............csscsccescsscsccccccccseeeeees 4
5.   TENANT          PROTECTION                  VOUCHERS               (TPVS).........ccccccscscsssssccssssssssssssssssssescsccscccscssssoess 6
6.   FUNDING           FOR ADMINISTRATIVE                            COSTS...........cccccscsccscscccscccsscssssssscessescescccccccsecscesees 8
T.   HUD-VASH            FUNDING ju... ccsccsccccccccccccccccecscssnsssscnssescescecceccccccccecesssssssssssssssescsscecsesesesees 19
8.   TRIBAL         HUD-VASH              RENEWALS               ............ccccscsssssssssssescesccccccccccccesessssssesssessesceccscccccsssseses 20
9,   MAINSTREAM                 VOUCHERS q..........cccccccccceccccccssssssssssssscesccccccccccccecesessssssssssessescscceccesssseees 20
10. FAMILY           UNIFICATION                 PROGRAM               (FUP )..........cccccssssssssssssssssccsescsccccccccsccscesessessssssees 21
11. $200 MILLION HAP SET-ASIDE ELIGIBLE CATEGORIES AND SUBMISSION
REQUIREMENT SD...........cccccccscssssssssscsssecsescccccccccccccecssssssssscessescescsccecccccccesessssssssssssessescescocoesssssees 21
12. MOVING            TO WORK             AGENCLIES...............cccccccccccccccescsssesssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssessesscsssssses 36
13. MOVING            TO WORK             NEW        COHORT             AGENCIES             ............ccscscsssscscccccccccccccccecescsssssseees 36
14. EXCLUDED              PROGRAMG                .............sccssssssssssscsescescccccccccccccceessssssssssssssessesceccecccccsccesesesssssssses 36
15. HCV FINANCIAL                    MANAGEMENT.                   .........ccccccscccccccccccsccssssssssssssscsssessescsccccccscccsecesesssssseees 36
16. HAP DISBURSEMENTS                           AND FRONT LOADING                           ...............csssssssessescccccccccccecececeessssseees 36
17. USE OF HAP AND HAP RNP/HUD-HELD                                            PROGRAM               RESERVE. ................cccseeeees 37
18. USES OF ADMINISTRATIVE                                FEES ...........ccccccccscsssccscscccscsssssssscscsessescecccccccccccecesesssssssees 37
19. VMS/FASS            REPORTING                AND DATA              INTEGRITY .............cssccssescccccccccccccccecescessssseees 38
20. PROHIBITION                 ON OVER-LEASING                       .............ccsscsssescescccccccccccccccessssssscsscessescssosccesesesesees 38
21. USE OF OUTSIDE                   SOURCES             OF FUNDS... ccccccccccccctccecersnsssssesscecsescescccccccsecssesssees 38
22. PAPERWORK                 REDUCTION                 ACT      ...............scsssssssssssessescccccccccccccecssssssssscssssssescecccccsssseeses 38
23. FURTHER             INFORMATION                   ...........ccccccccsccccercsnsssscssscssesccccccccccccsccesessesssssssscessescssceccsssseeees 38
APPENDIX A            ...........cccccccscssscsscccccccccsccsscescescessessessessnsssssnsssssssssssscsscsssesssssssssssssssscssccssessossessssseees 39
APPENDITX B           ............:cccccsssssssscccscccccccccescescescessssssssesssssssssssssssssssssssscesscsscsssssssssssssssscssscsscssesssessees 45
APPENDITX E           .............ccccsssssssssccccccccccsccsscescescesssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssccssssssscsssssssscsscssscsscsssssssssees 46
APPENDITX L ..............sscccsssccnsccccnccccsccvcnccesssccnssconsccsssessssessesssssessssenscessnsesesssesssssossssnsssonsssoees 50
1.   Purpose. This notice implements the Housing Choice Voucher (HCV) program funding
     provisions of the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2024 (Public Law 118-42), referred to
     hereafter as “the 2024 Act,” enacted on March 9, 2024.               The 2024 Act establishes the
     allocation methodology for calculating housing assistance payments (HAP) renewal funds,
     new incremental vouchers, and administrative fees.

2.   Organization. This notice is grouped into two parts. Sections 3 through 14 describe the
     funding made available under the 2024 Act and the Department of Housing and Urban
     Development’s (HUD) implementation of the provisions related to the allocation of that
     funding. Sections 15 through 21 provide other important information regarding the
     administration of the public housing agency’s (PHA’s) HCV Program.

3.   Summary. The HCV Program is HUD’s largest rental assistance program. Funding is
     provided through the 2024 Act, which HUD allocates to PHAs in accordance with such Act
     as described in this notice.

     The 2024 Act requires HUD to provide renewal funding based on validated Voucher
     Management System (VMS) leasing and cost data for the prior calendar year (CY) (January
     1, 2023 — December 31, 2023). The CY 2024 total amount appropriated by Congress to fund
     the HCV Program is split up by budget line items as follows:

     CY 2024 Appropriations

     HAP Renewal Funding!                                                  $28,283,455,000
     HAP Set-aside                                                            $200,000,000
     Tenant Protection Vouchers”                                              $337,000,000
     Administrative Fees                                                    $2,770,935,000
     Tribal HUD-VASH!                                                           $7,500,000
     Mainstream Vouchers                                                      $742,941,000
     Veterans Affairs Supportive Housing                                        $15,000,000
     Family Unification Program                                                 $30,000,000
     Total Available CY 2024 Appropriations                                $32,386,831,000




' The 2024 Act provides $28.4 billion for HAP Renewal Funding to include $6 billion for emergency funding as a
supplemental amount. Additionally, the Act provides up to $7.5 million for Tribal HUD-VASH renewal grants.
The amount for HAP Renewals has been reduced here accordingly.
> The 2024 Act specifies the following uses for the $337 million for Tenant Protection Vouchers: “section 8 rental
assistance for relocation and replacement of housing units that are demolished or disposed of pursuant to section 18
of the Act, conversion of section 23 projects to assistance under section 8, relocation of witnesses (including victims
of violent crimes) in connection with efforts to combat crime in public and assisted housing pursuant to a request
from a law enforcement or prosecution agency, enhanced vouchers under any provision of law authorizing such
assistance under section 8(t) of the Act, Choice Neighborhood vouchers, mandatory and voluntary conversions, and
tenant protection assistance including replacement and relocation assistance or for project-based assistance to
prevent the displacement of unassisted elderly tenants currently residing in section 202 properties financed between
1959 and 1974 that are refinanced pursuant to Public Law 106-569, as amended...”
     This notice provides information on how HUD calculates HAP renewal funding for the
     PHA’s HCV Program. In addition, each PHA has received or will receive a funding letter
     with the individual PHA’s specific funding calculations attached. If a PHA has questions
     related to the calculations or this notice, the PHA should contact its Financial Analyst (FA) at
     the Financial Management Center (FMC).

     PHAs are encouraged to pay attention to the funding provisions in Section 6, Funding for
     Administrative Costs, as there are several updates and new categories. Most of these updates
     are in the Special Fee portion of this section (Section 6c) to include Special Fees for PHAs
     with New FUP/FYI Vouchers Awarded in 2024 (Section 6,c,vii).

     Additionally, Section 6 includes updates to the requirements for Special Fees Needed for
     Administration of Section 8 Tenant-Based Rental Assistance Program (Section 6,c,Vviti).
     Some of these updates include applications only being accepted through DocuSign. A link
     to the DocuSign instructional document that includes, a link to the video tutorial, and access
     to the applications in DocuSign, is included within this section.

     This year’s Set-aside applications will only be accepted through DocuSign. PHAs are
     encouraged to pay particular attention to the Set-aside funding provisions (listed in Section
     11) and the links to the document that provides instructions, a link to a video tutorial and
     access to the application appendices in DocuSign.

     PHAs administering Mainstream Vouchers should pay specific attention to the
     Mainstream Set-aside funding provisions (Sections 9 and 11) that describe the
     Mainstream Voucher HAP Set-aside.

4.   Calculation of CY 2024 HAP Renewal Funding. The 2024 Act requires that HUD apply a
     re-benchmarking renewal formula based on validated leasing and cost data in VMS for CY
     2023 (January 1, 2023, to December 31, 2023) to calculate each PHA’s renewal allocation.
     The renewal provisions of the Act are stated in Appendix A, Consolidated Appropriations
     Act, 2024 (Public Law 118-42).

     HUD is providing renewal funding as follows:

         Step 1: A new HAP funding baseline is established based on all validated leasing and
         cost data (not to exceed unit months available under the Annual Contributions Contract
          (ACC) in VMS for CY 2023).°

         Step 2: As required by the 2024 Act, HUD adjusts allocations for the first-time
         renewals of tenant protection vouchers (TPVs) and special purpose vouchers (SPVs),
          such as HUD-Veterans Affairs Supportive Housing (HUD-VASH) vouchers, Family




> Tn rare instances where vouchers were transferred from one PHA to another during the re-benchmarking period,
the leasing and cost data of the PHAs will be adjusted to ensure that the leasing and costs represented by the
transferred vouchers are properly accounted for in the eligibility determinations.
Unification Program (FUP), and Foster Youth to Independence (FYI) vouchers for
which the initial increment expires in CY 2024. Affected PHAs’ renewal funding
allocation enclosures indicate the amount of additional funding provided for CY 2024
for first-time renewal of increments not initially funded for twelve months.

Note:   The reissuance of relocation TPVs (see Section 6 of PIH Notice 2018-09) and of
vouchers originally issued to families under the Disaster Voucher Program/Disaster
Housing Assistance Payments-IKE (DVP/DHAP-IKE) is not permitted. PHA’s
Consolidated Annual Contributions Contract (CACC) will be reduced by the number of
DVP/DHAP Ike vouchers and relocation TPVs that sunset in CY 2023. The CY 2023
costs associated with these units will also be reduced from the HAP funding    baseline in
Step 1.

Step 3: After all adjustments have been applied under Steps 1 and 2 above, HUD
applies the Renewal Funding Inflation Factor (RFIF), adjusted for localities, to the
PHA’s calculated 12-month renewal requirement. The RFIFs are published by HUD’s
Office of Policy, Development and Research (PD&R) and can be found at
https://www.huduser.gov/portal/datasets/rfif/rfif.
                                               html.

Step 4: HUD determines the total HAP renewal funding eligibility for all PHAs and
compares that amount to the total HAP renewal funds available per the 2024 Act to
determine a proration factor. This proration factor is then applied to each PHA’s CY
2024 eligibility. A proration of less than 100% is applied if the nationwide eligibility
exceeds the available HAP renewal funding.

Step 5: The 2024 Act provides that HUD may offset PHAs’ CY 2024 allocations based
on the excess amounts of PHAs’ restricted net position (RNP), including HUD-held
program reserves (in accordance with VMS data in CY 2023 that is verifiable and
complete), as determined by the Secretary. The 2024 Act further provides the offset
may be used to prevent the termination of rental assistance for families as the result of
insufficient funding, as determined by the Secretary, and to avoid or reduce the proration
of renewal funding allocations. PIH will perform a small offset impacting a limited
number of Expansion Moving to Work (MTW) and non-MTW PHAs for reallocation in
CY 2024. Detailed calculations of the offsets will be provided to impacted PHAs in the
renewal allocation enclosure. Offsets will come from excess program reserves
reconciled through December 31, 2023. HUD takes a number of factors and conditions
into account in determining what constitutes excess reserves. Appendix B to this
notice, CY 2024 Offset for Reallocation, is an example of the offset enclosures that will
be provided to PHAs and specifically describes this calculation as well as the categories
of reserve funds that are protected from the offset.
5.   Tenant Protection Vouchers (TPVs).

     a.   Definition.    TPVs are provided to protect HUD-assisted families from hardship as the
          result of a variety of actions that occur in HUD’s Public Housing (Low-Rent),
          Multifamily Housing portfolios, and Moderate Rehabilitation properties. Therefore, if
          the PHA applies for and is awarded replacement TPVs, it must offer the replacement
          TPVs in the form of tenant-based assistance (or as project-based assistance for certain
          conversion actions) to eligible families impacted by the conversion.>

          While the PHA is required to offer the replacement TPV to the eligible impacted family,
          in the context of Public Housing conversions, the PHA has discretion, at the time of the
          TPV offer, to inform all families that the family is not required to accept the TPV, and
          that, if the family chooses, at the family’s sole discretion, not to accept the TPV, the PHA
          intends to offer the family another form of housing.

          HUD’s current policy also provides replacement TPVs for vacant units that were
          occupied by an assisted family in the previous 24 months. However, depending on
          demand and funding availability, HUD may need to subsequently suspend the allocation
          of replacement TPVs for vacant units, and/or may need to reduce the initial increment
          term and associated funding to cover a period that is less than 12 months. These actions,
          if necessary, would only apply to future TPV funding allocations. HUD will alert PHAs
          should any of these cost-saving measures need to be implemented.

     b.   Funding.      As noted above, the 2024 Act provides $337 million for TPVs.

     c.   Continued Applicability of PIH Notice 2018-09.                The programmatic and policy
          guidance in Section 6 of PIH Notice 2018-09, Implementation of the Federal Fiscal Year
          (FFY) 2018 Funding Provisions for the Housing Choice Voucher Program, continues to
          apply to TPVs except as specifically revised in Section 5a and 5d of this notice or
          superseding TPV notice.

     d.   Eligibility for Replacement TPVs (Vacant Units). Under PIH 2018-09, replacement
          TPVs were only provided for occupied units.° As in CY 2023, this policy is revised for
          purposes of the CY 2024 funding available under this Notice so that, in addition to
          providing replacement TPVs for occupied units, HUD will also provide replacement
          TPVs for vacant units that were occupied by an assisted family within the previous 24
          months that are no longer available as assisted housing (although, as discussed in in




* TPV allocations qualify as either “replacement” or “relocation” vouchers. TPV allocations for relocation vouchers
must only be used by the family impacted by the conversion action and not for vacant units. For information on
replacement and relocation TPV allocations, see Section 6 of PIH 2018-09.
> This statement supersedes the last sentence in footnotes 5 and 6 of PIH 2018-09, which stated that   a PHA cannot
offer impacted residents another form of comparable housing (1.e., another public housing unit, a RAD unit) if it
applies for and receives TPVs for the Public Housing action.
© This policy also applied for certain prior year funding, per PIH 2019-08, 2020-04, 2021-10, and 2022-14.
         section 5a above, HUD may subsequently need to suspend this policy).                 The examples
         below demonstrate how this policy works:

           i.    For Public Housing Actions, vacant units that were occupied by an assisted
                 family within the previous 24 months from the time of the Special Application
                 Center (SAC) approval or the Choice Neighborhoods Initiative (CNI) award date.
                 For example: on February 1, 2024, PHA A was approved for
                 demolition/disposition of 25 public housing units. Of the 25 units in property A,
                 5 units were last occupied on February 1, 2022. The remainder of the units
                 continue to be occupied. Replacement TPV funding may be provided for all 25
                 units (vacant and occupied) because the 5 vacant units were last occupied within
                 24 months from the SAC approval.

          ii.    For Multifamily Housing Actions, vacant units that were occupied within the
                 previous 24 months from the eligibility event. For example: on February 1, 2024,
                 the prepayment of a section 236 mortgage in property A triggered eligibility for
                 TPVs. Of the 25 units in property A, 5 were last occupied on February 1, 2022.
                 The remainder of the units continue to be occupied. Replacement TPV funding
                 may be provided for all 25 units (vacant and occupied) because the 5 vacant units
                 were last occupied within 24 months from the eligibility event.

    e.   TPV Set-aside. The 2024 Act provides that no less than $5,000,000 of the $337 million
         appropriated for TPVs may be set-aside to provide TPVs to certain at-risk households in
         low-vacancy areas.   HUD has determined that since the law has not changed, the terms
         and conditions of PIH Notice 2019-01/H-2019-02 Funding Availability for Set-aside
         Tenant Protection Vouchers will apply to 2024 TPV Set-aside funds.

         TPV Funding.’ HUD calculates TPV funding for all eligible TPV actions based on the
         average Per Unit Cost (PUC) in the PHA’s HCV program. If the PHA that will
         administer the TPVs has concerns regarding the sufficiency of the TPV funding based on
         its average PUC, the PHA can request an upfront increased PUC along with the TPV
         funding application or request higher TPV funding after the PHA has already submitted
         the TPV funding application. In either case, the PHA must justify the requested increase
         by providing evidence of rent amounts that result in higher HAP costs and a justification
         explaining that the rents are reasonable.®       At a minimum, the PHA must submit its rent
         reasonableness analysis and a budget authority gap analysis that includes the following
         data:
              e Unit Type/Bedroom Size
              e Count of Units by Type/Bedroom Size
              e Contract Rent




7 The information provided in this section applies to all TPV actions, including those in the Public Housing and
Multifamily Housing portfolios.
8’ Rent reasonable requirements are found in regulation at 24 CFR 982.507 and 24 CFR 983.303, as applicable. Rent
reasonableness guidance may be found in the Rent Reasonableness Chapter of the HCV Guidebook.
               Utility Allowance (if owner paid)
               Monthly Total (Contract Rent + Utility Allowance)
               Resident Rent
               Monthly/Annual subsidy need by unit and property

      The PHA must submit the requests for TPV funding adjustments by email to the PHA’s
      Portfolio Management Specialist at the HUD PIH Field Office, with copy to the Field
      Office’s Public Housing Director. If the PHA does not know their assigned Portfolio
      Management Specialist, the PHA may email the Field Office’s Public Housing Director
      for assistance.

      Once the Field Office receives the PHA’s request, it will review it to confirm that actual
      and/or projected subsidy costs are appropriately calculated and may follow-up with the
      PHA if additional information is needed. If the Field Office determines that the increased
      PUC is appropriate, they will notify the HCV Financial Management Division of the
      revised need via a Field Office memo. The Field Office emails this memo, along with the
      PHA’s supporting documentation (and the TPV funding application, if applicable), to
      PIHConversionActions @hud.gov.

      The following additional requirements apply when a PHA is submitting a subsequent
      request for increased TPV funding subsequent to the TPV award:
          e The following additional information must be submitted with the request:
                  o Monthly/Annual subsidy provided in the TPV award
                  o ACC letter reflecting the TPV award.
          e PHAs can apply for higher PUCs during the time of their initial funding increment.
              The effective date for TPV increments is provided in the amended ACC letter sent
              from the FMC to PHAs.      Once the initial funding increment is renewed, no
              additional PUC will be provided.

    Note that all additional TPV funding is subject to available appropriations.   Questions
    concerning the TPV adjustment process described above may be sent to
    PIHConversionActions @hud. gov.

.   Funding for Administrative Costs.      The 2024 Act provides $2,770,935,000 for
    administrative expenses of PHAs administering the HCV Program (see Appendix A for
    Appropriations text). The 2024 Act also provides that this funding may be used for “other
    expenses” of PHAs administering the Section 8 tenant-based rental assistance program.
    HUD issued detailed guidance on the use of ongoing administrative fees for expenses related
    to assisting families to lease units in PIH Notice 2022-18. Of the appropriated amount, no
    less than $2,740,935,000 will be available for ongoing administrative fees and fees for new
    vouchers and up to $30,000,000 will be made available to allocate to PHAs that need
    additional funds to administer their Section 8 programs.
a. Ongoing Administrative Fees and Administrative Fees for New Vouchers.

   Ongoing administrative fees and administrative fees for new vouchers are allocated
   based on leasing. These administrative fees are calculated for CY 2024 as provided
   for by Section 8(q) of the United States Housing Act, and related Appropriation Act
   provisions, as in effect immediately before the enactment of the Quality Housing and
   Work Responsibility Act (QHWRA)         of 1998 (Public Law 105-276).     Under this
   calculation, PHAs are allocated a fee amount for each voucher that is under HAP
   contract as of the first day of each month.

   i.   Proration and Reconciliation of Administrative Fees: HUD is developing and
        will post the CY 2024 Administrative Fee rates to enable PHAs to calculate
        potential fee eligibility and to manage portability billings. An announcement will
        be made when they become available on HUD’s website. Use the link below to
        access them:
        https://www.hud.gov/program_offices/public_indian_housing/programs/hcv/guid
        ance_and_ notices.

        HUD disburses administrative fees to PHAs each month based on actual leasing
        reported in VMS in prior months. Each PHA’s administrative fee eligibility is
        reconciled after every quarter based on actual reported leasing, adjusted by an
        estimated proration based on total annual funding for administrative fees. HUD
        determines the estimated proration level by comparing each quarter’s national
        eligibility for administrative fees to one quarter (1/4"") of the appropriated amount
        available for ongoing administrative fees. HUD will disburse any amount due to
        the PHA and will offset any amount due from the PHA via a reduction from a
        subsequent administrative fee payment. A final reconciliation will be completed
        after the December 2024 leasing data is reported in VMS, at which time the final
        pro-ration for CY 2024 will be determined.

b. Blended Rate Administrative Fees and Higher Administrative Fee Rates:

   i.   Blended Rate Administrative Fees: PHAs serving multiple administrative fee
        areas may, in lieu of the fee determined for their agency, request a blended rate
        based on the actual location of their assisted units. The blended rate will be used
        for the entire CY 2024.

            How to Submit Requests:       PHAs must submit applications electronically.

            Electronic Mail (email) Requests: PHA requests for Blended Rate Fees
            must be submitted to HUD at the following mailbox:

            HCVBlendedRateRequests@HUD.gov. The subject line of the e-mail must
            read as follows: PHA Number, Request for Blended Rate Administrative
            Fees (e.g., TXOO/, 2024 Request for Blended Rate Administrative Fees).
                                                                                            10



             Deadline to Submit Requests:      Requests for Blended Rate Administrative
             Fees must be received no later than 5 p.m., per the PHA’s time zone,
             Friday, July 12, 2024.

il.   Higher Administrative Fee Rates: A PHA that operates over a large area,
      defined as two or more counties, may request higher administrative fees. An
      approved higher administrative fee rate will apply only to CY 2024 and is
      applicable to the HCV Program and Mainstream Vouchers. The PHA will be
      required to submit evidence of actual costs at the end of the CY to enable HUD to
      determine if the entire approved increase was needed. HUD will offset excess
      funds via reduction of future disbursement(s).     A PHA that received higher
      administrative fee for CY 2023 will be expected to complete the reconciliation
      with their Financial Management Center Financial Analyst prior to their CY 2024
      higher rate request being approved.

      Submission Requirements for Higher Administrative Fee Rates: To request
      higher fees, an agency must submit the following financial documentation to the
      PHA’s assigned FA at the FMC:

         e     Actual Unrestricted Net Position (UNP) (administrative fee reserves)
               balance as of December 31, 2023.
         e     Actual administrative costs for the HCV Program for CY 2023 in
               sufficient detail to allow for review.
         e     The PHA’s CY 2024 HCV Program administrative budget, including
               anticipated reasonable and necessary administrative costs broken out in
               sufficient detail to allow for review (positions and salaries, detailed travel
               costs, overhead and pro-rations, etc.). There is no HUD form, nor a
               mandated format, for this budget.
         e     An explanation of why the unit month and budget authority utilization in
               CY 2023 was below 95 percent of the unit month and budget authority
               available for renewal units (if this occurred).
         e     Ifthe PHA has made withdrawals from the Administrative Fee reserves
               per official guidance provided in PIH Notice 2015-17: Use and Reporting
               of Administrative Fee Reserves, certification is required. Should there be
               no withdrawals at this point, a statement that none were made is required.
         e     An explanation as to why the projected CY 2024 administrative fees are
               insufficient to cover expected program operating costs.
         e     Certification by the executive director of the PHA that the data is accurate.

             HUD reserves the right to reduce the documentation required.

             To request a higher administrative fee rate, PHAs must provide the above
             information to the FMC.   The required information must be received no later
             than 5 p.m., per the PHA’s time zone, Friday, July 12, 2024.        PHAs must
             submit applications electronically.
                                                                                                 11



                Electronic Mail (email) Requests:      PHA requests for a higher
                administrative fee rate must be submitted to HUD at the following mailbox:

                FinancialManagementCenter@hud.gov. Subject line must read as
                follows: PHA Number, (e.g., TX001) 2024 Request for Higher
                Administrative Fee.

C.     Special Fees. As stated above, HUD will make up to $30,000,000 available to
       allocate to PHAs that need additional funds to administer their Section 8 programs.       A
       portion of the $30,000,000 administrative fee set-aside may be used for ongoing
       administrative fees to increase the national fee proration, should HUD determine
       during the course of the calendar year (after the submission deadlines outlined below)
       that the entire $30,000,000 may not be needed for additional administrative costs.
       Special fees are not applicable to Mainstream Vouchers or Emergency Housing
       Vouchers (EHVs). These funds may be provided for the following purposes:

      i.    HCV Homeownership Fees: HUD provides a $1,500 special fee for every
            homeownership closing reported in the Public Housing Information Center (PIC)
            (soon to be migrated to Housing Information Portal (HIP)) for HCV families who
            have become homeowners through the HCV Homeownership program, Moving-
            To-Work (MTW) Homeownership program, and the Family Self-Sufficiency
            program (HCV only). This is an increase of $500 from the 2023 special fee
            amount. These special fees are allocated to the PHAs administering the vouchers,
            or FSS program, after the homebuyers’ closings are reported in PIC and closing
            dates are provided to the FMC staff. PHAs do not need to apply for these funds
            as HUD provides these fees automatically based on PIC data and closing dates
            confirmations.   HUD will also fund a one-time $2,500 special fee for each newly
            created HCV Homeownership Program at any PHA in CY 2024.                This is an
            increase of $2,000 from the previous year’s special fee.

     ii.    Special Fees for PHAs that Administer TPVs in Connection with Multifamily
            Housing Conversion Actions: For multifamily housing conversions, a special
            (one-time) fee of $350 will be provided for each unit occupied on the date of the
            eligibility event. PHAs do not need to apply for these funds as HUD provides
            these fees automatically based on PIC data. This special fee will also be allocated
            to PHAs that agree to administer vouchers on behalf of a Multifamily Choice
            Neighborhoods Grantee. This is an increase of $150 from the previous year’s fee,
            and the increase will be effective for CY 2024 conversions.

     iii.   Special Fees for Portability: Receiving PHAs with numbers of portability
            vouchers that comprise a significant portion of their vouchers under lease are
            eligible for a special fee. PHAs must have been administering a number of port-
            in vouchers equal to 20% or more of the PHA’s total number of leased vouchers
            as of December 31, 2023, to be eligible for special portability fees.     For each
            eligible port-in voucher, the receiving PHA will receive 12 months of funding
                                                                                             12


      equal to 15% of the PHA’s 2024 Column A rate for administrative fees. This is a
      one-time award of special fees and will be calculated based on PHA portability
      data found in PIC for actions through December 31, 2023, and leased data from
      the VMS as of December 31, 2023 (from the same VMS database used to
      determine the 2024 HCV renewal allocations). PHAs do not need to apply for
      these funds as HUD provides these fees automatically based on PIC data and the
      VMS data used for the 2024 renewal allocation. PHAs were advised via email on
      December 22, 2023, of the deadline date of no later than 4 p.m., Friday, March
      29, 2024, to ensure all PIC data was updated and successfully submitted.

1V.   Special Fees for Audit Costs for Declaring Major HCV Programs per Notice
      2021-08, and for HCV Voluntary Transfers per PIH Notice 2018-12: Please
      refer to Section 4, PIH Notice 2021-08 or a superseding notice published by
      HUD: Financial Reporting Requirements for the HCV and Mainstream Voucher
      Program Submitted through the Financial Assessment Subsystem (FASS-PH) for
      Public Housing and the Voucher Management System (VMS), and Section 6, PIH
      Notice 2018-12: Process for PHA Voluntary Transfers and Consolidations of
      Housing Choice Vouchers, Mainstream Vouchers, PBV and Project-Based
      Certificates, for the eligibility requirements and process to request special fees
      under this category. PIH Notice 2021-08, Section 4. For those general-purpose
      governments that have not declared their HCV related programs as a major fund for
      financial statement purposes or as a major enterprise fund under Code of Federal
      Regulations (CFR), Title 2, Subtitle A, Chapter II, Part 200, Subpart F; Audit
      Requirements, the audit obtained may not be sufficient for HUD to properly
      monitor its financial and compliance interest in these entities.

      Therefore, for HUD to gain an acceptable level of assurance, these PHAs may be
      directed to procure Independent Public Accountant (IPA) services for financial and
      compliance procedures as specified by HUD. This additional work is normally
      completed as part of the audit and is specifically known as “Auditor Agreed Upon
      Procedures”. Annually, these PHAs must contact the PIH Office of Housing
      Voucher Programs (OHVP), Financial Management Division (FMD) at
      PIHFinancialManagementDivision @hud.gov to confirm whether they must procure
      an IPA service.   If the PIH OHVP, FMD determines that IPA services must be
      performed, HUD will provide Set-aside funding, if available, to reimburse the
      agency for any additional audit costs unless sufficient UNP exists, in which case
      these funds may be used for the special purpose audit cost.

      PIH Notice 2018-12, Section 6. While reviewing the transfer of UNP to the
      receiving/consolidated PHA, the HUD Field Office will ensure the divesting PHA
      has properly procured and entered into a contract with an IPA to conduct its close-
      out audit, and has the funds available to cover it, HUD may assign additional
      administrative fee funding. This is subject to availability of funds and justifiable
      circumstances, from the Administrative Fee Set-aside funds to cover close-out audit
      costs and may conduct a final close-out or forensic audit of a divesting PHA, either
      prior to or following the transfer/consolidation. The HUD Field Offices must
                                                                                               13


       contact the Housing Voucher Financial Management Division at
       PIHFinancialManagementDivision    @     hud.gov to confirm availability of additional
       administrative fee funding; however, the divesting PHA’s available administrative
       fee, UNP, and/or other non-federal funds must be considered first and restricted for
       this purpose.

       Special Fees Needed for Participation in SAFMR Community of Practice:
       The Community of Practice is a group of PHAs that have implemented or will
       implement Small Area Fair Market Rents (SAFMR), coming together to share
       experiences, ideas, and best practices related to SAFMRs. In recognition that
       PHAs with previous experience implementing SAFMRs can provide invaluable
       information to PHAs located in a newly designated mandatory SAFMR area,
       HUD is making available special fees to compensate PHAs for participation in a
       Community of Practice. Led by HUD’s Technical Assistance provider, multiple
       opportunities for participating in a Community of Practice will be available
       throughout calendar year 2024. HUD anticipates that the information sharing
       between newer and older SAFMR PHAs will help both groups learn from each
       other and assist with their new or current SAFMR implementation. PHAs that
       have implemented SAFMRs throughout their entire jurisdiction (whether through
       being in a mandatory area or by exercising the opt-in option in PIH Notice 2018-
       01), and PHAs in newly designated mandatory SAFMR areas are encouraged to
       participate in a Community of Practice. PHAs that participate in the Community
       of Practice will be provided $1,000 (one-time) in special fees.

       HUD has published a list of PHAs eligible to participate in the Community of
       Practice on the SAFMR webpage and available here. If you believe your PHA is
       erroneously excluded from this list, please email SAFMRs @hud. gov.

       In June 2024, HUD will email each PHA on the list inviting them to join the
       Community of Practice using the PHA contact information in PIC. PHAs have
       until August 1, 2024, to respond to the DocuSign request and accept participation.
       HUD will acknowledge receipt of the participation confirmation via email. HUD
       will only award the one-time $1,000 fee to PHAs that affirmatively agreed to
       participate in a Community of Practice by August 1, 2024.

       If later, HUD determines that the PHA did not participate in the Community of
       Practice, HUD may recapture those funds.

 Vi.   Planning for housing Mobility-related Services: HUD is making available
       Special Fees under this Category for PHAs to develop a housing mobility-related
       services plan. A forthcoming PIH notice will describe the housing mobility-
       related services planning requirements as well as the application process.

Vil.   Special Fees for PHAs for New FUP/FYI Vouchers Awarded in 2024: This
       category is only applicable to PHAs that received a new FUP/FYI award in 2024.
       Effective with the publication of this notice, a special (one-time) fee of $750 will
                                                                                          14

        be provided for each voucher awarded in CY 2024. PHAs do not need to apply
        for these funds as HUD provides these fees automatically with the FUP/FYI
        awards. PHAs that received FUP/FYI vouchers in prior years and need additional
        special fees for increasing utilization, please refer to Section vili,A. below,
        Category I. Family Unification Program and FYI initiative Special Fees.

Viil.   Special Fees Needed for Administration of Section 8 Tenant-Based Rental
        Assistance Program: PHAs that have or will experience increased
        administrative expenses and need additional funds to administer their Section 8
        HCV Programs in CY 2024, including as a result of administration of tenant
        protection rental assistance, disaster related vouchers, SAFMRs, and other special
        purpose incremental vouchers, as shown in this section under Guidance for
        Special Fee Applications Per Category, can request special fees.

        Requests for unanticipated administrative fee funding increases will be considered
        on a case-by-case basis at the Secretary’s discretion. Please carefully review the
        applicable application criteria when preparing your application for these funds.

        ELIGIBLE USES OF SPECIAL FEE AWARDS: Details on eligible uses of
        special fee awards are provided within the below category descriptions.

        INELIGIBLE USES OF SPECIAL FEE AWARDS: This special fee funding
        cannot be used for the repayment of debts, or any amounts owed to HUD or
        program participants including, but not limited to, Office of Inspector General
        (OIG), Quality Assurance Division (QAD) or other monitoring review findings.
        Additionally, administrative fee funds provided through this notice considered for
        salaries, bonuses and/or employee incentives must comply with the executive
        compensation requirements under Section 220 of Public Law 118-42,
        Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2024 and must comply with reasonable
        compensation requirements found at 2 CFR Part 200.430(b).

        Reporting and recording of awarded Special Fees are included as part of the
        PHA’s HCV administrative financial records under CFDA 14.871.

        HOW TO SUBMIT REQUESTS - PHAs must submit requests via DocuSign,
        which includes the submission of the completed and signed online form for
        Appendix C and/or Appendix D along with all required documentation and
        calculations (as applicable) by category and by the deadline dates identified in
        this notice. Instructions for applying to the Special Fees Needed for
        Administration of Section 8 Tenant-Based Rental Assistance Program through
        DocuSign, a link to the video tutorial on the DocuSign application process as well
        as a link to the DocuSign form can all be accessed through the following link:
        Special Fee Applicant DocuSign Instructions.

        PHAs are urged to confirm application data and attachments for completeness and
        accuracy prior to submission to avoid having to resubmit applications. For PHAs
                                                                                         15


     that submit more than one application, HUD will automatically delete the older
     application and keep the most recently received on time application.

     Incomplete applications will not be reviewed. DocuSign will not process
     applications without signatures; therefore, HUD will not receive them for review.
     Executive Directors will receive a confirmation email from the DocuSign system
     within the same day as the submission.
     The only categories requiring attachments are the Secretary’s Discretion and
     SAFMR. Details on the requirements for each category are provided within
     the below descriptions by category.

     DEADLINES:       For Special Fees under the FUP/FYI category must be received
     no later than 5 p.m., per the PHA’s time zone, Friday, July 5, 2024.
     Applications for Special Fees under Disaster Related, Secretary’s Discretion,
     and SAFMR categories must be received no later than 5 p.m., per the PHA’s
     time zone, Thursday, October 31, 2024.

     HUD reserves the right to contact PHAs for clarification of items provided with
     the application. Clarifications or corrections must be received by HUD within the
     time frame specified in the notification.

     Additionally, HUD reserves the right to deny or limit the award amount based on
     a PHA’s administrative fee reserves and/or the national proration level to ensure
     fair and reasonable distribution of funds. HUD reserves the right to fund one,
     some, or all categories.

Guidance for Special Fee Applications per Category:

A.   Category 1 — Family Unification Program and FYI initiative Special Fees

Purpose of the FUP:

FUP is a program under which HCVs are provided to two different populations:

     1. Families for whom the lack of adequate housing is a primary factor in:

             a. The imminent placement of the family’s child or children in out-of-
                home care, or
             b. The delay in the discharge of the child or children to the family from
                out-of-home care.

     2. Otherwise eligible youths who have attained at least 18 years and not more
     than 24 years of age (have not reached their 25" birthday) and who have left
     foster care, or will leave foster care within 90 days, in accordance with a
     transition plan described in section 475(5)(H) of the Social Security Act and is
     homeless or at risk of becoming homeless at age 16 or older. As required by
                                                                                    16


statute, FUP vouchers issued to youth are limited to 36 months unless the youth
meets the requirements to receive an extension of assistance under the Fostering
Stable Housing Opportunities (FSHO) amendments (Section 103 of Division Q of
the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021 (Public Law 116- 260)). FSHO
amended section 8(x) of the U.S. Housing Act of 1937 and provides FUP youth
an extension of the 36-month time limit for up to an additional 24 months if they
meet certain requirements. FSHO applies to FUP youth who first leased or leases
a unit after the date of enactment of FSHO, December 27, 2020.     PHAs
administer FUP in partnership with Public Child Welfare Agencies (PCWAs) who
are responsible for referring FUP families and youths to the PHA for
determination of eligibility for rental assistance.

3. The 2020, 2021, 2022, 2023, and 2024 Acts included FUP assistance to be
targeted to FUP-eligible youth. HUD refers to this targeted FUP assistance as the
Foster Youth to Independence (FYI) initiative. For the purpose of the FUP
Special Fee category, all references to the FUP program are also applicable to the
FY] initiative.

Eligible Activities/Expenses: Special fee funding under this category must be
used exclusively to support the FUP program and FYI initiative for two purposes:
(1) costs incurred by a PHA in carrying out administrative responsibilities under
the program and (2) other eligible expenses in administering the program which
are described in Section 3 of Notice PIH 2022-18: Use of Housing Choice
Voucher (HCV) and Mainstream Voucher Administrative Fees for Other
Expenses to Assist Families to Lease Units.

PHAs are specifically encouraged to use funds available under this notice to take
on additional FUP and FYI initiative administrative activities such as FUP/FYI
landlord recruitment, housing search assistance activities, and landlord/tenant
mediation activities, or other additional FUP/FYI expenses such as owner
incentives, retention payments and security deposits. PHAs must follow
requirements under Notice PIH 2022-18.

PHA Eligibility: This category is available to PHAs actively administering
FUP/FYI vouchers awarded prior to CY 2024. HUD reserves the right to cap
awards based on the number of eligible applications received.

DocuSign Submission Requirements: HUD calculates eligibility under this
category; therefore, no additional documentation will be required or accepted
other than Appendix C, CY 2024 Housing Choice Voucher Program Special Fees
Application for $30 Million Set-aside for some Categories of Special Fees
FUP/FYI; Disaster; and/or SAFMR, which must be completed, signed, and
submitted through DocuSign by the deadline. To access instructions detailing
the DocuSign application process, a link to the video tutorial on this process, as
well as the link to apply for this category in DocuSign, please click on the
following link: Special Fee Applicant DocuSign Instructions.
                                                                                          17



     Deadline:   No later than 5 p.m., per the PHA’s time zone, Friday, July 5,
     2024.

B.   Category 2 — Disaster Related Special Fees

In the event of a future allocation of disaster vouchers during CY 2024, PIH will
provide eligibility and application guidance for disaster related vouchers’ special fees
at that time.

C.   Category 3 — Application for other Special Fees under The Secretary’s
     Discretion

Purpose of the Secretary’s Discretion Set-aside:

The purpose of this Set-aside is to provide additional administrative fee funding to
cover administrative expenses incurred as the result of a situation outside of the
specific categories described within this notice. HUD will consider requests for
other unanticipated increases in Administrative Fees on a case-by-case basis.
Please note that requests for additional fees because of a lower national fee proration
will not be accepted.

Eligible Activities/Expenses: Activities and expenses considered eligible under
Administrative Fees that are not covered under another special fee category are
eligible for funding under the Secretary’s Discretion.

Special fee funding under this category must be used exclusively to support the HCV
program administrative fee needs that are not covered by another special fee category
for two purposes: (1) costs incurred by a PHA in carrying out administrative
responsibilities under the program and (2) other eligible expenses in administering the
program which are described in Section 3 of Notice PIH 2022-18: Use of Housing
Choice Voucher (HCV) and Mainstream Voucher Administrative Fees for Other
Expenses to Assist Families to Lease Units.

PHA Eligibility: This category is available for activities and expenses considered
eligible under Administrative Fees that are not covered under another special fee
category are eligible for funding under the Secretary’s Discretion. PHAs calculate
their need; however, HUD, will confirm the PHA’s calculation and determine
eligibility.

     DocuSign Submission Requirements: To access instructions detailing the
     DocuSign application process, a link to the video tutorial on this process, as well
     as the link to apply for this category in DocuSign please click on the following
     link: Special Fee Applicant DocuSign Instructions. To be considered for
     eligibility under the Secretary’s Discretion category, PHAs must submit the below
                                                                                             18


     completed application appendix and attach the below described supporting
     documentation to the application appendix in DocuSign:

             1.    Appendix D, CY 2024 Housing Choice Voucher Program Special Fees
                   Application for $30 Million Set-aside for the Secretary’s Discretion
                   category only which must be completed to include the entry of all
                   fields within the Appendix, signed and submitted through DocuSign
                   by the deadline; and
             2.    Documentation attached to the application appendix that supports the
                   amount of funding the PHA is requesting for this category.

 Deadline:        No later than 5 p.m., per the PHA’s time zone, Thursday, October 31,
 2024.

. Category 4 - Special Fees for SAFMR and SAFMR-Based Exception Payment
  Standards: HUD is making special fee funding available for reimbursement of costs
  associated with implementation of SAFMRs under two categories:
     1. Up to $10,000 available for reimbursement of costs associated with the
         adoption of SAFMRs in all ZIP codes of the PHA’s jurisdiction (i.e. “Opt-In”
         PHAs); and
    2.   Up to $10,000 available for reimbursement of costs associated with
         establishment of SAFMR-based exception payment standards (adopting
         SAFMRs       only for certain ZIP codes in the PHA’s jurisdiction), provided that
         these exception payment standards cover the majority of ZIP codes in the
         PHA’s service area where the SAFMR is above the metropolitan FMR and will
         result in the PHA administering different payment standards for at least three
         different geographic areas.

 To be eligible for either category, PHAs must implement SAFMRs pursuant to the
 final rule, Establishing a More Effective Fair Market Rent (FMR) System; Using
 Small Area Fair Market Rents (SAFMR) in the HCV Program Instead of the Current
 50” Percentile FMRs, 24 CFR Part 888, 982, 983, 985, Docket No. FR-5855-F-03,
 dated January 17, 2017 and PIH Notice 2018-01 (or subsequent notices).

 PHAs that adopted SAFMRs or implemented SAFMR-based exception payment
 standards prior to October 1, 2023, are not eligible to apply. PHAs that are in the
 process of adopting SAFMRs or implementing SAFMR-based exception payment
 standards at the time of application for these special fees are eligible to apply so long
 as they meet one of the categories above and have submitted for approval (Opt-In) or
 notified (SAFMR-based exception payment standards) HUD in accordance with PIH
 Notice 2018-01 (or subsequent notices).

 PHAs applying for special fees under this category are required to follow the process
 detailed in PIH Notice 2018-01 (or subsequent notices), including required requests,
 approvals, and notifications. HUD will validate this certification against its records
 prior to approving funding under this category.
                                                                                                           19



            Eligible Activities/Expenses.          General costs could be related to activities that may
            include, but are not limited to, the following:
            e   Additional outreach to families and landlords on new FMR methodology and
                payment standards;
            e   Development of additional briefing materials;
            e   Hiring of additional staff;
            e   Staff training;
            e   Changes to rent reasonableness determinations methodology; and
            e   Required software modifications needed to accommodate the inclusion of the
                SAFMR adoption and SAFMR-based exception payment standards.
                     a. Requirements for Reimbursement Requests under the SAFMR adoption
                         subcategory must include the following:
                       1. Completed Appendix C, identifying category a.;
                       2. Effective or proposed effective date of SAFMR adoption; and
                       3. Supporting documentation showing expenses incurred (or estimated) for
                           software or other costs associated with SAFMRs adoption in the form of
                              a paid invoice (or bill).
                    b.     Requirements for Reimbursement Requests under SAFMR-based
                           exception payment standard subcategory must include the following:
                         1. Completed Appendix C, identifying category b.;
                         2. Effective date or proposed effective date of SAFMR-based exception
                              payment standards; and
                         3.   Supporting documentation showing expenses incurred (or estimated) for
                              SAFMR-based exception payment standards in the form of a paid
                              invoice (or bill).

                HUD will award funding based on the supporting documentation provided within
                the request. HUD reserves the right to prorate awards for PHAs that implement
                SAFMR-based exception payment standards if sufficient funds are not available
                to fully cover all awards.

                Applications for Special Fees under the SAFMR category must be received no
                later than 5 p.m., per the PHA’s time zone, Thursday, October 31, 2024.

7.   HUD-VASH Funding.            The 2024 Act provides $15,000,000 for the HUD-VASH program.
     Of the $15,000,000 total, $5,000,000 will be used for new incremental HUD-VASH
     vouchers, and $10,000,000 has been made available for administrative fees and other HUD-
     VASH program costs under PIH Notice 2024-10. The $5,000,000 in new incremental
     funding will be added to the approximately $72 million available from prior year funding for
     a total of approximately $77 million to be made available for PHAs in 2024. As provided by
     the 2024 Act, vouchers will be awarded based on geographic need and PHA administrative
     performance. HUD will issue comprehensive guidance on both the 2024 HUD-VASH
     voucher allocation and the HUD-VASH administrative funding at a later date. All PHAs are
     responsible for tracking new units and funding for special purpose vouchers (SPVs), such as
     HUD-VASH     vouchers, to include new incremental vouchers and renewals.             HUD-VASH
                                                                                                   20


  funds can only be used for the intended purposes and are not subject to MTW fungibility
  provisions.

. Tribal HUD-VASH Renewals. The 2024 Act provides up to $7,500,000 as a set-aside from
  the HAP renewal account for renewal grants and associated administrative fees for the Tribal
  HUD-VASH program. This program provides rental assistance and supportive services to
  Native American Veterans who are homeless or at-risk of homelessness living in Indian
  Country. Guidance on the Tribal HUD-VASH program is provided by HUD’s Office of
  Native American Programs.

. Mainstream Vouchers. The 2024 Act provides $742,941 ,000 for renewal funding and
  administrative fees for Mainstream units. The renewal funding will be re-benchmarked
  during CY 2024. Renewals are calculated based on validated Mainstream Voucher leasing
  and HAP expenses reported in VMS for the period January 1, 2023, to December 31, 2023.
  PHA funding for Mainstream units is limited to such calendar year eligibility and HUD-held
  Mainstream reserves. As with the regular voucher program, PHAs may not over-lease for the
  calendar year (CY).     (See Section 20, below, for more information on over-leasing.)   As in
  previous appropriations Acts, the 2024 Act further clarifies that all existing Mainstream
  Voucher assistance shall be provided to non-elderly persons with disabilities upon turnover.
  PIH Notice 2020-01 provides further guidance.

  Administrative fees are disbursed based on the most recent Mainstream Voucher leasing data
  reported in VMS, and fee reconciliations are performed on a quarterly basis. In addition, the
  2024 Act requires that the administrative and other non-HAP expenses of the PHAs
  administering these vouchers shall be funded under the same terms and be subject to the
  same pro rata administrative fee reductions that apply to all other PHAs administering
  vouchers under the HCV Program. Consistent with the HCV Program, PHAs are not eligible
  to receive re1mbursement for hard-to-house fees and audit costs. HUD issued detailed
  guidance on the use of ongoing administrative fees for expenses related to assisting families
  to lease units in PIH Notice 2022-18.

  All PHAs are responsible for tracking new units and new funding for SPVs. Mainstream
  funds can only be used for the intended purposes. These funds are not subject to MTW
  fungibility provisions.

  The 2024 Act provides up to $10 million for a Mainstream Voucher HAP Set-aside for the
  following categories of eligibility, based on need as determined by the Secretary:

                        (1) Category 1 — Prevention of Terminations Due to Insufficient
                            Funding (Shortfall), for PHAs that despite taking reasonable cost
                           savings measures, as determined by the Secretary, would otherwise be
                           required to terminate the rental assistance for Mainstream families as a
                           result of insufficient funding; and,

                        (2) Category 2 — Unforeseen Circumstances, for adjustments in the
                            allocation for PHAs, after applications for an adjustment by a PHA
                                                                                                   21


                          that experienced a significant increase, as determined by the Secretary,
                          in Mainstream renewal costs resulting from unforeseen circumstances.

   The HAP Set-aside application process and calculation methodology provided within Section
   11 of this notice is applicable to Mainstream Vouchers as well. More specifically, Section
   11A for Category 1, Shortfall, of the HCV Program Set-aside applies to Category 1,
   Shortfall, of the Mainstream Voucher Set-side. Section 11B provides detailed information
   and instructions for applying under Category 2a, Unforeseen Circumstances, for the HCV
   Program Set-aside, and applies to Category 2, Unforeseen Circumstances, under the
   Mainstream Voucher Set-aside as well.

10. Family Unification Program (FUP).     The 2024 Act provides $30,000,000 for new
   incremental voucher assistance for the FUP. Of this amount, HUD plans to award
   $5,000,000 for FUP through a Notice of Funding Opportunity (NOFO). The remaining
   $25,000,000 is limited to use on behalf of FUP-eligible youth under the Foster Youth to
   Independence (FYI) initiative.    In accordance with the 2024 Act, HUD will make these FYI
   funds available on a non-competitive basis.

   The 2024 Act also provides that any PHA administering voucher assistance appropriated in a
   prior Act under the FUP, or competitively under the 2024 Act, that determines that it no
   longer has an identified need for such assistance upon turnover, shall notify the Secretary,
   and the Secretary shall recapture such assistance from the agency and reallocate it to any
   other PHA(s) based on need for FUP voucher assistance.      This includes assistance made
   available under the FYI initiative. In addition, HUD will review PHA’s utilization of any
   non-competitive amounts and awards and will recapture and reallocate any unused amounts
   in accordance with the 2024 Act. HUD will implement these provisions through guidance at
   a later date.

   All PHAs are responsible for tracking new units and new funding for Special Purpose
   Vouchers.   FUP funds, including those made available under the FYI initiative, can only be
   used for the intended purposes.   These funds are not subject to MTW fungibility provisions.

11. $200 Million HAP Set-aside Eligible Categories and Submission Requirements. The
    2024 Act provides up to $200,000,000 for the HAP Set-aside. HUD has the authority to
    provide adjustments to PHAs’ allocation for Set-aside categories 1 through 7 as described
    within this section.

   Awards will be made to eligible PHAs in accordance with need, as determined by HUD,
   following an application by the PHA as described throughout this section of the notice.
   Awards could be reduced, in whole or in part, if PHAs have available reserves (RNP and/or
   HUD-Held Program Reserves) above a reasonable threshold, as defined by the Secretary,
   and/or prorated if the $200 million is insufficient to cover all awards. Additionally, HUD
   reserves the right to fund one, some, or all categories. HUD reserves the right to prioritize
   categories with the greatest need and prorate the remaining categories depending on the
   amount of funds remaining.
                                                                                                22


EHVs are not considered for adjustments of any HAP Set-aside categories.      Mainstream
Vouchers are not eligible for this funding; however, Mainstream Vouchers are eligible to
apply for the $10 Million Mainstream Voucher Set-aside by following the application
instructions and requirements included within this section for Category 1 — Prevention of
Terminations Due to Insufficient Funding (Shortfall) and Category 2a — Unforeseen
Circumstances.

The order in which categories are presented does not reflect priority; however, HUD reserves
the right to prioritize funding awards for Category 1 — Prevention of Terminations Due to
Insufficient Funding (Shortfall). PHAs may apply for more than one category of funding
and the funding provided within categories 2 — 7 does not impact the award amount of the
other categories (applicable only to categories 2 — 7).

HOW     TO SUBMIT REQUESTS           - PHAs must submit requests via DocuSign, which
includes the completion of online forms for Appendices F, G, H, I, J, and K as well as all
required documentation and calculations (as applicable) by category, and by the deadline
dates identified within this notice. Updated instructions for applying to the 2024 HAP Set-
aside through DocuSign to include a link to the video tutorial on the DocuSign application
process are available through the following link: HCV Set-aside Applicant DocuSign
Instructions. The links to the application appendices are provided within the “DOCUSIGN
SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS?” paragraph as well as within each of the below category
descriptions.

PHAs are urged to confirm application data and attachments for completeness and accuracy
prior to submission to avoid having to resubmit applications. For PHAs that submit more
than one application for a specific category, the system will automatically overwrite older
applications and keep the most recent application received. Only the last application
received by the deadline date will be reviewed for eligibility.

Incomplete applications will not be considered for eligibility. DocuSign will not process
applications without signatures; therefore, HUD will not receive them for review.
Executive Directors will receive a confirmation email from the DocuSign system within the
same day as the submission.

The CY 2024 Quick Reference and Timeline Sheet for HAP Set-aside Funds is included as
Appendix L.

     SET-ASIDE CATEGORIES AND ELIGIBILITY AND SUBMISSION
     REQUIREMENTS:

A.   Category 1 - Prevention of Terminations Due to Insufficient Funding (Shortfall):
     This category of HAP Set-aside is for PHAs that, despite taking reasonable cost savings
     measures as determined by the Secretary, would otherwise be required to terminate
     participating families from the program due to insufficient funds, also known as funding
     shortfalls. This category may also be funded in whole or in part through the offset
     described in section 4, step 5 above, but the requirements, application process, and
                                                                                          23


appendices of this notice apply regardless of the funding source, and use of the term
“6200 Million HAP Set-aside” with respect to this category should be understood to also
reference any offset funds used for this purpose. While Mainstream Vouchers are not
eligible for the $200 Million HAP Set-aside, PHAs follow these same requirements
when applying for the Mainstream Voucher Set-aside funding as discussed in Section 9,
above. EHVs are not eligible for funding under this category.

   To be eligible for funding under this category, the PHA must meet the criteria
   outlined below and must submit Appendix F through DocuSign.

   In addition to PHAs applying for HAP Set-aside funding to prevent terminations in
   the regular HCV Program due to insufficient funding, the information and
   instructions included within this Set-aside is also applicable to PHAs applying for
   Shortfall funding under the $10 Million Mainstream Voucher Set-aside mentioned in
   Section 9 of this notice. A PHA administering Mainstream Vouchers may apply for
   and receive Mainstream Voucher shortfall funds in accordance with the requirements
   described below.

   In cases where the Mainstream PHA also administers regular HCVs, the shortfall
   determination is program specific (e.g., in determining whether the PHA is in a
   confirmed shortfall with respect to Mainstream Vouchers, only Mainstream Voucher
   funding and HAP expenses are taken into consideration, not the PHA’s regular HCV
   funding and HAP expenses).

   A PHA that is experiencing a shortfall in the regular HCV Program and Mainstream
   Vouchers must indicate the application is covering a request for funds for both
   Mainstream and regular HCVs by checking both boxes on Appendix F. Set-aside
   funding awarded to the PHA is specific to either the Mainstream Vouchers or regular
   HCVs and may not be used interchangeably by the PHA. For example, shortfall
   funding awarded for Mainstream Vouchers may not be used for regular HCVs. HUD
   will indicate the specific amount and the type of voucher the funding is designated for
   in the award letter.

   Note:   In determining a shortfall for HCV and/or Mainstream Vouchers and the
   amount of funding to be provided, HUD will use the HCV Two-Year Projection
   Tool. PHAs should refer to Appendix E of the notice, which provides the criteria
   HUD will use to determine if the PHA has a HUD-confirmed shortfall and the
   calculation of the shortfall amount. HUD’s Two-Year Forecasting Tool and the
   instructions for it can be found through a link on the Office of Housing Vouchers
   website.

   Depending on the number of applications and amount of total eligibility, HUD may
   prioritize awards for the Prevention of Terminations Due to Insufficient Funding
   (Shortfall) category and may need to prorate eligibility for other categories of the Set-
   aside.
                                                                                                24

        In egregious situations, for PHAs not following HUD Shortfall Prevention Team
        (SPT) guidance on voucher reissuance, HUD        reserves the right to further
        require a PHA to rescind recently issued vouchers to attain full Set-aside
        eligibility.

        PHAs with specific questions related to the calculation and determination of a HUD-
        confirmed shortfall should contact the SPT at: ShortfallInquiries@hud.gov. The
        subject line of the email must include the PHA’s number (for example, TX001).

        DOCUSIGN SUBMISSION REQUIRMENTS: PHAs must complete and sign
        Appendix F as applicable in DocuSign. To access the DocuSign Appendix F
        application, click on the following link: Appendix F. Instructions detailing the
        DocuSign application process as well as a link to the video tutorial on this process,
        can be accessed by clicking on the following link: HCV Set-aside Applicant
        DocuSign Instructions.

       DEADLINE:      No later than 5 p.m., per the PHA’s time zone, Monday, March 10,
       2025. PHAs that receive Set-aside funds based on their current HAP costs that find
       additional funding is needed later in the year do not need to reapply to receive
       additional funding. The SPT will automatically determine the PHA’s eligibility for
       additional funding and HUD will provide the additional funding in accordance with its
       established Set-aside funding priorities and available funding. PHAs that have
       concerns about potential shortfalls should be in contact with the HUD Field Office or
       SPT, regardless of whether they are currently in a shortfall situation.

B.   Category 2a - Unforeseen Circumstances: PHAs should be aware that an unforeseen
     circumstance is an occurrence within or after the re-benchmarking period which the PHA
     could not reasonably have anticipated and was out of the PHA’s control. Funding
     adjustments for this category are based on cost increases occurring in CY 2024. In
     addition to PHAs applying for funding under the HAP Set-aside, these instructions and
     requirements are applicable to PHAs that are applying for Mainstream Voucher Set-aside
     funding for Unforeseen Circumstances. In such instance the funding award calculation is
     based on the PHA’s Mainstream Voucher PUCs and UMLs, not the PHA’s regular HCV
     PUCs and UMLs. EHVs are not eligible for funding under this category.

        In cases where the Mainstream PHA also administers regular HCVs, the Unforeseen
        Circumstances determination is program specific.

        A PHA that is requesting Set-aside funding for Unforeseen Circumstances for both
        regular HCVs and Mainstream Vouchers must check both boxes on Appendix G.
        Set-aside funding awarded to the PHA is specific to either the Mainstream Vouchers
        or regular HCVs and may not be used interchangeably by the PHA. For example,
        Unforeseen Circumstances funding awarded for Mainstream Vouchers may not be
        used for regular HCVs. HUD will indicate the specific amount and the type of
        voucher the funding is designated for in the award letter.
                                                                                               25


        PHA Eligibility. The 2024 Act provides that the cost increase must be
        significant, as defined by the Secretary, for the PHA to be eligible for the
        unforeseen circumstances category of the CY 2024 set-aide. HUD 1s establishing
        the following criteria for significant cost increase:

        The PHA’s latest validated 2024 PUC per VMS must be 2 percent or greater than
        the PUC HUD used to determine the PHA’s CY 2024 renewal funding (the CY
        2024 Renewal PUC) to be eligible for this category of funding.

ii.     Funding Award Calculations for PHAs. For PHAs (both Non-MTW and
        MTW), the funding award amount will be calculated as follows:

        a.   HUD       determines the difference between the increased PUC and the PHA’s
             CY 2024 HAP renewal PUC.         The increased PUC is calculated by dividing
             HAP costs by unit months leased (UMLs) for the most recent month of total
             HAP based on the most recent month.      For MTW Expansion agencies, the
             HCV CY 2024 HAP renewal PUC is located in the 2024 HCV renewal
             Enclosure A, line 31, described as CY 2024 Inflated Per Unit Cost. The Non-
             MTW PHAs’ HCV CY 2024 HAP renewal PUC is located in the 2024 HCV
             renewal Enclosure A, line 29, described as CY 2024 Inflated Per Unit Cost.
             The PHA’s Mainstream Voucher CY 2024 HAP renewal PUC is located in
             the 2024 HCV renewal Enclosure A, line 12, described as CY 2024 Inflated
             PUC. The initial MTW PHA’s PUC information is located by the prorated
             eligibility amount on the PHA’s renewal enclosure.
        b.   The difference is then multiplied by the PHA’s most recent month’s UMLs
             and then by the remaining months in 2024 to determine the total funding
             amount.

        HUD will use the most recent validated VMS        data available to calculate PHA
        eligibility.

        PHA Example:          Unforeseen Circumstances HAP Set-aside Award

                                                                HUD will use the most
Most Recent Month's PUC (in this                        $500    recent validated month of
example, July’s PUC)                                            VMS reporting
PHA’s CY 2024 PUC (2024 HCV
Renewal Enclosure A, line 29 for
Non-MTW PHAs and line 31 for
MTW Expansion agencies,
described as CY 2024 Inflated Per                               Initial MTW renewal
Unit Cost and 2024 Mainstream                                   enclosures have a different
Renewal Enclosure A, line 12,                                   format. PUC information
described as CY 2024 Inflated                                   can be found by the prorated
                                                        $405
PUC)                                                            eligibility amount.
Difference between the PUCs
                                                          $95
                                                                                                  26


    Is the difference between the 2
    PUCs 2% or greater than the CY
    2024 PUC (Line | divided by Line                           73%
4 | 2, must be greater than 1.02)?

                                                                     HUD will use the most
    Most Recent Month's units months                           300   recent validated month of
5 | leased                                                          VMS reporting
                                                                    Multiplied by the number of
    Unit months leased (Line 5 * 5                            1.500 months remaining in CY
6 | Months)                                                   == | 2024.
7 | Total Request (Line 3 * Line 6)                      $142,500


             In this example the PHA’s PUC increased 23 percent, which meets the eligibility
             criteria for application review due to significant increased costs. The PHA is
             eligible for $142,500.

             PHAs with two (2) months or more of reserves will not be considered for any
             funding under this category at this time.

        DOCUSIGN SUBMISSION REQUIRMENTS: To access instructions detailing
        the DocuSign application process as well as a link to the video tutorial on this
        process, can be accessed by clicking on the following link: HCV Set-aside Applicant
        DocuSign Instructions. PHAs are required to submit the following:
            a. Completed and signed Appendix G form in DocuSign, Appendix G
                  application, click on the following link:   Appendix G.   CY 2024 Housing
                  Choice Voucher Program Application for $200 Million HAP Set-aside for
                  Category 2a — Unforeseen Circumstances and Application for $10 Million
                  Mainstream Voucher HAP Set-aside for Category 2 — Unforeseen
                  Circumstances in DocuSign.
             b.   The PHA must also attach a written narrative to their DocuSign application
                  describing the unforeseen circumstances and their relationship to the
                  significantly increased renewal costs in CY 2024. PHAs applying for
                  unforeseen circumstances under both their HCV Program and Mainstream
                  Vouchers, are required to provide a narrative for each.

         For applications under the unforeseen circumstances category, it is important to note
         that PHAs must submit all items (a. and b.) above by the application deadline for the
         application to be considered. Failure to provide any of the required documents
         and information within DocuSign as instructed will result in denial of the
         application.

         DEADLINE:        No later than 5 p.m., per the PHA’s time zone, Friday, June 14,
         2024.

C. Category 2b - Portability: To be eligible for funding under this category, the PHA must
   have experienced a significant increase in renewal costs due to portability for tenant-
                                                                                           27


 based rental assistance under Section 8 (r) of the U.S. Housing Act of 1937.   EHVs and
 Mainstream Vouchers are not eligible for funding under this category.

 To determine eligibility and calculate funding under this category for regular HCVs,
 HUD will compare the average HAP Per Unit Cost (PUC) for the re-benchmarking
 period (January 1, 2023 to December 31, 2023) to the average Port-out Vouchers HAP
 PUC based on year-to-date reporting in PIC (as of March 29, 2024). If the portability
 average HAP exceeds 110% of the HCV Program-wide average HAP PUC for the re-
 benchmarking period, the PHA will be eligible for Set-aside funding. The difference
 between the portability average PUC and 110% of the program-wide average PUC is
 multiplied by the year-to-date total unit months leased (UML) for the “Port Vouchers
 Paid” reported in PIC, extrapolated to 12 months.

     DOCUSIGN SUBMISSION REQUIRMENTS: PHAs must complete and sign
     Appendix H, CY 2024 Housing Choice Voucher Program Applications for $200
     Million HAP Set-aside for Categories2b — Portability; 3a — Project-Based Vouchers;
     3b —     MTW Expansion agencies; 4 - HUD-VASH; 5 — Lower-than-average Leasing;
     and/or 7 — NLT Inspection Withheld Housing Assistance Payments, as applicable in
     DocuSign. To access the DocuSign Appendix H application, click on the following
     link: Appendix H. Instructions detailing the DocuSign application process as well as
     a link to the video tutorial on this process, can be accessed by clicking on the
     following link: HCV Set-aside Applicant DocuSign Instructions.

     Failure to submit the completed and signed DocuSign form as instructed will
     result in denial of the application.

     DEADLINE:       No later than 5 p.m., per the PHA’s time zone, Friday, June 14,
     2024.

. Category 3a -— PBVs: To be eligible for funding under this category, a PHA must show
  that vouchers were withheld from use during the CY 2023 re-benchmarking period to be
 available to meet   a commitment for PBV assistance under Section 8(0)(13) of the U.S.
 Housing Act of 1937. Adjustments only apply to vouchers withheld pursuant to a PBV
 Agreement to Enter into a Housing Assistance Payments Contract (AHAP) for newly
 constructed or rehabilitated housing. Adjustments do not apply to existing housing, as
 there is no waiting period for existing housing PBV commitments and accordingly, there
 is no need to withhold vouchers for such commitments. Adjustments will not be made
 under any circumstances for units under an AHAP commitment that, when added to units
 under lease for CY 2023, exceed the PHA’s baseline units under ACC for CY 2023.
 (The PHA would not have been able to lease those withheld vouchers during CY 2024
 due to the restriction on over-leasing.) EHVs and Mainstream Vouchers are not eligible
 for funding under this category. RAD PBV units are not eligible for this adjustment
 either.

     DOCUSIGN SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS: To access instructions detailing
     the updated DocuSign application process and a link to the video tutorial on this
                                                                                            28


process, please click on the following link: HCV Set-aside Applicant DocuSign
Instructions. All attachments as described in items 1 and 2 below should be
attached to the corresponding Appendix I DocuSign submission. Once in
DocuSign, PHAs are required to provide the following:

1.   Completed and signed Appendix H in DocuSign to apply for PBV, CY 2024
     Housing Choice Voucher Program and Application for $200 Million HAP Set-
     aside for Categories 2b — Portability; 3a — Project-Based Vouchers; 3b - MTW
     Expansion agencies; 4 - HUD-VASH; 5 — Lower-than-average Leasing; and/or 7
     — NLT Inspection Withheld Housing Assistance Payments, as applicable in
     DocuSign. Only one (1) Appendix H is required per PHA, regardless of the
     number of projects submitted under this category. To access the DocuSign
     Appendix H      application, click on the following link: Appendix H;

2.   For every PBV project the PHA is requesting adjustment funding for, the PHA
     must provide the following:

      e   Completed and Signed Appendix I through DocuSign, CY 2024 Housing
          Choice Voucher Program - $200 Million HAP Set-aside Category 3b - PBV-
          Project Data (for each project-based commitment). To access the Appendix I
          application, click on the following link: Appendix I. Please note that
          instructions for this category have been updated since last year, so it’s
          highly recommended that PHAs review the instructional document for
          information on how to apply this year;

      e AHAP: For each PBV commitment for which a request is being made under
        this category, the PHA must provide, from Part 1 of the executed
        Agreement to Enter into a HAP Contract (AHAP) for New
        Constructions/Rehabilitation, the following:
             a.  The page which identifies the parties to the AHAP (both the PHA and
                    the owner);
                    Identification of the project;
            moaos




                    Section 1.4B i, identifies the effective date of the agreement;
                    Section 1.4B 11, identifies the date of the commencement of the work;
                    Section 1.4B ii, identifies the time for completion of the work;
                    Exhibit C which identifies the units by size and applicable initial
                    contract rents for the units to be project-based;
                    If the project is to be completed in stages: Exhibit E that identifies the
                    schedule of completion of stages (if applicable). (This exhibit shall
                    identify the units in each stage.); and
                    Signature page that provides the signature of both the Housing
                    Authority and the owner and the dates the AHAP was signed; and

      e   HAP Contract: To be eligible for HAP Set-aside funding, the HAP contract
          must be executed within CY 2024. If the HAP Contract has not been
          executed by the application submission date, the PHA must state when the
                                                                                                  29


                HAP contract will be executed. If the HAP contract has been executed by the
                application submission date, the PHA must provide, from PART 1 of the
                HAP Contract for New Constructions or Rehabilitation, the following:
                    a. The page which identifies the parties to the HAP Contract (both the
                        Housing Authority and the owner);
                    b. Exhibit A which identifies the total number of units in the project
                         covered by the HAP Contract; the initial Contract Rent to owner, and
                         the number and description of the contract units;
                    c.   Ifthe project is to be completed in stages: in addition to item b.
                         described in the above AHAP section that states the requirement for
                         the “identification of the project’, Exhibit A must also identify the
                         units to be completed in each phase covered by the HAP Contract;
                    d.   Exhibit   B which identifies the services, maintenance, and utilities to be
                         provided by the owner;
                    e.   Exhibit C which identifies the utilities available in the contract unit,
                         including a listing of utility services to be paid by the owner (without
                         charges in addition to the rent to owner) and utilities to be paid by the
                         tenant;
                    f.   Section 2a which identifies the initial term of the contract; and
                    g.   Signature page which provides the signature of both the Housing
                         Authority and the owner and the dates the HAP was signed.

        DEADLINE:        No later than 5 p.m., per the PHA’s time zone, Friday, June 14,
        2024.

E.   Category 3b - MTW Expansion agencies: To be eligible for a funding adjustment
     under this category, PHAs must have received their MTW designation prior to the date of
     obligation and demonstrate funds were obligated by the PHA, but not expended during
     CY 2023, and provide supporting documentation that the obligated funds are for an
     MTW-eligible commitment/activity for the development of affordable housing. “MTW
     designation” is defined as the date the MTW PHA’s MTW ACC Amendment is fully
     executed.

     Adjustments only apply to obligations made and not expended in CY 2023 and supported
     planned expenditures in CY 2024. Eligible applications will be funded at the lower of the
     requested amount and the delta between the PHA’s 2023 renewal eligibility based on the
     re-benchmarking formula, and the CY 2024 maximum renewal eligibility based on total
     authorized units at the inflated PUC. These two totals are provided within Renewal
     Funding Enclosures, Line 20 in the CY 2023 Renewal Funding Enclosure and Line 16 of
     the CY 2024 Renewal Funding Enclosure, respectively. Awards will be capped at
     $2,500,000, per PHA.    Finally, for PHAs submitting obligations for more than one
     project, the adjustment per project may receive a proration if the total funding adjustment
     for the PHA exceeds the delta and/or cap. EHVs and Mainstream Vouchers are not
     eligible for funding under this category.
                                                                                           30


   DOCUSIGN SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS FOR PBV COMMITMENTS:
   To access instructions detailing the updated DocuSign application process to include
   a link to the updated video tutorial on this process, please click on the following link:
   HCV Set-aside Applicant DocuSign Instructions. For a PBV commitment, apply per
   the instructions and requirements described above for Category 3a — PBV.

   DOCUSIGN SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS FOR MTW-ELIGIBLE
   COMMITMENT/ACTIVITY-DEVELOPMENT (EXCLUDING-PBV): To
   access instructions detailing the updated DocuSign application process and a link to
   the video tutorial on this process, please click on the following link: HCV Set-aside
   Applicant DocuSign Instructions. For MTW Expansion agencies applying for
   funding obligated but not expended in CY 2023 for an MTW-eligible
   commitment/activity development that is not a PBV commitment (such as Public
   Housing or Local, Non-Traditional development) PHAs are required to submit the
   following for each project:

   1.   A completed and signed Appendix H in DocuSign, Application for $200 Million
        HAP Set-aside for Categories 2b — Portability; 3a — Project-Based Vouchers; 3b —
        MTW Expansion agencies; 4 - HUD-VASH; 5 — Lower-than-average Leasing;
        and/or 7 — NLT Inspection Withheld Housing Assistance Payments, that clearly
        indicates the PHA is applying under Category 3b - MTW Expansion agencies, as
        applicable. To access the Appendix H application, click on the following link:
        Appendix H;
   2. A completed and signed Appendix J, CY 2024 Housing Choice Voucher Program
      — $200 Million HAP Set-aside — Category 3b - MTW Expansion agencies-Project
      Data, for each MTW-eligible development commitment for which a request is
      being made under this category. To access the Appendix J appendix, click on
      the following link: Appendix J;
   3. An approved Annual PHA Plan and MTW Supplement, identifying the PHA’s
      binding agreement indicating its planned use of HAP funding, for each MTW-
      eligible development commitment for which a request is being made under this
      category, attached to the corresponding Appendix J DocuSign form; and
   4. Documentation to demonstrate the PHA will require an outlay or expenditure
      of funds, immediately or later in 2024 for the MTW-eligible development
      activity. This includes the submission of documentation demonstrating an
      obligation was made in 2023 for the project(s) and is an executed binding
      agreement between a MTW Expansion agency and a third party. Examples
      of obligating documentation include but are not limited to a) construction
      contract; b) promissory note for affordable housing; c) purchase agreement;
      or d) loan agreement, also attached to the corresponding Appendix J DocuSign
      form. A Board Resolution is not considered an obligating document unless the
      MTW PHA is undertaking the development/construction work themselves.

DEADLINE:      No later than 5 p.m., per the PHA’s time zone, Friday, June 14, 2024.
                                                                                               31


F. Category 4 - HUD-VASH: For PHAs administering HUD-VASH vouchers that can
   demonstrate a need for adjustment funding for at least one of the following situations:

       1.   PUC Increase:   For PHAs whose program-wide funded CY 2024 HAP PUC is
            less than their current HUD-VASH    HAP PUC, based on their latest HUD-VASH
            HAP expenses in CY 2024. HUD will calculate eligibility under this category.
            Eligibility is determined by comparing the highest HUD-VASH PUC for CY
            2023 to the program-wide funded prorated HAP PUC, then multiplying the
            difference between the PUCs by the funded UMLs.

       2.   Leasing Increase: For PHAs whose total HUD-VASH leasing for CY 2024 will
            exceed the leasing level included in their renewal funding, plus the leasing that
            will be supported by the RNP and HUD-Held Program Reserves, HUD will
            calculate eligibility under this category. Eligibility is determined by adding
            UMLs for all the CY 2023 validated VMS data available to a projection for the
            remainder of the CY and comparing that total to the initial funded HUD-VASH
            UMLs   (limited to 100% of the PHAs UMAs), then multiplied by the CY 2024
            PUC.

       DOCUSIGN SUBMISSION REQUIRMENTS: PHAs must complete and sign
       Appendix H, CY 2024 Housing Choice Voucher Program Applications for $200
       Million HAP Set-aside for Categories2b — Portability; 3a — Project-Based Vouchers;
       3b —    MTW Expansion agencies; 4 - HUD-VASH; 5 — Lower-than-average Leasing;
       and/or 7 — NLT Inspection Withheld Housing Assistance Payments, as applicable in
       DocuSign. To access the DocuSign Appendix H application, click on the following
       link: Appendix H. Instructions detailing the updated DocuSign application process
       as well as a link to the video tutorial on this process, can be accessed by clicking on
       the following link: HCV Set-aside Applicant DocuSign Instructions.

       DEADLINE:       No later than 5 p.m., per the PHA’s time zone, Friday, September
       27, 2024.

G. Category 5 — Lower-Than-Average Leasing: Non-MTW and MTW Expansion
   agencies are eligible to apply for this category. Initial MTW PHAs, the initial 39 MTW
   PHAs, are not eligible to apply for this funding. To be eligible for funding under this
   category, the PHA must be leasing a lower-than-average percentage of their authorized
   vouchers, have low amounts of budget authority in their net restricted asset accounts and
   HUD-held programmatic reserves, relative to other agencies. EHVs and Mainstream
   Vouchers are not eligible for funding under this category.

       To determine eligibility for this category of set-aside funds, HUD will consider Unit
       Months Leased (UMLs), Unit Months Available (UMAs), and reconciled reserves as
       of December 2023. Additionally, HUD will consider historical offset data.

            HUD will determine eligibility by:
               e Excluding non-MTW PHAs with above average UMLs/UMAs; and
                                                                                              32


                  e   Of the remaining PHAs, excluding those with reserve levels that are above
                      the median, based on PHA size.

                  e   HUD will determine awards by the following tiers: Tier I: No reserves
                      above the 4/6/12% reserve level based on size and no offsets since 2017;
                  e   Tier II: No reserves above the 4/6/12% reserve level based on size and no
                      offsets in 2022 or 2023;
                  e   Tier III: Less than an additional 4% reserves above the 4/6/12% reserve
                      level based on size and no offsets in 2022 or 2023; and
                  e   Tier IV: Remaining eligible PHAs.

          PHAs must lease additional vouchers with this award. If PHAs need assistance
          with the number of vouchers for reissuance, they may contact their local field
          office representative. The field office will be able to assist with developing a
          leasing plan to maximize the use of this award. PHAs that apply to this category
          must be cognizant of their capacity to issue vouchers to families on the waiting list
          and the likelihood that families will use their vouchers successfully.

          DEADLINE:         No later than 5 p.m., per the PHA’s time zone, Friday, June 14,
          2024.

          Note: The list of PHAs that are eligible to apply for this category of HAP Set-
          aside funding will be posted to the following website:
          https://www.hud.gov/program_offices/public_indian_ housing/programs/hcv/fmd.
          An email notification will be sent to PHAs once the list of Lower-than-average
          Leasing PHAs is published. PHAs not included on the published list should not
          apply as their applications will automatically be denied.

       DOCUSIGN SUBMISSION REQUIRMENTS: PHAs must complete and sign
       Appendix H, CY 2024 Housing Choice Voucher Program Applications for $200
       Million HAP Set-aside for Categories2b — Portability; 3a — Project-Based Vouchers;
       3b —    MTW Expansion agencies; 4 - HUD-VASH; 5 — Lower-than-average Leasing;
       and/or 7 — NLT Inspection Withheld Housing Assistance Payments, as applicable in
       DocuSign. To access the DocuSign Appendix H application, click on the following
       link: Appendix H. Instructions detailing the updated DocuSign application process
       as well as a link to the video tutorial on this process, can be accessed by clicking on
       the following link: HCV Set-aside Applicant DocuSign Instructions.

H.   Category 6- Disaster: To be eligible for funding under this category, the PHA must
     have experienced increased costs or loss of units in an area for which the President
     declared a disaster under title IV of the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and
     Emergency Assistance Act (42 U.S.C. 5170 et seq.) in CY 2023 or CY 2024. The
     funding provided through this category will address the impact disasters have had on CY
     2024 expenses. EHVs and Mainstream Vouchers are not eligible for funding under this
     category.
                                                                                          33


1. Loss of Units Due to Disaster.      This adjustment is provided to assist the PHA in
     increasing the number of families under lease, not to exceed 100% of the PHA’s
     authorized units, to help address housing needs in the impacted community. HUD
     will use the most recently reported and validated month’s VMS data to determine
     the number of units currently under lease. HUD will use the higher of: (1) the
     PHA’s most recently reported and validated month’s VMS data or (2) the three-
     month average for the most recent reported and validated VMS data to determine
     the PUC to calculate the funding adjustment. However, if the PHA requests and
     HUD approves the PHA’s request for an increased PUC, the approved PUC will be
     used to calculate the increased leasing adjustment, as well as to make the increased
     PUC adjustment for the PHA’s HCV Program as a whole.

DOCUSIGN SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS: For instructions detailing the
updated DocuSign application process as well as a link to the video tutorial, please
click on the following link: HCV Set-aside Applicant DocuSign Instructions. To be
eligible for funding under the Loss of Units Due to Disaster category, a PHA
must submit the following through DocuSign:

     a.   Completed and signed Appendix K in DocuSign, CY 2024 Housing Choice
          Voucher Program $200 Million HAP Set-aside — Category 6 — Disaster. To
          access the Appendix K application, click on the following link: Appendix K;
          and
     b.   Attach the following items to the Appendix K application:
           e Written narrative detailing the impact of the disaster that has caused a
              loss of units, the PHA’s assessment of the availability of rental housing
              stock in the PHAs jurisdiction, a description of any plans in the
              jurisdiction to increase the availability of rental stock, which may include
              the PHA’s plan to project-base additional vouchers to increase the supply
             of units available to voucher families, and the number of families currently
             on the PHA’s HCV waiting list and if the waiting list is currently open or
             closed; and
           e Evidence to support the narrative.

2.   Increased Costs. The PHA may request an adjustment for a higher PUC. The
     requested PUC must be higher than the higher of the most recent reported and
     validated PUC in VMS or the most recent three-month average reported and
     validated in VMS. The requested adjustment must be supported by
     documentation that the PHA is required to include with their application. For
     example, the PHA may provide data supporting the higher requested PUC by
     providing PIC data for recent new admissions and/or recent movers or other data
     supporting its request for a funding adjustment.

DOCUSIGN SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS: For instructions detailing the
updated DocuSign application process as well as a link to the video tutorial on this
process, please click on the following link: HCV Set-aside Applicant DocuSign
                                                                                           34


  Instructions. To be eligible for funding under the Increased Costs Due to Disaster
  category, a PHA must submit the following through DocuSign:

        a.   Completed and signed Appendix K in DocuSign, CY 2024 Housing Choice
             Voucher Program $200 Million HAP Set-aside — Category 6 — Disaster. To
             access the Appendix K application, click on the following link: Appendix K,
             and
        b.   Attach the following items to the Appendix K application:
             e Written narrative detailing the impact the disaster had in causing the
                 increased costs, the PUC requested; and
             e   Evidence to support the narrative (how the requested PUC was
                 determined).

  For applications under the disaster category, category 6, it is important to note that
  PHAs must submit all items (a. through d.) above, depending on the subcategory
  selected with the application, Loss of Units Due to Disaster and/or Increased Costs,
  by the application deadline for the application to be considered. Failure to provide
  any of the required documents, including the PHA calculation of the increased
  costs, will result in denial of the application.

  DEADLINE:          No later than 5 p.m., per the PHA’s time zone, Friday, December
  27, 2024.

Category 7 — NLT Inspection Withheld Housing Assistance Payments: To be
eligible for funding under this category, a PHA must demonstrate that after, February 9,
2024, when HUD established the PHA’s HAP renewal funding baseline to calculate the
CY 2024 renewal allocation (Step 1 described in Section 4 of this notice), the PHA
subsequently paid the owner housing assistance payments that were withheld during
calendar year 2023 in accordance with the requirements of the non-life threatening
(NLT) initial inspection option under section 8(0)(8)(A)(i) of the U.S. Housing Act of
1937.   EHVs and Mainstream Vouchers are not eligible for funding under this category.

Under the NLT initial inspection option, a PHA may approve an assisted tenancy,
execute a HAP contract, and begin making assistance payments on a unit that fails
the initial inspection in cases where the unit only has NLT deficiencies. If the
family accepts the unit with the NLT conditions, the owner has 30 days from the
date of the PHA notification to correct the NLT conditions. If the NLT conditions
are not corrected within 30 days of the PHA notifying the owner of the unit’s failure,
the PHA must withhold any further assistance payments until those conditions are
addressed and the unit fully complies with the housing quality standards. Once the
unit is in compliance, the PHA must recommence making housing assistance
payments to the owner. In addition, the PHA may choose to pay the owner
retroactively for the period during which payments were withheld by releasing the
withheld payments to the owner. PHAs have discretion over the maximum amount
of time the PHA will withhold payments before ultimately terminating the HAP
contract for owner non-compliance with HQS. However, the HAP contract may not
                                                                                             35


     continue beyond 180 days of the effective date of the HAP contract if the unit is not
     brought into compliance. For detailed guidance on the NLT initial inspection
     option, please see PIH Notice 2017-20, Housing Opportunity Through
     Modernization Act of 2016 (HOTMA) — Housing Quality Standards (HQS)
     Implementation Guidance, issued October 27, 2017.

     Because these HAP costs that were withheld under the NLT initial inspection option
     in CY 2023 and paid retroactively after HUD established the PHA’s HAP renewal
     baseline for the CY 2024 renewal allocation are not currently reflected in the PHA’s
     renewal funding, the PHA is eligible for a funding adjustment under this Set-aside
     category. In calculating the amount of HAP funding for which the PHA is eligible,
     HUD will adjust the retroactive HAP amount identified by the PHA by the appliable
     RFIF and the proration factor used to determine the PHA’s CY 2024 renewal
     allocation in Section 4 of this notice.

     The 2024 Act specifies that this adjustment is for retroactive payments under the NLT
     initial inspection option. Accordingly, a retroactive payment that a PHA may have
     made under any other circumstance is not covered and the PHA is not eligible to apply
     for Set-aside funding to cover that retroactive payment. In addition, Mainstream
     Vouchers are not eligible for funding under this category.

  DOCUSIGN SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS: To access instructions detailing
  the updated DocuSign application process and a link to the video tutorial on this
  process, please click on the following link: HCV Set-aside Applicant DocuSign
  Instructions. PHAs are to submit the following documents to DocuSign:
1. Completed and signed Appendix H in DocuSign to apply for PBV, CY 2024
     Housing Choice Voucher Program and Application for $200 Million HAP Set-aside
    for Categories 2b — Portability; 3a — Project-Based Vouchers; 3b - MTW_ Expansion
      agencies; 4 -    HUD-VASH; 5 — Lower-than-average Leasing; and/or 7 — NLT
      Inspection Withheld Housing Assistance Payments, as applicable in DocuSign. To
      access the DocuSign Appendix H application, click on the following link: Appendix
      H.
2.    Attach the items identified in a. below to the Appendix H application;
      a. A spreadsheet identifying the amount of CY 2023 withheld HAP, by unit, by
          month, and the date of the retroactive payment was made to the owner in CY
           2023; and


      b.   PHAs are required to enter their HAP expense amounts for NLT Inspection
           Withheld HAP in VMS. Entries made after February 9, 2024, will include a Prior
           Month Correction (PMC) in the month which the HAP expense was incurred.
           Additionally, the PHA will enter a comment into the “Comments” field located in
           the “Expense/Comments” tab. The comment will reflect the amount of the HAP
           Expenses entered. Examples of PMC comments are as follows:

      Example 1: NLT withheld HAP expenses for July 2023 is $1,000
      (the above would be entered in the July 2023 Comments field)
                                                                                                   36


          Example 2: NLT withheld HAP expenses for November 2023 = $1,250 (the above
          would be entered in the November 2023 Comments field)

               PMCs in VMS will match the information/documentation the PHA provides as
               required to be eligible for funding under this category of the Set-aside.

       DEADLINE:       No later than 5 p.m., per the PHA’s time zone, Friday, June 14, 2024.

12. Moving To Work Initial Agencies. The initial 39 MTW agencies’ renewal funding is
    determined pursuant to their Standard MTW Agreements and appropriations requirements.
    HUD is directed by the 2024 Act to apply the same proration factor to the HCV HAP
    renewal allocations and administrative fee eligibility for MTW agencies as is applied to all
    other PHAs. The initial MTW agencies may utilize their funds in accordance with their
    Standard MTW Agreements.

13. Moving To Work Expansion Agencies. As is the case for non-MTW PHAs under current
    appropriations law, the HAP renewal funding eligibility for MTW agencies will be calculated
    based on each MTW agency’s actual expenses for the previous calendar year (known as the
    re-benchmark year). Unique to MTW agencies, however, the MTW agency’s actual
    expenses are: 1) the previous Calendar Year’s HAP expenses reported in the Voucher
   Management System (VMS), and 2) the previous CY’s eligible non-HAP MTW             expenses
   reported in VMS. For both HAP and non-HAP MTW expenses, the reported expenses must
   have been paid from an eligible source of funds as described in paragraph (c) of the MTW
   Operations Notice in order to be included in the HAP renewal funding formula. In addition,
   MTW HAP renewal funding is subject to an MTW Renewal Eligibility cap derived from the
   number of units authorized under the MTW agency’s ACC, as described in paragraph (d) of
   the MTW Operations Notice. The lower of the total combined HAP and non-HAP expenses
   or the MTW Renewal Eligibility cap will then be adjusted by the Renewal Funding Inflation
   Factor (RFIF) and any national proration that applies to the HCV renewal appropriation to
   determine the MTW agency’s actual CY HAP renewal funding. Moving to Work Expansion
   agencies are subject to offset. Additional information and examples can be found within the
   MTW Operations Notice available through the following link:
   https://www.hud.gov/sites/dfiles/PIH/documents/FinalMTWExOpsNoticePart          VIWeb.pdf.
   The MTW Expansion agencies may utilize their funds in accordance with the MTW
   Operations Notice.

14. Excluded Programs. The provisions implemented by this notice do not apply to renewal
    funding for the Moderate Rehabilitation Program or Single Room Occupancy (SRO) or to
    renewal and administrative fee funding for the Emergency Housing Voucher (EHV)
    Program. No funding for the EHV program is provided under this notice.

15. HCV Financial Management. HUD is focused on ensuring that PHAs appropriately
    manage their HCV Programs within the funding provided for the CY and existing restricted
    net position (RNP) and HUD-Held program reserves. PHAs are encouraged to use the Two-
    Year Forecasting Tool to assist them in their budgeting and leasing plans. HUD OHVP
    Quality Assurance Division will continue to conduct Financial Management and VMS
                                                                                                 37


   reviews to ensure accurate reporting and recording of PHA incurred expenses to allow for
   accurate renewal funding.

16. HAP Disbursements and Frontloading. PHAs receive monthly disbursements from their
    budgetary allocations in accordance with the cash management procedures in PIH Notice
    2017-06. PHAs may request a frontload when monthly disbursements and available RNP
    and HUD-Held Program Reserves will not cover expenses for the month. PHAs may request
    a frontload via the two-year tool or by submitting a request to the FMC Financial Analyst.
    PHAs will be required to provide HAP expenses not yet reported in VMS and actual HAP
    expenses for the period requested. The frontload will be limited to the amount necessary to
    cover the actual HAP expenses. PHAs in need of a frontload during the year and have excess
    SPV funding available in their RNP, will be provided with a frontload that does not consider
    their available SPV funds as SPV funds may only be used for their intended purposes. PHAs
    must remember that frontloading early in the CY affects the amounts available in later
    months in the CY.

   Finally, HUD is using HUD form 50058 (family report) leasing data in CY 2024 to
   determine HAP monthly disbursements as we transition to the Enterprise Voucher
   Management System (eVMS). HUD will alert each PHA when their payments are calculated
   based on 50058 leasing data. Additional information will be provided through separate
   guidance.

17. Use of HAP and HAP RNP/HUD-Held Program Reserves. PHAs are reminded that funds
    in the HAP RNP account and HUD-Held Program Reserves shall only be used for eligible
    HAP needs in the current CY. The CACC requires PHAs to use HAP funding to cover
    housing assistance payments. HAP and/or PHA reserves (HAP RNP and HUD-Held
    Program Reserves) shall not under any circumstances be used for any other purpose, such as
   to cover administrative expenses or be loaned, advanced, or transferred (referred to as
   operating transfers due to/due from) to other component units or other programs such as the
   Low-Rent (Public Housing) program. Use of HAP for any purpose other than eligible HAP
   needs is a violation of law, and such illegal uses or transfers may result in sanctions and
   possible declaration of breach of the ACC. The current year funding may not be used for
   prior year costs, including by MTW agencies.

   In instances where a PHA is found to have misappropriated HAP and/or HAP RNP/HUD-
   held reserve funds by using the funds for any purpose other than valid HAP expenses for
   units up to the baseline, HUD requires the immediate return of the funds to the HAP or HAP
   RNP/HUD-Held Program Reserves account. HUD may take action, including suspension
   and debarment, against a PHA or any party that has used HAP funds and/or the HAP
   RNP/HUD-Held Program Reserves account for non-HAP purposes.

18. Uses of Administrative Fees. For proper uses and reporting of administrative fees and UNP
    HUD issued additional guidance on the use of administrative fees for other expenses under
    PIH Notice 2022-18: Use of Housing Choice Voucher (HCV) and Mainstream Voucher
    Administrative Fees for Other Expenses to Assist Families to Lease Units and continues to
    use PIH Notice 2015-17: Use and Reporting of Administrative Fee Reserves, respectively.
                                                                                                  38



19. VMS/FASS Reporting and Data Integrity.         PHAs must continue to submit required
   financial documents including, but not limited to, monthly VMS      and annual Financial
   Assessment Subsystem electronic submissions. PHAs that do not submit the required data by
   the reporting deadline may be sanctioned as provided by 24 CFR 982.152(d), and in
   accordance with the procedures outlined in PIH Notice 2021-08 or any successor notice.
   PHAs that fail to meet the submission requirements may be subject to administrative actions,
   including but not limited to, an imposition of a penalty against the PHA’s monthly
   administrative fees until the PHA complies with these requirements. This penalty represents
   a permanent reduction for the current CY that shall not be reversed.

20. Prohibition of Over-leasing. The 2024 Act prohibits the use of appropriated HAP funds by
    any PHA, except for PHAs in the MTW demonstration, which are governed by MTW
    program requirements or MTW agreements, to lease units above their CACC baseline units
    during any CY, even if the PHA has sufficient budget authority (BA) and/or RNP to support
    the additional units. If a PHA engages in over-leasing, it must identify other eligible sources
    to pay for the over-leasing, and the PHA must take immediate steps to eliminate any current
    over-leasing. Renewal funding allocations will not include over-leased units. Renewal
    funding eligibility including Mainstream Voucher’s eligibility will be reduced based on the
    number of over-leased unit months and the average PUC during the re-benchmark period.
    PHAs must still report all over-leasing in VMS and must also report $0 HAPs in the
    appropriate categories in VMS.

21. Use of Outside Sources of Funds. HUD issued PIH Notice 2013-28, Guidance on the Use
    of Outside Sources of Funds in the HCV Program. HUD recommends that all PHAs
    carefully review the information contained in the notice.

22. Paperwork Reduction Act. The additional information collection requirements contained
    in this document are approved by the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) under the
   Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995 (44 U.S.C. 3501-3520). The OMB control number is
   2577-0169. In accordance with the Paperwork Reduction Act, HUD may not conduct or
   sponsor, and a person is not required to respond to, a collection of information unless the
   collection displays a currently valid OMB control number.

23. Further Information. Refer all questions regarding this Notice to the Housing Voucher
    Financial Management Division, Office of Public Housing and Voucher Programs, at
    PIHFinancialManagementDivision @hud.gov.




                                       Pas mo
                                      Richard J. Monocchio
                                      Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary
                                      Public and Indian Housing
                                                                                                     39


Appendix A

                 Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2024 (Public Law 118-42)

Tenant-Based Rental Assistance — Overall Funding and Renewals:

For activities and assistance for the provision of tenant-based rental assistance authorized under
the United States Housing Act of 1937, as amended (42 U.S.C. 1437 et seq.) (in this title “the
Act’), not otherwise provided for, $28,386,831,000, to remain available until expended, which
shall be available on October 1, 2023 (in addition to the $4,000,000,000 previously appropriated
under this heading that shall be available on October 1, 2023), of which $6,000,000,000 is
designated by the Congress as being for an emergency requirement pursuant to section
251(b)(2)(A)(G) of the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985, and
$4,000,000,000, to remain available until expended, which shall be available on October 1,
2024: Provided, That of the sums appropriated under this heading—(1) $28,490,955,000 shall be
available for renewals of expiring section 8 tenant-based annual contributions contracts
(including renewals of enhanced vouchers under any provision of law authorizing such
assistance under section 8(t) of the Act) and including renewal of other special purpose
incremental vouchers: Provided, That notwithstanding any other provision of law, from amounts
provided under this paragraph and any carryover, the Secretary for the calendar year 2024
funding cycle shall provide renewal funding for each public housing agency based on validated
voucher management system (VMS) leasing and cost data for the prior calendar year and by
applying an inflation factor as established by the Secretary, by notice published in the Federal
Register, and by making any necessary adjustments for the costs associated with the first-time
renewal of vouchers under this paragraph including tenant protection and Choice Neighborhoods
vouchers: Provided further, That none of the funds provided under this paragraph may be used to
fund a total number of unit months under lease which exceeds a public housing agency's
authorized level of units under contract, except for public housing agencies participating in the
Moving to Work (MTW)      demonstration, which are instead governed in accordance with the
requirements of the MT'W demonstration program or their MTW agreements, if any: Provided
further, That the Secretary shall, to the extent necessary to stay within the amount specified
under this paragraph (except as otherwise modified under this paragraph), prorate each public
housing agency's allocation otherwise established pursuant to this paragraph: Provided
further, That except as provided in the following provisos, the entire amount specified under this
paragraph (except as otherwise modified under this paragraph) shall be obligated to the public
housing agencies based on the allocation and pro rata method described above, and the Secretary
 shall notify public housing agencies of their annual budget by the latter of 60 days after
 enactment of this Act or March 1, 2024: Provided further, That the Secretary may extend the
notification period only after the House and Senate Committees on Appropriations are notified at
least 10 business days in advance of the extension: Provided further, That public housing
 agencies participating in the MTW demonstration shall be funded in accordance with the
requirements of the MT'W demonstration program or their MTW agreements, if any, and shall be
 subject to the same pro rata adjustments under the preceding provisos: Provided further, That the
 Secretary may offset public housing agencies’ calendar year 2024 allocations based on the excess
 amounts of public housing agencies’ net restricted assets accounts, including HUD-held
programmatic reserves (in accordance with VMS data in calendar year 2023 that is verifiable and
                                                                                                    40


 complete), as determined by the Secretary: Provided further, That public housing agencies
participating in the MTW demonstration shall also be subject to the offset, as determined by the
 Secretary, excluding amounts subject to the single fund budget authority provisions of their
MTW agreements, from the agencies’ calendar year 2024 MTW funding allocation: Provided
further, That the Secretary shall use any offset referred to in the preceding two provisos
throughout the calendar year to prevent the termination of rental assistance for families as the
result of insufficient funding, as determined by the Secretary, and to avoid or reduce the
proration of renewal funding allocations: Provided further, That up to $200,000,000 shall be
 available only: (A) for adjustments in the allocations for public housing agencies, after
 application for an adjustment by a public housing agency that experienced a significant increase,
 as determined by the Secretary, in renewal costs of vouchers resulting from unforeseen
circumstances or from portability under section 8(r) of the Act; (B) for vouchers that were not in
use during the previous 12-month period in order to be available to meet a commitment pursuant
to section 8(0)(13) of the Act, or an adjustment for a funding obligation not yet expended in the
previous calendar year for a MTW-eligible activity to develop affordable housing for an agency
added to the MTW demonstration under the expansion authority provided in section 239 of the
Transportation, Housing and Urban Development, and Related Agencies Appropriations Act,
2016 (division L of Public Law 114-113); (C) for adjustments for costs associated with HUD-
Veterans Affairs Supportive Housing (HUD-VASH) vouchers; (D) for public housing agencies
that despite taking reasonable cost savings measures, as determined by the Secretary, would
otherwise be required to terminate rental assistance for families as a result of insufficient
funding; (E) for adjustments in the allocations for public housing agencies that—(i) are leasing a
lower-than-average percentage of their authorized vouchers, (11) have low amounts of budget
authority in their net restricted assets accounts and HUD-held programmatic reserves, relative to
other agencies, and (ii1) are not participating in the Moving to Work demonstration, to enable
such agencies to lease more vouchers; (F) for withheld payments in accordance with section
8(0)(8)(A)(i1) of the Act for months in the previous calendar year that were subsequently paid by
the public housing agency after the agency’s actual costs were validated; and (G) for public
housing agencies that have experienced increased costs or loss of units in an area for which the
President declared a disaster under title IV of the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and
Emergency Assistance Act (42 U.S.C. 5170 et seq.): Provided further, That the Secretary shall
allocate amounts under the preceding proviso based on need, as determined by the Secretary;

Tenant Protection:

$337,000,000 shall be available for section 8 rental assistance for relocation and replacement of
housing units that are demolished or disposed of pursuant to section 18 of the Act, conversion of
section 23 projects to assistance under section 8, relocation of witnesses (including victims of
violent crimes) in connection with efforts to combat crime in public and assisted housing
pursuant to a request from a law enforcement or prosecution agency, enhanced vouchers under
any provision of law authorizing such assistance under section 8(t) of the Act, Choice
Neighborhood vouchers, mandatory and voluntary conversions, and tenant protection assistance
including replacement and relocation assistance or for project-based assistance to prevent the
displacement of unassisted elderly tenants currently residing in section 202 properties financed
between 1959 and 1974 that are refinanced pursuant to Public Law 106-569, as amended, or
under the authority as provided under this Act: Provided, That when a public housing
                                                                                                   41

development is submitted for demolition or disposition under section 18 of the Act, the Secretary
may provide section 8 rental assistance when the units pose an imminent health and safety risk to
residents: Provided further, That the Secretary may provide section 8 rental assistance from
amounts made available under this paragraph for units assisted under a project-based subsidy
contract funded under the “Project-Based Rental Assistance” heading under this title where the
owner has received a Notice of Default and the units pose an imminent health and safety risk to
residents: Provided further, That of the amounts made available under this paragraph, no less
than $5,000,000 may be available to provide tenant protection assistance, not otherwise provided
under this paragraph, to residents residing in low vacancy areas and who may have to pay rents
greater than 30 percent of household income, as the result of: (A) the maturity of   a HUD-insured,
HUD-held or section 202 loan that requires the permission of the Secretary prior to loan
prepayment; (B) the expiration of a rental assistance contract for which the tenants are not
eligible for enhanced voucher or tenant protection assistance under existing law; or (C) the
expiration of affordability restrictions accompanying a mortgage or preservation program
administered by the Secretary: Provided further, That such tenant protection assistance made
available under the preceding proviso may be provided under the authority of section 8(t) or
section 8(0)(13) of the Act: Provided further, That any tenant protection voucher made available
from amounts under this paragraph shall not be reissued by any public housing agency, except
the replacement vouchers as defined by the Secretary by notice, when the initial family that
received any such voucher no longer receives such voucher, and the authority for any public
housing agency to issue any such voucher shall cease to exist: Provided further, That the
Secretary may only provide replacement vouchers for units that were occupied within the
previous 24 months that cease to be available as assisted housing, subject only to the availability
of funds;

Administrative Fees:

$2,770,935,000 shall be available for administrative and other expenses of public housing
agencies in administering the section 8 tenant-based rental assistance program, of which up to
$30,000,000 shall be available to the Secretary to allocate to public housing agencies that need
additional funds to administer their section 8 programs, including fees associated with section 8
tenant protection rental assistance, the administration of disaster related vouchers, HUD-VASH
vouchers, and other special purpose incremental vouchers: Provided, That no less than
$2,740,935,000 of the amount provided in this paragraph shall be allocated to public housing
agencies for the calendar year 2024 funding cycle based on section 8(q) of the Act (and related
appropriation Act provisions) as in effect immediately before the enactment of the Quality
Housing and Work Responsibility Act of 1998 (Public Law 105-276): Provided further, That if
the amounts made available under this paragraph are insufficient to pay the amounts determined
under the preceding proviso, the Secretary may decrease the amounts allocated to agencies by a
uniform percentage applicable to all agencies receiving funding under this paragraph or may, to
the extent necessary to provide full payment of amounts determined under the preceding proviso,
utilize unobligated balances, including recaptures and carryover, remaining from funds
appropriated under this heading from prior fiscal years, excluding special purpose vouchers,
notwithstanding the purposes for which such amounts were appropriated: Provided further, That
all public housing agencies participating in the MTW demonstration shall be funded in
accordance with the requirements of the MTW demonstration program or their MT'W
                                                                                                   42

agreements, if any, and shall be subject to the same uniform percentage decrease as under the
preceding proviso: Provided further, That amounts provided under this paragraph shall be only
for activities related to the provision of tenant-based rental assistance authorized under section 8,
including related development activities;

Mainstream    Vouchers:


$742,941,000 shall be available for the renewal of tenant-based assistance contracts under
section 811 of the Cranston-Gonzalez National Affordable Housing Act (42 U.S.C. 8013),
including necessary administrative expenses: Provided, That administrative and other expenses
of public housing agencies in administering the special purpose vouchers in this paragraph shall
be funded under the same terms and be subject to the same pro rata reduction as the percent
decrease for administrative and other expenses to public housing agencies under paragraph (3) of
this heading: Provided further, That up to $10,000,000 shall be available only—(A) for
adjustments in the allocation for public housing agencies, after applications for an adjustment by
a public housing agency that experienced a significant increase, as determined by the Secretary,
in Mainstream renewal costs resulting from unforeseen circumstances; and (B) for public
housing agencies that despite taking reasonable cost savings measures, as determined by the
 Secretary, would otherwise be required to terminate the rental assistance for Mainstream families
 as a result of insufficient funding: Provided further, That the Secretary shall allocate amounts
under the preceding proviso based on need, as determined by the Secretary: Provided
further, That upon turnover, section 811 special purpose vouchers funded under this heading in
this or prior Acts, or under any other heading in prior Acts, shall be provided to non-elderly
persons with disabilities;

Tribal HUD-VASH        Renewals:

 Of the amounts provided under paragraph (1), up to $7,500,000 shall be available for rental
 assistance and associated administrative fees for Tribal HUD-—VASH to serve Native American
veterans that are homeless or at-risk of homelessness living on or near a reservation or other
Indian areas: Provided, That such amount shall be made available for renewal grants to
recipients that received assistance under prior Acts under the Tribal HUD-VASH
program: Provided further, That the Secretary shall be authorized to specify criteria for renewal
 grants, including data on the utilization of assistance reported by grant recipients: Provided
further, That such assistance shall be administered in accordance with program requirements
under the Native American Housing Assistance and Self-Determination Act of 1996 and
modeled after the HUD-VASH program: Provided further, That the Secretary shall be
 authorized to waive, or specify alternative requirements for any provision of any statute or
regulation that the Secretary administers in connection with the use of funds made available
under this paragraph (except for requirements related to fair housing, nondiscrimination, labor
 standards, and the environment), upon a finding by the Secretary that any such waivers or
 alternative requirements are necessary for the effective delivery and administration of such
 assistance: Provided further, That grant recipients shall report to the Secretary on utilization of
 such rental assistance and other program data, as prescribed by the Secretary: Provided
further, That the Secretary may reallocate, as determined by the Secretary, amounts returned or
                                                                                                   43


recaptured from awards under the Tribal HUD-VASH program under prior Acts to existing
recipients under the Tribal HUD-VASH program;

HUD-VASH Program:

$15,000,000 shall be available for incremental rental voucher assistance for use through a
supported housing program administered in conjunction with the Department of Veterans Affairs
as authorized under section 8(0)(19) of the United States Housing Act of 1937: Provided, That
the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development shall make such funding available,
notwithstanding section 203 (competition provision) of this title, to public housing agencies that
partner with eligible VA Medical Centers or other entities as designated by the Secretary of the
Department of Veterans Affairs, based on geographical need for such assistance as identified by
the Secretary of the Department of Veterans Affairs, public housing agency administrative
performance, and other factors as specified by the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development
in consultation with the Secretary of the Department of Veterans Affairs: Provided further, That
the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development may waive, or specify alternative
requirements for (in consultation with the Secretary of the Department of Veterans Affairs), any
provision of any statute or regulation that the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development
administers in connection with the use of funds made available under this paragraph (except for
requirements related to fair housing, nondiscrimination, labor standards, and the environment),
upon a finding by the Secretary that any such waivers or alternative requirements are necessary
for the effective delivery and administration of such voucher assistance: Provided further, That
assistance made available under this paragraph shall continue to remain available for homeless
veterans upon turn-over: Provided further, That of the total amount made available under this
paragraph, up to $10,000,000 may be for additional fees established by and allocated pursuant to
a method determined by the Secretary for administrative and other expenses (including those
eligible activities defined by notice to facilitate leasing, such as security deposit assistance and
costs related to the retention and support of participating owners) of public housing agencies in
administering HUD-—VASH vouchers;

Family Unification Program:

(7) $30,000,000 shall be available for the family unification program as authorized under section
8(x) of the Act: Provided, That the amounts made available under this paragraph are provided as
follows: (A) $5,000,000 shall be available for new incremental voucher assistance, which shall
continue to remain available for family unification upon turnover; and (B) $25,000,000 shall be
available for new incremental voucher assistance to assist eligible youth as defined by such
section 8(x)(2)(B) of the Act, which shall continue to remain available for such eligible youth
upon turnover: Provided, That such amounts shall be available on a noncompetitive basis to
public housing agencies that partner with public child welfare agencies to identify such eligible
youth, that request such assistance to timely assist such eligible youth, and that meet any other
criteria as specified by the Secretary: Provided further, That the Secretary shall review utilization
of such assistance and assistance originating from appropriations made available for youth under
this heading in any prior Act that the Secretary made available on a noncompetitive basis, at an
interval to be determined by the Secretary, and unutilized voucher assistance that is no longer
needed based on such review shall be recaptured by the Secretary and reallocated pursuant to the
                                                                                                44

preceding proviso: Provided further, That any public housing agency administering new
incremental voucher assistance originating from appropriations made available for the family
unification program under this heading in this or any prior Act that the Secretary made available
on a competitive basis that determines it no longer has an identified need for such assistance
upon turnover shall notify the Secretary, and the Secretary shall recapture such assistance from
the agency and reallocate it to any other public housing agency or agencies based on need for
voucher assistance in connection with such specified program or eligible youth, as applicable;
and

Tracking of Special Purpose Vouchers:

The Secretary shall separately track all special purpose vouchers funded under this heading.
                                                                                                                  45


           Appendix B


                                            CY 2024 Offset for Reallocation

             HA   Number:
             HA   Name:


             CY 2023 End of Year Reserves

             PROTECTED CATEGORIES
             Difference between the PHA's Eligibility and Prorated Eligibility
oO w>




             CY 2024 Amounts needed to fully lease VASH             units
             Difference between higher of December 2023 UMLs x 12 or CY 2023 UMLs up to baseline on units
             under CACC
             Difference between   December 2023, PUC, and Inflated CY 2024 PUC at capped annualized
             December leasing
OnmmMmos




             CY 2023 New incremental       BA- 1/2 of Eligibility
             CY 2023 Set Aside Protection- 1/2 of Eligibility
             Portion of CY 2024 Renewal Eligibility (Based on units under CACC):
                    4% - 500 and above units
                    6% - 250 to 499 unit
                      12% - Less than 250 units
             PHAs with CY 2023 inflation factors that were higher than the CY 2023 national weighted average
             inflator
               Difference of CY 2023 Inflated Renewal Funding compared to CY 2024 Inflated Renewal funding is
               Protected
             Protect 1/2 of RAD 1 HAP for Projects in their 1st Full of Year of Funding during CY 2023
             Total Funds Available for Offset
             Offset Amount (Total Funds Available for Offset x 68%)


             Prorated Eligibility After Offset
              PHAs that received 2023 Shortfall funds or are facing a projected Shortfall in 2024 based on verified
               CY 2023 VMS data are exempt from this offset.
              PHAs that received 2023 Lower-than-average Leasing funds are exempt from this offset.
Appendix E

                Calculation of HUD-Confirmed Shortfall and Shortfall Amount

The amount that a PHA will be eligible to receive from the $200,000,000 HCV Program HAP
Set-aside and the $10,000,000 Mainstream Voucher HAP Set-aside will be calculated by HUD,
using HUD’s Two-Year Forecasting Tool (see link) and the most recent validated voucher
leasing and expense data available in VMS at the time the PHA’s application is reviewed,
including any updated information supplied by the PHA. HUD’s Two-Year Forecasting Tool
can be found at the Office of Housing Choice Vouchers website that includes a link to the two-
year tool instruction page.

The two-year tool compares all resources available (including ARP Extraordinary Circumstances
renewal adjustments for PUC increases) to support the PHA’s HAP payments in CY 2024 with
actual HAP expenses for 2024 projected through the end of the CY based upon the best
information available.

Resources are calculated using the HUD-calculated RNP as of 12/31/2023, the HUD-held
reserve as of 12/31/2023, the PHA’s actual Renewal Annual Budget Authority (ABA) for 2024,
and any new voucher incremental funding applicable to CY 2024 or HAP Set-aside amounts
awarded or expected to be awarded in 2024.

HAP expenses are calculated based on current leasing and expense data, projected through the
end of CY 2024; the PHA’s suspension of general voucher issuance; and projected attrition
based on actual attrition for the 12 months prior to the PHA’s request for HAP Set-aside funds,
adjusted for accuracy if the PHA has more recent information that will impact the attrition rate in
future months, as reported in PIC, and considering any updated information supplied by the
PHA.

The requirement to suspend general voucher issuance is subject to the following exclusions:

    1.   Vouchers issued to current HCV participants, to allow them to move.

    2.   Vouchers issued to avert a reduction in leasing due to program attrition. The PHA must
         manage the issuance of these vouchers so that the PHA does not exceed the number of
         units leased at the time of the SPT-confirmed shortfall and any additional units that are
         also authorized to be leased in accordance with these requirements. Under the
         supervision of SPT, PHAs with the available budget authority and units to increase
         leasing in 2025, may issue vouchers off the waitlist as early as November 2024 in
         accordance with time from issuance to HAP execution.

         In general, a PHA may reissue the turnover voucher to a family from the PHA waiting
         list, except for eligible HUD-VASH turnovers where a referral is provided by the
         Veterans Administration Medical Centers (VAMC), issue the voucher to a family
         moving from a Project-Based Voucher (PBV) unit in accordance with 24 CFR 983.261,
         or use the voucher to absorb a family under portability.
                                                                                                 47


         However, a PBV family that has the right to move in accordance with 24 CFR 983.261
         and wishes to do so has priority for the turnover voucher.

    3.   Instances in which the PHA is leasing under the HUD-VASH program up to the baseline
         level of units under all HUD-VASH allocations (not just recent allocations), including
         turnover of HUD-VASH vouchers.

    4.   Vouchers issued to program applicants under Tenant Protection vouchers (TPVs) or
         special-purpose voucher increments awarded in CY 2023 or CY 2024. These SPVs
         include Family Unification Program (FUP), Non-Elderly Disabled (NED), and Foster the
         Youth to Independence (FYI) vouchers.

    5.   Project-Based Vouchers (PBV) under the Rental Assistance Demonstration (RAD)
         funded through the HCV Program. This includes HUD-approved contractual obligations
         associated with Faircloth to RAD projects.

    6.   PHAs may allow applicants to move into PBV units to allow the PHA to meet its
         contractual obligation to fill PBV AHAP units being placed under HAP for the first time,
         and PBV units currently under HAP that are vacated by program participants.

    7.   Vouchers issued pursuant to the settlement of litigation (“Litigation Vouchers”) against a
         PHA. PHAs must request approval to continue leasing Litigation Vouchers and submit
         supporting documentation. HUD will review and decide on a case-by-case basis using
         the supporting documentation received as the basis for the decision.

    8.   Vouchers issued using funds awarded under the Lower-than-average Leasing HAP Set-
         aside category.

    9.   The Secretary reserves the right to consider additional exceptions on a case-by-case
         basis.

PHAs cannot issue vouchers and/or execute HAP contracts for families that do not meet any of
the exceptions through the end of CY 2024, or until advised in writing by the SPT that they no
longer have a shortfall. In addition, HUD reserves the right to suspend leasing for any of the
above exception categories or altogether if necessary.

The application period for shortfall Set-aside funding will remain open until SPT has reconciled
Shortfalls for all PHAs for CY 2024, subject to funding availability. PHAs that receive Set-aside
funds based on their current HAP costs are encouraged to maintain contact with the SPT to
ensure all shortfall needs are met. Similarly, PHAs that do not initially qualify for shortfall
funding because they have suspended leasing and expect to decrease leasing by attrition are also
encouraged to maintain contact with the local Field Office and the SPT if the attrition fails to
resolve their shortfall.

All PHAs applying for the shortfall Set-aside must be working with HUD’s SPT at the time of
their application. The SPT will review the PHA’s funding available for 2024 and their leasing
                                                                                                   48


and expense data to date, to determine whether the PHA has a shortfall and the amount needed to
resolve the shortfall. The PHA will continue to work with the SPT throughout the year to
monitor the PHA’s financial position and to implement cost savings measures outlined in PIH
Notice 2011-28 or a superseding notice published by HUD to decrease the possibility of an
increased shortfall. PHAs must adhere to the eligibility requirements detailed in Section 11 of
this Notice or a superseding notice.

Factors considered by the SPT to determine the amount of a potential shortfall will be
determined as follows:

   a.   Cash Supported Total Reserves as of 12/31/2023:        SPT will use the Cash Supported
        Total Reserves as of 12/31/2023, which consists of the HUD-Held Reserve, and the lower
        of HUD-Estimated RNP, PHA Reported RNP as of 12/31/2023, or the actual amount of
        cash on hand to support the RNP. If there is a discrepancy with any of these amounts the
        PHA will be required to provide documentation as requested before this adjustment is
        made.

   b.   HUD-held reserve as of 12/31/2023:      SPT will use the balance reported to SPT by
        HUD’s FMC.

   c.   2024 Renewal ABA:      Actual renewal ABA awards for CY 2024.


   d.   SPV_and tenant protection funding and Set-asides: FMC will provide amounts to be
        made available to the PHA in CY 2024 for special purpose voucher and tenant protection
        funding increments applicable to any portion of CY 2024, and for any Set-aside funding
        previously awarded in CY 2024. If necessary, the SPT will make adjustments to the
        shortfall Set-aside award to ensure that new increment funding for Mainstream, SPVs,
        Lower-than-average Leasing Set-aside, and/or TPVs remains available to lease the newly
        awarded number of SPVs and/or TPVs, rather than being used to cover the general
        shortfall.

   e.   Unit months leased: The unit months leased (UML) for CY 2024 will be projected by
        taking the number of units reported in VMS in the last month available and projecting
        that number through the end of the year. Reductions to projected leasing will be made to
        adjust for attrition, in accordance with the annual turnover rate used in the two-year tool.
        This rate is derived from the PHA’s PIC data on families end of participation (EOP).
        Increases to projected leasing will be made for vouchers issued prior to the date of the
        notification by the SPT of a potential shortfall and for additional leasing resulting from
        the admission of families described in each exception category above except that no
        adjustments will be made for mover families who receive vouchers in accordance with
        category 1.

   f.   Total HAP expense:     Total HAP expense for CY 2024 will be based on a projection of
        the unit months leased for CY 2024 (described in e above) at the per-unit cost taken from
        the PHA’s most recent VMS report, and considering any updated information supplied by
        the PHA.   If the PHA’s PUC increases in future months, and the PHA again determines
                                                                                                 49


    that it is in danger of a shortfall, an additional shortfall award may be made without the
    need to reapply.

.   Vouchers issued or projected to be issued:     The number of vouchers issued as of the
    date of notification by the SPT of a potential shortfall, as shown in the PHA’s VMS
    report, will be used to determine future leasing, if any, from vouchers issued prior to the
    date of notification by the SPT of a potential shortfall. PHAs can only reissue turnover
    vouchers after receiving SPT notification of a potential shortfall. Planned issuances
    for vouchers exempt from the suspension will be shown in the months they will be
    issued. The projected HAP costs for these units will be affected by the voucher success
    rate provided by the PHA and average time from issuance of the voucher to the HAP
    effective date. HUD has the right to suspend leasing altogether if necessary.

    Other Planned Additions or Reductions to Leased Units: This field incorporates into
    the leasing schedule other planned additions to leasing with fixed start dates, such as the
    dates that PBV units currently under AHAP are scheduled to come under HAP. The
    calculated HAP cost for these units is not subject to the success rate calculation.

    2024 Year-End Total HAP Reserve Balance: Any PHA with a negative projected 2024
    year-end balance will be considered a shortfall PHA. PHAs with year-end balances of $0
    or above will not be considered shortfall PHAs or eligible to receive shortfall Set-aside
    funds.

    Available UNP and Other Non-Federal Cash: In cases where the needed shortfall
    amount is hard to determine due to factors like many potential voucher lease ups still to
    occur, rapidly changing PUCs, unclear attrition rates, etc., the SPT will consider the
    availability UNP or other non-federal cash that the PHA could use to temporarily cover
    HAP payments and may reduce the shortfall award amount accordingly. If the shortfall
    award does not fully meet the need, the PHA then has UNP or other non-federal funds to
    ensure all landlords get paid on time, and the SPT can provide an additional shortfall
    award at the appropriate time to make the HCV or Mainstream Vouchers whole, allowing
    the PHA to repay the UNP or other non-federal account for the amount borrowed to pay
    landlords on time. This would reduce the number of shortfall awards that are estimated
    and end up more than the PHA actually needed.
                                                                                                                          50


       Appendix L

             CY 2024 Quick Reference and Timeline Sheet for HAP Set-aside Funds

Category             Deadline     PHA must submit - Failure to provide the items identified in each of the           Mainstream
                     Date         below categories the PHA applies in DocuSign, WILL result in a                     Voucher Set-
                                  rejection of the PHA’s application(s)                                              Aside
                                                                                                                     Eligibility
1.   Shortfall       3/10/2025        e    Completed and signed 2024 Appendix F                                      Yes
     Funds                        *All applications must be submitted in DocuSign.

2a. Unforeseen       06/14/2024       e    Completed and signed 2024 Appendix G, and,                                Yes
     Circumstances                    e    A written narrative describing the unforeseen circumstance for the
                                           HCV Program and/or for Mainstream Vouchers
                                  *All applications must be completed with ED signature and submitted in
                                  DocuSign.

2b. Portability      06/14/2024       e    Completed and signed 2024 Appendix H                                      No
                                  *All applications must be completed with ED signature and submitted in
                                  DocuSign.

3a. PBV              06/14/2024       e    1 Completed and signed 2024 Appendix H per PHA                            No
                                      e    Completed and signed 2024 Appendix I for each project

                                  AHAP For each PBV project:
                                     e  The page which identifies the parties to the AHAP (both the Housing
                                        Authority and the owner);
                                     e  Identification of the project;
                                      e    Section 1.4B i, which identifies the effective date of the agreement;
                                      e    Section 1.4B u, identifies the date of the commencement of the
                                           work;
                                      e    Section 1.4B ii, identifies the time for completion of the work;
                                      e    Exhibit C which identifies the units by size and applicable initial
                                           contract rents for the units to be project-based;
                                      e    If the project is to be completed in stages: Exhibit E which identifies
                                           the schedule of completion of stages (if applicable) (This exhibit
                                           shall identify the units in each stage); and
                                      e    Signature page which provides the signature of both the Housing
                                           Authority and the owner and the dates the AHAP was signed.

                                  HAP Contract for each PBV project: To be eligible for Set-aside funding,
                                  the HAP contract must be executed/signed within CY2024. If the HAP
                                  Contract has not been executed by the application submission date, the PHA
                                  must state when the HAP contract will be executed. If the HAP contract has
                                  been executed by the application submission date, the PHA must provide,
                                  from PART 1 of the HAP Contract for New Constructions or
                                  Rehabilitation, the following;
                                       e    The page which identifies the parties to the HAP Contract (both the
                                           Housing Authority and the owner);
                                      e   Exhibit A which identifies the total number of units in the project
                                          covered by the HAP Contract; the initial Contract Rent to owner, and
                                          the number and description of the contract units;
                                      e = If the project is to be completed in stages: in addition to item b.
                                          described in the above AHAP section that states the requirement for
                                                                                                                 51


Category    Deadline     PHA must submit - Failure to provide the items identified in each of the              Mainstream
            Date         below categories the PHA applies in DocuSign, WILL result in a                        Voucher Set-
                         rejection of the PHA’s application(s)                                                 Aside
                                                                                                               Eligibility
                                   the “Identification of the project’, Exhibit A must also identify the
                                   units to be completed in each phase covered by the HAP Contract;
                                   Exhibit B, which identifies the services, maintenance, and utilities to
                                   be provided by the owner;
                                   Exhibit C, which identifies the utilities available in the contract unit,
                                   including a listing of utility services to be paid by the owner (without
                                   charges in addition to the rent to owner) and utilities to be paid by
                                   the tenant;
                                   Section 2a, which identifies the initial term of the contract; and
                                  Signature page which provides the signature of both the Housing
                                  Authority and the owner and the dates the HAP was signed.
                         *All applications must be completed to include ED signature and
                         additional requirements must be submitted in DocuSign.

3b. MTW     06/14/2024   For PBV    Commitment:
Expansion                          Follow all the above requirements for category 3a. PVB
Agencies
                         For MTW-eligible commitment/activity development (excluding PBV):
                                  Completed and signed 2024 Appendix H;
                                  Completed and signed 2024 Appendix J for each project;
                                  An approved Annual PHA Plan and MTW Supplement,
                                  identifying the PHA’s binding agreement indicating its planned use
                                  of HAP funding, for each MTW-eligible development commitment
                                  for which a request is being made under this category; and
                                  Documentation to demonstrate the PHA will require an outlay or
                                  expenditure of funds, immediately or in the future for the MTW-
                                  eligible development activity to include the submission of any
                                  completed HUD documentation to date as it relates to the
                                  development, for each MTW-eligible development commitment for
                                  which a request is being made under this category.
                         *All applications must be completed to include ED signature and
                         additional requirements must be submitted in DocuSign.

4.   HUD-   09/27/2024             Completed and signed Appendix H with a. and/or b. marked.
     VASH                              a. Per Unit Cost Increase: For PHAs whose program-wide
                                           funded CY 2024 HAP PUC is less than their current HUD-
                                           VASH HAP PUC based on their latest HUD-VASH HAP
                                           expenses in CY 2024, HUD will calculate eligibility under
                                           this category. Therefore, no additional documentation will
                                           be required or accepted other than Appendix H, which must
                                           be completed, signed, and submitted by the deadline date.
                                            and/or
                                       b.   Leasing Increase: For PHAs whose HUD-VASH leasing
                                            for CY 2024 will exceed the leasing level included in their
                                            renewal funding, plus the leasing that will be supported by
                                            the RNP and HUD-Held Program Reserves, HUD will
                                            calculate eligibility under this category. Therefore, no
                                            additional documentation will be required or accepted other
                                            than Appendix H, which must be completed, signed, and
                                            submitted by the deadline date.
                                                                                                                     52


Category          Deadline     PHA must submit - Failure to provide the items identified in each of the            Mainstream
                  Date         below categories the PHA applies in DocuSign, WILL result in a                      Voucher Set-
                               rejection of the PHA’s application(s)                                               Aside
                                                                                                                   Eligibility
                               *All applications must be complete to include ED signature and
                               additional requirements must be submitted in DocuSign.

5.   Lower-       06/14/2024            Completed and signed 2024 Signed Appendix H.
     than-                     *All applications must be completed to include ED signature and
     average                   additional requirements must be submitted in DocuSign.
     Leasing
6.   Disaster     12/27/2024   Loss of Units Category of Disaster:
                                        Completed and signed 2024 Appendix K;
                                        Written narrative, detailing the impact of the disaster that has caused
                                        a loss of units, the PHA’s assessment of the availability of rental
                                        housing stock in the PHAs jurisdiction, a description of any plans in
                                        the jurisdiction to increase the availability of rental stock, which may
                                        include the PHA’s plan to project-base additional vouchers to
                                        increase the supply of units available to voucher families, and the
                                        number of families currently on the PHA’s HCV waiting list and if
                                        the waiting list is currently open or closed; and
                                        Evidence to support the narrative.

                               Increased Costs Category of Disaster:
                                        Completed and signed Appendix K;
                                        Written narrative detailing the impact the disaster had in causing the
                                        increased costs, the PUC requested; and
                                        Evidence to support the narrative (how the requested PUC was
                                        determined).
                               *All applications must be complete to include ED signature and
                               additional requirements must be submitted in DocuSign.

7.   NLT          6/14/2024             Completed and signed 2024 Appendix H;
     Inspection                         A spreadsheet identifying the amount of CY 2023 withheld HAP, by
     Withheld                           unit, by month, and the date of the retroactive payment was made to
     Housing                            the owner in CY 2024; and
     Assistance
                                        PHAs are required to enter their HAP expense amounts for NLT
     Payments
                                        Inspection Withheld HAP in VMS.

                               *All applications and additional requirements must be completed to
                               include ED signature and submitted in DocuSign.
