                                                                                                     DAN     JOHNSON
                                                                                                              DIRECTOR

CLACKAMAS
  COUNT Y                                           DEPARTMENT       OF   TRANSPORTATION       AND   DEVELOPMENT

                                                                                 DEVE LOPMENT    SERVICES     BUILDING
                                                             150   BEAVERCREEK   ROAD      OREGON    City,   OR   97045




   November 30, 2023                                      BCC Agenda Date/Item:


   Board of County Commissioners
   Clackamas County


       Approval of a Personal Services Contract with Carl Douglas Cox for Code
      Compliance Hearings Officer services. Total value is $600,000 for six years.
     Funding is through permitting revenue, solid waste franchise fees and fees for
                      service.   No County General Funds are involved.

     Previous Board          Request for Consent:    11-28-23
     Action/Review
     Performance             Ensure safe, healthy, and secure communities
     Clackamas               Build public trust through good government
     Counsel Review          Yes — AN                   Procurement                      Yes
                                                          Review
     Contact Person          Michelle Amend               Contact Phone                  503-742-4785


   EXECUTIVE SUMMARY: The Board of County Commissioners has adopted code
   compliance regulations and procedures pursuant to County Code Chapter 2.07, Chapter
   7.03, Chapter 9.01, Chapter 9.02, Chapter 9.03, Chapter 10.03, Chapter 10.04, and Title
   12 and 13 that are enforced by the Code Enforcement Program within the Department of
   Transportation and Development (DTD).

   In providing enforcement, where feasible and legally permissible Code Enforcement
   offers a range of enforcement opportunities to all parties, including voluntary compliance,
   education, and mediation. When a greater level of enforcement is required a citation may
   be issued and a formal compliance hearing takes place.

   Compliance hearings are heard by a
   hearings officer who serves as an
   impartial and unbiased decision-maker
   to hear these matters and issue fines,                          For Filing Use Only
   fees, costs, expenses,   conditions, or
   restrictions. The compliance hearing
   process provides accountability and
   motivates compliance with the

                  P. 503.742.4400       F. 503.742.4272        WWW.CLACKAMAS.US
ordinances and regulations which support the livability, health, and safety of people and
pets in Clackamas County.

With the current contract for hearings officer services expiring on December 31, 2023,
DTD staff worked with County Procurement to issue a request for proposals (RFP) for
compliance hearings officer services.

PROCUREMENT        PROCESS:

The RFP was advertised in accordance with ORS and LCRB Rules on September 14,
2023. Proposals were received on October 16, 2023. The County received one (1)
proposal. An evaluation committee of DTD personnel evaluated the proposal. The
evaluation committee scored the proposal and confirmed it met the RFP requirements and
eventual needs of the county.

RECOMMENDATION:           Staff respectfully recommends that the Board of County
Commissioners approve contract #8748 with Carl Douglas Cox, Municipal Hearings
Official, for professional code compliance hearings officer services.


Respecttully submitted,




Dan Johnson,   Director
Department of Transportation & Development




                                           Page 2 of 2
      A
CLACKAMAS
  COUNTY
                                         CLACKAMAS COUNTY
                                    PERSONAL SERVICES CONTRACT
                                                 Contract #8748

This Personal Services Contract (this “Contract”) is entered into between Carl Douglas Cox
(“Contractor”), and Clackamas County, a political subdivision of the State of Oregon (“County”), on
behalf of its Department of Transportation and Development.

ARTICLE L.
1. Effective Date and Duration. This Contract shall become effective            January 1, 2024.   Unless earlier
       terminated or extended, this Contract shall expire on December 31, 2025. This Contract may be
       renewed for two (2) additional two-year periods upon the mutual agreement of both parties.

       Scope of Work. Contractor shall provide the following personal services: Compliance Hearings
       Officer (“Work”), further described in Exhibit A.

       Consideration. For accomplishing the Work required by this Contract, the maximum annual amount
       County may pay Contractor, from available and authorized funds, shall not to exceed One Hundred
       Thousand Dollars ($100,000), for a total Contract amount, including all optional renewals, not to
       exceed Six Hundred Thousand Dollars ($600,000). Consideration rates are on a time and materials
       basis in accordance with the rates and costs specified in Exhibit B. If any interim payments to
       Contractor are made, such payments shall be made only in accordance with the schedule and
       requirements in Exhibit B.

       Invoices and Payments. Unless otherwise specified, Contractor shall submit monthly invoices for
       Work performed. Invoices shall describe all Work performed with particularity, by whom it was
       performed, and shall itemize and explain all expenses for which reimbursement is claimed. The
       invoices shall include the total amount billed to date by Contractor prior to the current invoice. If
       Contractor fails to present invoices in proper form within sixty (60) calendar days after the end of the
       month in which the services were rendered, Contractor waives any rights to present such invoice
       thereafter and to receive payment therefor. Payments shall be made in accordance with ORS 293.462
       to Contractor following the County’s review and approval of invoices submitted by Contractor.
       Contractor shall not submit invoices for, and the County will not be obligated to pay, any amount in
       excess of the maximum compensation amount set forth above. If this maximum compensation
       amount is increased by amendment of this Contract, the amendment must be fully effective before
       Contractor performs Work subject to the amendment.

       Invoices shall reference the above Contract Number and be submitted to: MAmend(@clackamas.us

       Travel and Other Expense. Authorized: [|] Yes         [X] No
       If travel expense reimbursement is authorized in this Contract, such expense shall only be reimbursed
       at the rates in the County Contractor Travel Reimbursement Policy, hereby incorporated by reference
       and found at: https://www.clackamas.us/finance/terms.html.Travel expense re1mbursement is not in
       excess of the not to exceed consideration.

       Contract Documents. This Contract consists of the following documents, which are listed in
       descending order of precedence and are attached and incorporated by reference, this Contract, Exhibit
       A, and Exhibit B.

7.      Contractor and County Contacts.
     Contractor Administrator: Carl D. Cox                   County Administrator:
     Phone: 503-504-1770                                     Phone: 503-742-4785
     Email: carldcox@yahoo.com                               Email: MAmend@clackamas.us

Rev    8/2023                                         Page   1
Payment information will be reported to the Internal Revenue Service (“IRS”) under the name and
taxpayer ID number submitted. (See I.R.S. 1099 for additional instructions regarding taxpayer ID
numbers.) Information not matching IRS records will subject Contractor payments to backup
withholding.

ARTICLE IL.
1.    ACCESS TO RECORDS. Contractor shall maintain books, records, documents, and other evidence,
      in accordance with generally accepted accounting procedures and practices, sufficient to reflect
      properly all costs of whatever nature claimed to have been incurred and anticipated to be incurred in
      the performance of this Contract. County and their duly authorized representatives shall have access
      to the books, documents, papers, and records of Contractor, which are directly pertinent to this
      Contract for the purpose of making audit, examination, excerpts, and transcripts. Contractor shall
      maintain such books and records for a minimum of six (6) years, or such longer period as may be
      required by applicable law, following final payment and termination of this Contract, or until the
      conclusion of any audit, controversy or litigation arising out of or related to this Contract, whichever
      date is later.

      AVAILABILITY OF FUTURE FUNDS. Any continuation or extension of this Contract after the
      end of the fiscal period in which it is written is contingent on a new appropriation for each succeeding
      fiscal period sufficient to continue to make payments under this Contract, as determined by the
      County in its sole administrative discretion.

      CAPTIONS. The captions or headings in this Contract are for convenience only and in no way
      define, limit, or describe the scope or intent of any provisions of this Contract.

      COMPLIANCE WITH APPLICABLE LAW. Contractor shall comply with all applicable federal,
      state and local laws, regulations, executive orders, and ordinances, as such may be amended from time
      to time.

      COUNTERPARTS. This Contract may be executed in several counterparts (electronic or otherwise),
      each of which shall be an original, all of which shall constitute the same instrument.

      GOVERNING LAW. This Contract, and all rights, obligations, and disputes arising out of it, shall
      be governed and construed in accordance with the laws of the State of Oregon and the ordinances of
      Clackamas County without regard to principles of conflicts of law. Any claim, action, or suit
      between County and Contractor that arises out of or relates to the performance of this Contract shall
      be brought and conducted solely and exclusively within the Circuit Court for Clackamas County, for
      the State of Oregon. Provided, however, that if any such claim, action, or suit may be brought in a
      federal forum, it shall be brought and conducted solely and exclusively within the United States
      District Court for the District of Oregon. In no event shall this section be construed as a waiver by the
      County of any form of defense or immunity, whether sovereign immunity, governmental immunity,
      immunity based on the Eleventh Amendment to the Constitution of the United States or otherwise,
      from any claim or from the jurisdiction of any court. Contractor, by execution of this Contract, hereby
      consents to the personal jurisdiction of the courts referenced in this section.

      INDEMNITY, RESPONSIBILITY FOR DAMAGES. Contractor shall be responsible for all
      damage to property, injury to persons, and loss, expense, inconvenience, and delay which may be
      caused by, or result from, any act, omission, or neglect of Contractor, its subcontractors, agents, or
      employees. The Contractor agrees to indemnify and defend the County, and its officers, elected

Rev   8/2023                                         Page   2
      officials, agents, and employees, from and against all claims, actions, losses, liabilities, including
      reasonable attorney and accounting fees, and all expenses incidental to the investigation and defense
      thereof, arising out of or based upon Contractor’s acts or omissions in performing under this Contract.

      However, neither Contractor nor any attorney engaged by Contractor shall defend the claim in the
      name of County, purport to act as legal representative of County, or settle any claim on behalf of
      County, without the approval of the Clackamas County Counsel’s Office. County may assume its
      own defense and settlement at its election and expense.

8.    INDEPENDENT CONTRACTOR STATUS. The service(s) to be rendered under this Contract are
      those of an independent contractor. Although the County reserves the right to determine (and
      modify) the delivery schedule for the Work to be performed and to evaluate the quality of the
      completed performance, County cannot and will not control the means or manner of Contractor’s
      performance. Contractor is responsible for determining the appropriate means and manner of
      performing the Work. Contractor is not to be considered an agent or employee of County for any
      purpose, including, but not limited to: (A) The Contractor will be solely responsible for payment of
      any Federal or State taxes required as a result of this Contract; and (B) This Contract is not intended
      to entitle the Contractor to any benefits generally granted to County employees, including, but not
      limited to, vacation, holiday and sick leave, other leaves with pay, tenure, medical and dental
      coverage, life and disability insurance, overtime, Social Security, Workers' Compensation,
      unemployment compensation, or retirement benefits.

9.    INSURANCE. Contractor shall secure at its own expense and keep in effect during the term of the
      performance under this Contract the insurance required and minimum coverage indicated below. The
      insurance requirement outlined below do not in any way limit the amount of scope of liability of
      Contractor under this Contract. Contractor shall provide proof of said insurance and name the County
      as an additional insured on all required liability policies. Proof of insurance and notice of any material
      change should be submitted to the following address: Clackamas County Procurement Division, 2051
      Kaen Road, Oregon City, OR 97045 or emailed to the County Contract Analyst.

                Required - Workers Compensation: Contractor shall comply with the statutory workers’
                compensation requirements in ORS 656.017, unless exempt under ORS 656.027 or 656.126.
                DX] Required — Commercial General Liability: combined single limit, or the equivalent, of not
                less than $1,000,000 per occurrence, with an annual aggregate limit of $2,000,000 for Bodily
                Injury and Property Damage.
                DX] Required — Professional Liability: combined single limit, or the equivalent, of not less than
                $1,000,000 per claim, with an annual aggregate limit of $2,000,000 for damages caused by
                error, omission or negligent acts.
                XX] Required — Automobile Liability: combined single limit, or the equivalent, of not less than
                $1,000,000 per accident for Bodily Injury and Property Damage.

               The policy(s) shall be primary insurance as respects to the County. Any insurance or self-
               insurance maintained by the County shall be excess and shall not contribute to it. Any obligation
               that County agree to a waiver of subrogation is hereby stricken.

10. LIMITATION OF LIABILITIES. This Contract is expressly subject to the debt limitation of
    Oregon counties set forth in Article XI, Section 10, of the Oregon Constitution, and is contingent
    upon funds being appropriated therefore. Any provisions herein which would conflict with law are
    deemed inoperative to that extent. Except for liability arising under or related to Article I, Section 13
    or Section 20 neither party shall be liable for (4) any indirect, incidental, consequential or special
    damages under this Contract or (11) any damages of any sort arising solely from the termination of this
    Contact in accordance with its terms.


Rev   8/2023                                              Page   3
11. NOTICES. Except as otherwise provided in this Contract, any required notices between the parties
    shall be given in writing by personal delivery, email, or mailing the same, to the Contract
    Administrators identified in Article 1, Section 6. If notice is sent to County, a copy shall also be sent
    to: Clackamas County Procurement, 2051 Kaen Road, Oregon City, OR 97045. Any communication
    or notice so addressed and mailed shall be deemed to be given five (5) days after mailing, and
    immediately upon personal delivery, or within 2 hours after the email is sent during County’s normal
    business hours (Monday — Thursday, 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.) (as recorded on the device from which
    the sender sent the email), unless the sender receives an automated message or other indication that
    the email has not been delivered.

12. OWNERSHIP OF WORK PRODUCT. All work product of Contractor that results from this
    Contract (the “Work Product’) is the exclusive property of County. County and Contractor intend
    that such Work Product be deemed “work made for hire” of which County shall be deemed the
    author. If for any reason the Work Product is not deemed “work made for hire,” Contractor hereby
    irrevocably assigns to County all of its right, title, and interest in and to any and all of the Work
    Product, whether arising from copyright, patent, trademark or trade secret, or any other state or
    federal intellectual property law or doctrine. Contractor shall execute such further documents and
    instruments as County may reasonably request in order to fully vest such rights in County.
    Contractor forever waives any and all rights relating to the Work Product, including without
    limitation, any and all rights arising under 17 USC § 106A or any other rights of identification of
    authorship or rights of approval, restriction or limitation on use or subsequent modifications.
    Notwithstanding the above, County shall have no rights in any pre-existing Contractor intellectual
    property provided to County by Contractor in the performance of this Contract except to copy, use
    and re-use any such Contractor intellectual property for County use only.

13. REPRESENTATIONS AND WARRANTIES. Contractor represents and warrants to County that
    (A) Contractor has the power and authority to enter into and perform this Contract; (B) this Contract,
    when executed and delivered, shall be a valid and binding obligation of Contractor enforceable in
    accordance with its terms; (C) Contractor shall at all times during the term of this Contract, be
    qualified, professionally competent, and duly licensed to perform the Work; (D) Contractor is an
    independent contractor as defined in ORS 670.600; and (E) the Work under this Contract shall be
    performed in a good and workmanlike manner and in accordance with the highest professional
    standards. The warranties set forth in this section are in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other
    warranties provided.

14. SURVIVAL. All rights and obligations shall cease upon termination or expiration of this Contract,
    except for the rights and obligations set forth in Article II, Sections 1, 6, 7, 10, 12, 13, 14, 15, 17, 20,
    21, 25, 27, 28, and 29, and all other rights and obligations which by their context are intended to
    survive. However, such expiration shall not extinguish or prejudice the County’s right to enforce this
    Contract with respect to: (a) any breach of a Contractor warranty; or (b) any default or defect in
    Contractor performance that has not been cured.

15. SEVERABILITY. If any term or provision of this Contract is declared by a court of competent
    jurisdiction to be illegal or in conflict with any law, the validity of the remaining terms and provisions
    shall not be affected, and the rights and obligations of the parties shall be construed and enforced as if
    the Contract did not contain the particular term or provision held to be invalid.

16. SUBCONTRACTS AND ASSIGNMENTS. Contractor shall not enter into any subcontracts for any
    of the Work required by this Contract, or assign or transfer any of its interest in this Contract by
    operation of law or otherwise, without obtaining prior written approval from the County, which shall
    be granted or denied in the County’s sole discretion. In addition to any provisions the County may
    require, Contractor shall include in any permitted subcontract under this Contract a requirement that
    the subcontractor be bound by this Article I, Sections 1, 7, 8, 13, 16 and 27 as if the subcontractor

Rev   8/2023                                         Page   4
      were the Contractor. County’s consent to any subcontract shall not relieve Contractor of any of its
      duties or obligations under this Contract.

17. SUCCESSORS IN INTEREST. The provisions of this Contract shall be binding upon and shall
    inure to the benefit of the parties hereto, and their respective authorized successors and assigns.

18. TAX COMPLIANCE CERTIFICATION. The Contractor shall comply with all federal, state and
    local laws, regulation, executive orders and ordinances applicable to this Contract. Contractor
    represents and warrants that it has complied, and will continue to comply throughout the duration of
    this Contract and any extensions, with all tax laws of this state or any political subdivision of this
    state, including but not limited to ORS 305.620 and ORS chapters 316, 317, and 318. Any violation
    of this section shall constitute a material breach of this Contract and shall entitle County to terminate
    this Contract, to pursue and recover any and all damages that arise from the breach and the
    termination of this Contract, and to pursue any or all of the remedies available under this Contract or
    applicable law.

19. TERMINATIONS. This Contract may be terminated for the following reasons: (A) by mutual
    agreement of the parties or by the County (1) for convenience upon thirty (30) days written notice to
    Contractor, or (i1) at any time the County fails to receive funding, appropriations, or other expenditure
    authority as solely determined by the County; or (B) if contractor breaches any Contract provision or
    is declared insolvent, County may terminate after thirty (30) days written notice with an opportunity
      to cure.

      Upon receipt of written notice of termination from the County, Contractor shall immediately stop
      performance of the Work. Upon termination of this Contract, Contractor shall deliver to County all
      documents, Work Product, information, works-in-progress and other property that are or would be
      deliverables had the Contract Work been completed. Upon County’s request, Contractor shall
      surrender to anyone County designates, all documents, research, objects or other tangible things
      needed to complete the Work.

20. REMEDIES. If terminated by the County due to a breach by the Contractor, then the County shall
    have any remedy available to it in law or equity. If this Contract is terminated for any other reason,
    Contractor’s sole remedy is payment for the goods and services delivered and accepted by the
    County, less any setoff to which the County is entitled.

21. NO THIRD PARTY BENEFICIARIES. County and Contractor are the only parties to this Contract
    and are the only parties entitled to enforce its terms. Nothing in this Contract gives, is intended to
    give, or shall be construed to give or provide any benefit or right, whether directly, indirectly or
    otherwise, to third persons unless such third persons are individually identified by name herein and
    expressly described as intended beneficiaries of the terms of this Contract.

22. TIME IS OF THE ESSENCE. Contractor agrees that time is of the essence in the performance of
    this Contract.

23. FOREIGN CONTRACTOR. If the Contractor is not domiciled in or registered to do business in the
    State of Oregon, Contractor shall promptly provide to the Oregon Department of Revenue and the
    Secretary of State, Corporate Division, all information required by those agencies relative to this
    Contract. The Contractor shall demonstrate its legal capacity to perform these services in the State of
    Oregon prior to entering into this Contract.

24. FORCE MAJEURE. Neither County nor Contractor shall be held responsible for delay or default
    caused by events outside the County or Contractor’s reasonable control including, but not limited to,
    fire, terrorism, riot, acts of God, or war. However, Contractor shall make all reasonable efforts to

Rev   8/2023                                        Page   5
      remove or eliminate such a cause of delay or default and shall upon the cessation of the cause,
      diligently pursue performance of its obligations under this Contract.

25. WAIVER. The failure of County to enforce any provision of this Contract shall not constitute a
    waiver by County of that or any other provision.

26. PUBLIC CONTRACTING REQUIREMENTS. Pursuant to the public contracting requirements
    contained in Oregon Revised Statutes (“ORS”) Chapter 279B.220 through 279B.235, Contractor
    shall:
             a. Make payments promptly, as due, to all persons supplying to Contractor labor or
                materials for the prosecution of the work provided for in the Contract.
            b. Pay all contributions or amounts due the Industrial Accident Fund from such Contractor
                 or subcontractor incurred in the performance of the Contract.
             c. Not permit any lien or claim to be filed or prosecuted against County on account of any
                 labor or material furnished.
             d. Pay the Department of Revenue all sums withheld from employees pursuant to ORS
                 316.167.
             e. As applicable, the Contractor shall pay employees for work in accordance with ORS
                279B.235, which 1s incorporated herein by this reference. The Contractor shall comply
                with the prohibitions set forth in ORS 652.220, compliance of which is a material
                 element of this Contract, and failure to comply 1s a breach entitling County to terminate
                this Contract for cause.
             f. Ifthe Work involves lawn and landscape maintenance, Contractor shall salvage, recycle,
                 compost, or mulch yard waste material at an approved site, if feasible and cost effective.

27. NO ATTORNEY FEES. In the event any arbitration, action or proceeding, including any
    bankruptcy proceeding, is instituted to enforce any term of this Contract, each party shall be
    responsible for its own attorneys’ fees and expenses.

28. CONFIDENTIALITY. Contractor acknowledges that it and its employees and agents may, in the
    course of performing their obligations under this Contract, be exposed to or acquire information that
    the County desires or 1s required to maintain as confidential, including information that is protected
    under applicable law, including Personal Information (as “Personal Information” is defined in ORS
    646A.602(11)).

      Contractor agrees to hold any and all information that it is required by law or that the County marks as
      “Confidential” to be held in confidence (“Confidential Information”), using at least the same degree of
      care that Contractor uses in maintaining the confidentiality of its own confidential information, and
      will use the Confidential Information for no purpose other than in the performance of this Contract, and
      to advise each of its employees and agents of their obligations to keep Confidential Information
      confidential.

      Contractor agrees that, except as directed by the County, Contractor will not at any time during or
      after the term of this Contract, disclose, directly or indirectly, any Confidential Information to any
      person, and that upon termination or expiration of this Contract or the County’s request, Contractor
      will turn over to the County all documents, papers, records and other materials in Contractor's
      possession which embody Confidential Information.

      Contractor acknowledges that breach of this Contract, including disclosure of any Confidential
      Information, or disclosure of other information that, at law or in good conscience or equity, ought to
      remain confidential, will give rise to irreparable injury to the County that cannot adequately be
      compensated in damages. Accordingly, the County may seek and obtain injunctive relief against the
      breach or threatened breach of the foregoing undertakings, in addition to any other legal remedies that

Rev   8/2023                                         Page   6
      may be available. Contractor acknowledges and agrees that the covenants contained herein are
      necessary for the protection of the legitimate business interests of the County and are reasonable in
      scope and content.

      Contractor agrees to comply with all reasonable requests by the County to ensure the confidentiality
      and nondisclosure of the Confidential Information, including if requested and without limitation: (a)
      obtaining nondisclosure agreements, in a form approved by the County, from each of Contractor’s
      employees and agents who are performing services, and providing copies of such agreements to the
      County; and (b) performing criminal background checks on each of Contractor’s employees and
      agents who are performing services, and providing a copy of the results to the County.

      Contractor shall report, either orally or in writing, to the County any use or disclosure of Confidential
      Information not authorized by this Contract or in writing by the County, including any reasonable
      belief that an unauthorized individual has accessed Confidential Information. Contractor shall make
      the report to the County immediately upon discovery of the unauthorized disclosure, but in no event
      more than two (2) business days after Contractor reasonably believes there has been such
      unauthorized use or disclosure. Contractor’s report shall identify: (1) the nature of the unauthorized
      use or disclosure, (11) the Confidential Information used or disclosed, (111) who made the unauthorized
      use or received the unauthorized disclosure, (iv) what Contractor has done or shall do to mitigate any
      deleterious effect of the unauthorized use or disclosure, and (v) what corrective action Contractor has
      taken or shall take to prevent future similar unauthorized use or disclosure. Contractor shall provide
      such other information, including a written report, as reasonably requested by the County.

      Notwithstanding any other provision in this Contract, Contractor will be responsible for all damages,
      fines and corrective action (including credit monitoring services) arising from disclosure of such
      Confidential Information caused by a breach of its data security or the confidentiality provisions
      hereunder.

      The provisions in this Section shall operate in addition to, and not as limitation of, the confidentiality
      and similar requirements set forth in the rest of the Contract, as it may otherwise be amended.
      Contractor’s obligations under this Contract shall survive the expiration or termination of the
      Contract, as amended, and shall be perpetual.


29. MERGER. THIS CONTRACT CONSTITUTES THE ENTIRE AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE
    PARTIES WITH RESPECT TO THE SUBJECT MATTER REFERENCED THEREIN. THERE
    ARE NO UNDERSTANDINGS, AGREEMENTS, OR REPRESENTATIONS, ORAL OR
    WRITTEN, NOT SPECIFIED HEREIN REGARDING THIS CONTRACT. NO AMENDMENT,
    CONSENT, OR WAIVER OF TERMS OF THIS CONTRACT SHALL BIND EITHER PARTY
    UNLESS IN WRITING AND SIGNED BY ALL PARTIES. ANY SUCH AMENDMENT,
    CONSENT, OR WAIVER SHALL BE EFFECTIVE ONLY IN THE SPECIFIC INSTANCE AND
    FOR THE SPECIFIC PURPOSE GIVEN. CONTRACTOR, BY THE SIGNATURE HERETO OF
    ITS AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE, IS AN INDEPENDENT CONTRACTOR,
    ACKNOWLEDGES HAVING READ AND UNDERSTOOD THIS CONTRACT, AND
    CONTRACTOR AGREES TO BE BOUND BY ITS TERMS AND CONDITIONS.




Rev   8/2023                                          Page   7
By their signatures below, the parties to this Contract agree to the terms, conditions, and content
expressed herein.

 Carl D. Cox                                               Clackamas County



         J N     (,             11/08/2023
 Authorized Signature                      Date            Chair                            Date



       Carl D. Cox, Attorney at Law
 Name / Title (Printed)                                    Recording Secretary

 N/A
 Oregon Business Registry #                                                                  _
                                                                   /y
                                                           Approved as to Form:
 N/A                        rmation
               / State of Fo
 Entity Type

                                                           County Counsel                             Date




Rev 8/2023                                          Page   &
               EXHIBIT A
               RFP 2023-74




Rev   8/2023      Page   9
                   CLACKAMAS
                       COUNT Y



            REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS #2023-74

                             FOR

TWO PROFESSIONAL CODE COMPLIANCE             HEARINGS    OFFICERS

           BOARD   OF COUNTY COMMISSIONERS
                    TOOTIE SMITH, Chair
                PAUL SAVAS, Commissioner
                MARK SHULL, Commissioner
             MARTHA SCHRADER, Commissioner
                 BEN WEST, Commissioner




                         Gary Schmidt
                     County Administrator


                      Thomas Candelario
                       Contract Analyst

      PROPOSAL    CLOSING   DATE, TIME AND      LOCATION

         DATE:       October 16, 2023

         TIME:       2:00 PM, Pacific Time

         PLACE:      https://bidlocker.us/a/clackamascounty/BidLocker
                                                      SCHEDULE


Request for Proposals Issued... ..........0.cccecceeteeeteeees         September 14, 2023

Protest of Specifications Deadline.............00..ccee               September 21, 2023, 5:00 PM, Pacific Time

Deadline to Submit Clarifying Questions..................             September 28, 2023, 5:00 PM, Pacific Time

Request for Proposals Closing Date and Time.........                  October 16, 2023, 2:00 PM, Pacific Time

Deadline to Submit Protest of Award.............0.0.... Seven (7) days from the Intent to Award

Anticipated Contract Start Date... 0.000000...                   January 2024




                                             TABLE OF CONTENTS


                                Section | — Notice of Request for Proposals

                                Section 2 — Instructions to Proposers

                                Section 3 — Scope of Work

                                Section 4 — Evaluation and Selection Criteria

                                Section 5 — Proposal Content (Including Proposal Certification)




2023-74                                                    Page 11
                                   SECTION 1
                       NOTICE OF REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS

Notice is hereby given that Clackamas County through its Board of County Commissioners will receive
sealed Proposals per specifications until 2:00 PM, October 16, 2023 (“Closing”), to provide Two
Professional Code Compliance Hearings Officers         . No Proposals will be received or considered after
that time.


Location of RFP documents: OregonBuys
RFP Documents can be downloaded from the state of Oregon procurement website (“OregonBuys’’) at
the following address https://oregonbuys. gov/bso/view/login/login.xhtml, Document No. S-C01010-
000008125

Prospective Proposers will need to sign in to download the information and that information will be
accumulated for a Plan Holder's List. Prospective Proposers are responsible for obtaining any Addenda,
clarifying questions, and Notices of Award from OregonBuys.


Submitting Proposals: Bid Locker
Proposals will only be accepted electronically thru a secure online bid submission service, Bid Locker.
Email submissions to Clackamas County email addresses will no longer be accepted.
    A. Completed proposal documents must arrive electronically via Bid Locker located at
         https://bidlocker.us/a/clackamascounty/BidLocker.
    B. Bid Locker will electronically document the date and time of all submissions. Completed
         documents must arrive by the deadline indicated in Section | or as modified by Addendum.
        LATE PROPOSALS WILL NOT BE ACCEPTED.
    C. Proposers must register and create a profile for their business with Bid Locker in order to submit
         for this project. It is free to register for Bid Locker.
    D. Proposers with further questions concerning Bid Locker may review the Vendor’s Guide located
        at https://www.clackamas.us/how-to-bid-on-county-projects .

Contact Information
Procurement Process and Technical Questions: Thomas Candelario,. tcandelario@clackamas.us

The Board of County Commissioners reserves the right to reject any and all Proposals not in compliance
with all prescribed public bidding procedures and requirements, and may reject for good cause any and all
Proposals upon the finding that it is in the public interest to do so and to waive any and all informalities in
the public interest. In the award of the contract, the Board of County Commissioners will consider the
element of time, will accept the Proposal or Proposals which in their estimation will best serve the
interests of Clackamas County and will reserve the right to award the contract to the contractor whose
Proposal shall be best for the public good.

Clackamas County encourages proposals from Minority, Women, Veteran and Emerging Small
Businesses.




                                                    Page |
                                            SECTION 2
                                   INSTRUCTIONS TO PROPOSERS

Clackamas County (“County”) reserves the right to reject any and all Proposals received as a result of this
RFP. County Local Contract Review Board Rules (“LCRB”) govern the procurement process for the County.

2.1       Modification or Withdrawal of Proposal: Any Proposal may be modified or withdrawn at any time
prior to the Closing deadline, provided that a written request 1s received by the County Procurement Division
Director, prior to the Closing. The withdrawal of a Proposal will not prejudice the right of a Proposer to submit
a new Proposal.

2.2      Requests for Clarification and Requests for Change: Proposers may submit questions regarding
the specifications of the RFP. Questions must be received in writing on or before 5:00 p.m. (Pacific Time), on
the date indicated in the Schedule, at the Procurement Division address as listed in Section 1 of this RFP.
Requests for changes must include the reason for the change and any proposed changes to the requirements.
The purpose of this requirement is to permit County to correct, prior to the opening of Proposals, RFP terms
or technical requirements that may be unlawful, improvident or which unjustifiably restrict competition.
County will consider all requested changes and, if appropriate, amend the RFP. No oral or written instructions
or information concerning this RFP from County managers, employees or agents to prospective Proposers shall
bind County unless included in an Addendum to the RFP.

2.3      Protests of the RFP/Specifications: Protests must be in accordance with LCRB C-047-0730.
Protests of Specifications must be received in writing on or before 5:00 p.m. (Pacific Time), on the date
indicated in the Schedule, or within three (3) business days of issuance of any addendum, at the Procurement
Division address listed in Section 1 of this RFP. Protests may not be faxed. Protests of the RFP specifications
must include the reason for the protest and any proposed changes to the requirements.

2.4      Addenda: If any part of this RFP is changed, an addendum will be provided to Proposers that have
provided an address to the Procurement Division for this procurement. It shall be Proposers responsibility to
regularly check OregonBuys for any notices, published addenda, or response to clarifying questions.

2.5       Submission of Proposals: Proposals must be submitted in accordance with Section 5. All Proposals
shall be legibly written in ink or typed and comply in all regards with the requirements of this RFP. Proposals
that include orders or qualifications may be rejected as irregular. All Proposals must include a signature that
affirms the Proposer’s intent to be bound by the Proposal (may be on cover letter, on the Proposal, or the
Proposal Certification Form) shall be signed. If a Proposal is submitted by a firm or partnership, the name and
address of the firm or partnership shall be shown, together with the names and addresses of the members. If
the Proposal is submitted by a corporation, it shall be signed in the name of such corporation by an official
who 1s authorized to bind the contractor. The Proposals will be considered by the County to be submitted in
confidence and are not subject to public disclosure until the notice of intent to award has been issued.

No late Proposals will be accepted. Proposals submitted after the Closing will be considered late and will be
returned unopened. Proposals may not be submitted by telephone or fax.

2.6      Post-Selection Review and Protest of Award: County will name the apparent successful Proposer in
a Notice of Intent to Award published on OregonBuys. Identification of the apparent successful Proposer is
procedural only and creates no right of the named Proposer to award of the contract. Competing Proposers shall
be given seven (7) calendar days from the date on the Notice of Intent to Award to review the file at the
Procurement Division office and file a written protest of award, pursuant to LCRB C-047-0740. Any award
protest must be in writing and must be delivered by email, hand-delivery or mail to the address for the
Procurement Division as listed in Section | of this RFP.

Only actual Proposers may protest if they believe they have been adversely affected because the Proposer would
be eligible to be awarded the contract in the event the protest 1s successful. The basis of the written protest must
be in accordance with ORS 279B.410 and shall specify the grounds upon which the protest is based. In order to
be an adversely affected Proposer with a right to submit a written protest, a Proposer must be next in line for


2023-74                                                Page 2
award, i.e. the protester must claim that all higher rated Proposers are ineligible for award because they are
non-responsive or non-responsible.

County will consider any protests received and:
        a. reject all protests and proceed with final evaluation of, and any allowed contract language
           negotiation with, the apparent successful Proposer and, pending the satisfactory outcome of this
            final evaluation and negotiation, enter into a contract with the named Proposer; OR
        b. sustain a meritorious protest(s) and reject the apparent successful Proposer as nonresponsive, if
            such Proposer is unable to demonstrate that its Proposal complied with all material requirements
            of the solicitation and Oregon public procurement law; thereafter, County may name a new
            apparent successful Proposer; OR
        c. reject all Proposals and cancel the procurement.

2.7      Acceptance of Contractual Requirements: Failure of the selected Proposer to execute a contract and
deliver required insurance certificates within ten (10) calendar days after notification of an award may result in
cancellation of the award. This time period may be extended at the option of County.

2.8       Public Records: Proposals are deemed confidential until the “Notice of Intent to Award” letter is issued.
This RFP and one copy of each original Proposal received in response to it, together with copies of all documents
pertaining to the award of a contract, will be kept and made a part of a file or record which will be open to public
inspection. If a Proposal contains any information that 1s considered a TRADE SECRET under ORS 192.345(2),
SUCH INFORMATION MUST BE LISTED ON A SEPARATE SHEET CAPABLE OF SEPARATION
FROM _ THE REMAINING PROPOSAL AND MUST BE CLEARLY                                        MARKED       WITH THE
FOLLOWING LEGEND:

“This information constitutes a trade secret under ORS 192.345(2), and shall not be disclosed except in
accordance with the Oregon Public Records Law, ORS Chapter 192.”

The Oregon Public Records Law exempts from disclosure only bona fide trade secrets, and the exemption from
disclosure applies only “unless the public interest requires disclosure in the particular instance” (ORS 192.345),
Therefore, non-disclosure of documents, or any portion of a document submitted as part of a Proposal, may
depend upon official or judicial determinations made pursuant to the Public Records Law.

2.9       Investigation of References: County reserves the right to investigate all references in addition to those
supplied references and investigate past performance of any Proposer with respect to its successful performance
of similar services, its compliance with specifications and contractual obligations, its completion or delivery of
a project on schedule, its lawful payment of subcontractors and workers, and any other factor relevant to this
RFP. County may postpone the award or the execution of the contract after the announcement of the apparent
successful Proposer in order to complete its investigation.

2.10 | RFP Proposal Preparation Costs and Other Costs: Proposer costs of developing the Proposal, cost
of attendance at an interview (if requested by County), or any other costs are entirely the responsibility of the
Proposer, and will not be ret1mbursed in any manner by County.

2.11     Clarification and Clarity: County reserves the right to seek clarification of each Proposal, or to make
an award without further discussion of Proposals received. Therefore, it 1s important that each Proposal be
submitted initially in the most complete, clear, and favorable manner possible.

2.12     Right to Reject Proposals: County reserves the right to reject any or all Proposals or to withdraw any
item from the award, if such rejection or withdrawal would be in the public interest, as determined by County.

2.13.       Cancellation: County reserves the right to cancel or postpone this RFP at any time or to award no
contract.

2.14     Proposal Terms: All Proposals, including any price quotations, will be valid and firm through a
period of one hundred and eighty (180) calendar days following the Closing date. County may require an


2023-74                                                Page 3
extension of this firm offer period. Proposers will be required to agree to the longer time frame in order to be
further considered in the procurement process.

2.15     Oral Presentations: At County’s sole option, Proposers may be required to give an oral presentation of
their Proposals to County, a process which would provide an opportunity for the Proposer to clarify or elaborate
on the Proposal but will in no material way change Proposer’s original Proposal. If the evaluating committee
requests presentations, the Procurement Division will schedule the time and location for said presentation. Any
costs of participating in such presentations will be borne solely by Proposer and will not be reimbursed by
County. Note: Oral presentations are at the discretion of the evaluating committee and may not be conducted;
therefore, written Proposals should be complete.

2.16     Usage: It is the intention of County to utilize the services of the successful Proposer(s) to provide
services as outlined in the below Scope of Work.

2.17     Review for Responsiveness: Upon receipt of all Proposals, the Procurement Division or designee
will determine the responsiveness of all Proposals before submitting them to the evaluation committee. If a
Proposal is incomplete or non-responsive in significant part or in whole, it will be rejected and will not be
submitted to the evaluation committee. County reserves the right to determine if an inadvertent error is solely
clerical or is a minor informality which may be waived, and then to determine if an error is grounds for
disqualifying a Proposal. The Proposer’s contact person identified on the Proposal will be notified, identifying
the reason(s) the Proposal is non-responsive. One copy of the Proposal will be archived and all others
discarded.

2.18     RFP Incorporated into Contract: This RFP will become part of the Contract between County and
the selected contractor(s). The contractor(s) will be bound to perform according to the terms of this RFP, their
Proposal(s), and the terms of the Sample Contract.

2.19     Communication Blackout Period: Except as called for in this RFP, Proposers may not communicate
with members of the Evaluation Committee or other County employees or representatives about the RFP during
the procurement process until the apparent successful Proposer is selected, and all protests, if any, have been
resolved. Communication in violation of this restriction may result in rejection of a Proposer.

2.20      Prohibition on Commissions and Subcontractors: County will contract directly with
persons/entities capable of performing the requirements of this RFP. Contractors must be represented directly.
Participation by brokers or commissioned agents will not be allowed during the Proposal process. Contractor
shall not use subcontractors to perform the Work unless specifically pre-authorized in writing to do so by the
County.     Contractor represents that any employees assigned to perform the Work, and any authorized
subcontractors performing the Work, are fully qualified to perform the tasks assigned to them, and shall
perform the Work in a competent and professional manner. Contractor shall not be permitted to add on any fee
or charge for subcontractor Work.        Contractor shall provide, if requested, any documents relating to
subcontractor’s qualifications to perform required Work.

2.21.     Ownership of Proposals: All Proposals in response to this RFP are the sole property of County, and
subject to the provisions of ORS 192.410-192.505 (Public Records Act).

2.22      Clerical Errors in Awards: County reserves the right to correct inaccurate awards resulting from its
clerical errors.

2.23      Rejection of Qualified Proposals: Proposals may be rejected in whole or in part if they attempt to
limit or modify any of the terms, conditions, or specifications of the RFP or the Sample Contract.

2.24      Collusion: By responding, the Proposer states that the Proposal is not made in connection with any
competing Proposer submitting a separate response to the RFP, and is in all aspects fair and without collusion
or fraud. Proposer also certifies that no officer, agent, elected official, or employee of County has a pecuniary
interest in this Proposal.



2023-74                                               Page 4
2.25    Evaluation Committee: Proposals will be evaluated by a committee consisting of representatives
from County and potentially external representatives. County reserves the right to modify the Evaluation
Committee make-up in its sole discretion.

2.26     Commencement of Work: The contractor shall commence no work until all insurance requirements
have been met, the Protest of Awards deadline has been passed, any protest have been decided, a contract has
been fully executed, and a Notice to Proceed has been issued by County.


2.27   Nondiscrimination: The successful Proposer agrees that, in performing the work called for by this
RFP and in securing and supplying materials, contractor will not discriminate against any person on the basis
of race, color, religious creed, political ideas, sex, age, marital status, sexual orientation, gender identity,
veteran status, physical or mental handicap, national origin or ancestry, or any other class protected by
applicable law.

2.28      Intergovernmental Cooperative Procurement Statement: Pursuant to ORS 279A and LCRB, other
public agencies shall have the ability to purchase the awarded goods and services from the awarded
contractor(s) under terms and conditions of the resultant contract. Any such purchases shall be between the
contractor and the participating public agency and shall not impact the contactor’s obligation to the County.
Any estimated purchase volumes listed herein do not include other public agencies and County makes no
guarantee as to their participation. Any Proposer, by written notification included with their Proposal, may
decline to extend the prices and terms of this solicitation to any and/or all other public agencies. County grants
to any and all public serving governmental agencies, authorization to purchase equivalent services or products
described herein at the same submitted unit bid price, but only with the consent of the contractor awarded the
contract by the County.




2023-74                                                Page 5
                                              SECTION 3
                                           SCOPE OF WORK

3.1.       INTRODUCTION

Clackamas County is seeking two qualified individuals or firms to act as primary professional code
compliance hearings officers.

Please direct all Technical/Specifications or Procurement Process Questions to the indicated
representative referenced in the Notice of Request for Proposals and note the communication
restriction outlined in Section 2.19.

3.2        BACKGROUND

Clackamas County is seeking two qualified individuals or firms to act as primary professional code
compliance hearings officers to conduct and decide quasi-judicial Code Compliance violations relating to
the following codes and ordinances:

Chapter 2.07 Compliance Hearing Officer Code;
Chapter 7.03, Road Use Code;
Chapter 9.01, Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings and Structures;
Chapter 9.02, Application and Enforcement of the Clackamas County Building Code;
Chapter 9.03, Excavation and Grading Code;
Chapter 10.03, Solid Waste and Waste Management Code;
Chapter 10.04, Recycling License Code
Title 12 and 13, Zoning and Development Ordinance.

Any other code authorized by the Board of Commissioners.
These codes can be viewed at https://www.clackamas.us/code

3.2.1.   Successful candidate
The successful proposer for the Hearings Officer Position will have the qualifications and experience
shown below. If the proposer is a firm, the conditions stated apply to the staff member assigned as the
actual Hearings Officer, as well as any alternates provided.

The successful proposer for the Hearings Officer Position:

       e   Must be familiar with contested case litigation in the state court, with administrative
           hearings, and rules of evidence and procedure;

       e   Should be a notary public in order to be able to swear in witnesses;

       e   Must be an attorney with an active status license to practice in the State of Oregon, with a
           minimum of five (5) years of experience;

       e   Proposer should generally be familiar with:
               State of Oregon Building Code, and other state specialty codes,
               The County’s Enforcement Philosophy, and Protocols and Violation Priority Matrix,
               The County Solid Waste and Waste Management Code,
               The County Recycling License Code
               The County Zoning and Development Ordinance,
               The County Road Use Code,

2023-74                                            Page 6
             The County Application and Enforcement of the Clackamas County Building Code;
             The County Excavation and Grading Code,
             Oregon DEQ Onsite Sewage Disposal Rules, and
             The Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings and Structures. (Clackamas
             County Code 9.01)

          Should generally be familiar with land use law in Oregon, and related planning and
          development issues, real estate law concerning the sale of property, construction law, and
          property law.

          Must be able to schedule one designated day per week, usually Thursday, starting at 9:00
          A.M., to conduct hearings in order to allow County staff to issue citations with definite
          hearing dates which will not have to be rescheduled due to conflicting court appearances
          or conference on the part of the Hearings Officer.

          Must be able to consistently, efficiently, promptly and fairly hear and decide cases.
          Delays in making decisions are discouraged. The successful proposer must also make
          decisions that are in alignment with state laws, state codes, and County codes and
          ordinance. Adherence to these requirements will form a part of the hearings officer’s
          annual performance evaluation, and will be considered in deciding to renew the contract
          each year.

          Must be able to agreeably work with people, and to deal evenhandedly with both sides of
          a dispute.

          Must be able to proficiently use technology to conduct hearings on a digital format such
          as Zoom or Microsoft TEAMS or similar software.

          This is not a judicial position. While some research will be required, lengthy research
          projects and lengthy written options are not encouraged. Final decisions shall be in
          writing not later than fourteen (14) days from conclusion of the Hearing.

          Must comply and follow the conditions and responsibilities of a Hearings Officer as
          specified in Compliance Hearings Officer Code.

          Must keep accurate records for the purpose of computing compensable time and submit
          said records to the Clackamas County Building Codes Division by the end of each month
          for payment of services by the County. Payment will be only for time actually spent in
          conducting hearings and preparing written orders. There will be no portal to portal pay.

          Must be able to preside and control the proceedings.




2023-74                                          Page 7
3.3.      SCOPE OF WORK

3.3.1.    Scope:

The scope of work shall be defined by the following:

3.3.1.    Proceedings are informal hearings rather than complex court-style hearings.

3.3.1.2 Civil Penalties (fines), forfeiture and administrative compliance fees are the most common type
of penalty.

3.3.1.3. The Hearings Officer will have to hear testimony and be able to administer oaths to the witnesses.

3.3.1.4. Audio recording will form the only “record” in most cases.

3.3.1.5. All the issues raised in the hearings are based on the codes and ordinances which are contained at
the County Law Library.

3.3.1.6. It is preferred that decisions are rendered at the conclusion of the hearing with an explanation of
the consequences to the violator or why the County staff failed to prove the case. However, decisions not
rendered at the conclusion of the hearing must be made at the beginning of the next scheduled hearing
with a written order not later than fourteen (14) days from hearing conclusion.

3.3.1.7. There will be no County support or secretarial staff present at the Hearings, so the Hearings
Officer must be able to preside and control the proceedings personally. Orders of the Hearings Officer
shall be on letter head of the Hearings Officer.

3.3.1.8. When a petition for Writ Review is filed and granted in Circuit Court to challenge a Hearings
Officer final decision, the Hearings Officer or their private staff will be required to compile a complete
record of their proceeding on the matter of tender to Circuit Court.

3.3.1.9. Due to the wide range of individuals the County interacts with, the Hearings Officer has to be
able to work effectively with people. This is a basic job requirement and will be highly weighted in the
annual review.

3.3.1.10. The County is adopting the use of a Code Compliance Hearings Officer in order to simplify the
Code Compliance process and save money. This is not intended to be a lengthy or complex process.

3.3.1.11 The Code Compliance Hearings Officer shall not waive requirements of the building or any other
specialty code, permit requirements, or fees as provided in the various codes, ordinances, rules or
regulations enforced.

3.3.2 Annual Review:
The selected contractor(s) will be subject to an annual review to determine their performance of services
based on the following criteria:
     e   Delays in decision making and written orders.
         Amount of time spent handling land use cases.
         Ability to understand issues and law.
         Ability to deal effectively with applicants, members of the public and County staff.
         Ability to conduct orderly, effective, and efficient land use hearings.
         Ability to write decisions that are in alignment with state laws, state codes, and County
         ordinances.
The proposer shall understand that the County is making absolutely no representations of duration of
contract. Renewal of the contract will be dependent upon satisfactory evaluation.

2023-74                                             Page 8
3.3.3 Responsibilities of the County

Clackamas County Staff to provide the following assistance to the Hearings Officer:

Scheduling the time and place of all quasi-judicial Code Compliance hearings and notifying the
appropriate parties of hearings pursuant to the Clackamas County, Oregon Zoning and Development
Ordinance, and the Compliance Hearings Officer Code, Chapter 2.07.

Making available space for hearings conducted by the Hearings Officer; necessary paper with County
letterhead for all decisions to be rendered by the Hearings Officer; any recording equipment for said
hearings.

Mailing of hearing notices




3.3.4 Work    Schedule:

The successful proposer must be able to schedule one designated day per week usually Tuesday or
Thursday, starting at 9:00am using the Zoom platform or in person to conduct hearings in order to allow
County staff to issue citations with definite hearing dates which will not have to be rescheduled to
conflicting court appearances or conferences on the part of the Hearings Officer.

Unless the County has two Hearings Officers under contract, the Hearings Officer must arrange for an
alternate Hearings Officer as necessary when the Contractor is unable to attend a scheduled hearing or has
a conflict of interest. The alternate Hearings Officer must be approved in advance by the Building Codes
Administrator. The Hearings Officer must notify the Building Codes Administrator not less than four (4)
weeks prior to dates of anticipated unavailability.

3.3.5.    Term of Contract:

The term of the contract shall be two years from the effective date, with the option for two (2) additional
two (2) year renewals thereafter subject to the mutual agreement of the parties.

The applicant should understand that the County is making absolutely no representation of tenure or
expectations of contract renewal. Renewal of the contract will be dependent upon satisfactory evaluation.


3.3.6    Sample Contract: Submission of a Proposal in response to this RFP indicates Proposer’s
willingness to enter into a contract containing substantially the same terms (including insurance
requirements) of the sample contract identified below. No action or response to the sample contract 1s
required under this RFP. Any objections to the sample contract terms should be raised in accordance with
Paragraphs 2.2 or 2.3 of this RFP, pertaining to requests for clarification or change or protest of the
RFP/specifications, and as otherwise provided for in this RFP. This RFP and all supplemental information
in response to this RFP will be a binding part of the final contract.

The applicable Sample Personal Services Contract for this RFP can be found at
https://www.clackamas.us/finance/terms. html.




2023-74                                            Page 9
Personal Services Contract (unless checked, ttem does not apply)
    The following paragraphs of the Professional Services Contract will be applicable:
    [_] Article I, Paragraph 5 — Travel and Other Expense is Authorized
    XJ Article II, Paragraph 28 — Confidentiality
    L_] Article II, Paragraph 29 — Criminal Background Check Requirements
    [_] Article II, Paragraph 30 — Key Persons
    L_] Article II, Paragraph 31 — Cooperative Contracting
    L_] Article Il, Paragraph 32 — Federal Contracting Requirements
    [_] Exhibit A — On-Call Provision

    The following insurance requirements will be applicable:
    [><] Commercial General Liability: combined single limit, or the equivalent, of not less than
         $1,000,000 per occurrence, with an annual aggregate limit of $2,000,000 for Bodily Injury and
         Property Damage.
    XX] Professional Liability: combined single limit, or the equivalent, of not less than $1,000,000 per
         occurrence, with an annual aggregate limit of $2,000,000 for damages caused by error, omission
         or negligent acts.
    XX] Automobile Liability: combined single limit, or the equivalent, of not less than $1,000,000 per
         occurrence for Bodily Injury and Property Damage.


3.3.7 LOCAL CONTRACT          REVIEW BOARD RULE C-046-140

C046-0140 Delegation of Authority

The local Contract Review Board hereby delegates to the County Hearings Officer the rights, powers,
and authority vested in the Local Contract Review Board to receive notices, conduct hearings, and make
decisions regarding prequalification’s and disqualifications pursuant to ORS 279.110, ORS279B.425,
ORS279C. 450, ORS200.065(5) and ORS 200.75(1). In the event the County Hearings Officer is not
available to conduct a timely hearing, the County Land use Hearings Officer may serve in the same
capacity and is hereby delegated the same rights, powers and authority.




2023-74                                           Page 10
                                                SECTION 4
                                         EVALUATION PROCEDURE

4.1       An evaluation committee will review all Proposals that are initially deemed responsive and they shall
          rank the Proposals in accordance with the below criteria. The evaluation committee may recommend an
          award based solely on the written responses or may request Proposal interviews/presentations.
          Interviews/presentations, if deemed beneficial by the evaluation committee, will consist of the highest
          scoring Proposers. The invited Proposers will be notified of the time, place, and format of the
          interview/presentation. Based on the interview/presentation, the evaluation committee may revise their
          scoring.

          Written Proposals must be complete and no additions, deletions, or substitutions will be permitted
          during the interview/presentation (if any). The evaluation committee will recommend award of a
          contract to the final County decision maker based on the highest scoring Proposal. The County decision
          maker reserves the right to accept the recommendation, award to a different Proposer, or reject all
          Proposals and cancel the RFP.

          Proposers are not permitted to directly communicate with any member of the evaluation committee
          during the evaluation process. All communication will be facilitated through the Procurement
          representative.

4.2       Evaluation Criteria

          Category                                                           Points available:


          Knowledge and experience with Codes and Ordinances                         0-35
          Covered by the Hearings Officer position. (Section 3.2)

          Practical experience participating in contested cases and                  0-20
          Hearings prior experience as a Hearings Officer,
          Arbitrator, mediator or judge (Section 3.2)

          Degree and variety of past work experiences in handling                    0-10
          people. (Section 3.2)

          Knowledge of municipal law, and government operations                      0-5
          and regulations (Section 3.2)

          Submitted samples of Decisions, opinion or brief (Section 5.2)             0-5

          References (Section 5.5)                                                   0-5

          Fees (Section 5.4)                                                         0-5

          Experience with oral communications in a court of public hearing           0-15

          Available points                                                           0-100




2023-74                                              Page 11
4.3       Once a selection has been made, the County will enter into contract negotiations. During negotiation,
          the County may require any additional information it deems necessary to clarify the approach and
          understanding of the requested services. Any changes agreed upon during contract negotiations will
          become part of the final contract. The negotiations will identify a level of work and associated fee that
          best represents the efforts required. If the County is unable to come to terms with the highest scoring
          Proposer, discussions shall be terminated and negotiations will begin with the next highest scoring
          Proposer. If the resulting contract contemplates multiple phases and the County deems it is in its
          interest to not authorize any particular phase, it reserves the right to return to this solicitation and
          commence negotiations with the next highest ranked Proposer to complete the remaining phases.




2023-74                                             Page 12
                                                     SECTION 5
                                                PROPOSAL CONTENTS

5.1.         Vendors must observe submission instructions and be advised as follows:

5.1.1. Proposals will only be accepted electronically thru Equity Hub’s Bid Locker. Email submissions to
Clackamas County email addresses will no longer be accepted.

5.1.2. Completed proposal documents must arrive electronically via Equity Hub’s Bid Locker located at
https: //bidlocker.us/a/clackamascounty/BidLocker.

5.1.3.  County reserves the right to solicit additional information or Proposal clarification from the vendors, or
any one vendor, should the County deem such information necessary.

5.1.4.  Proposal may not exceed a total of 20 pages (single-sided), inclusive of all exhibits, attachments, title
pages, pages separations, table of contents, or other information. The Proposal Certification Page will NOT
count towards the final page count.

                      Provide the following information in the order in which it appears below:

5.2.        | Proposer’s General Background and Qualifications:

             Description of the proposer and their applicable code enforcement experience.
             Credentials/experience of key individuals that would be assigned to this project.
             Description of providing similar services to public entities of similar size within the past five (5) years.
             Description of the proposer’s ability to meet the requirements in Section 3.
             Description of what distinguishes the firm from other firms performing a similar service.
             Provide example (s) of written decisions or similar documents
             Identify any potential conflicts of interest
             Provide evidence that the proposer is in good standing with the Oregon State Bar.

5.3.         Scope of Work


       1.    Describe your hearing management philosophy and the techniques you use in order to agreeably work
             with people, and to deal evenhandedly with both sides of a dispute.

       2.    Describe how your experience makes you the best-qualified candidate for this position.

5.4.      Fees
Fees should be on a time and material with a not to exceed fee basis. Fees should be sufficiently descriptive to
facilitate acceptance of a Proposal. List the not-to-exceed amount you propose for the service. Fees and fee
schedules should outline all estimated expenses, hourly rates for all assigned individuals, and all other
reimbursable expenses.

The County intends to award up to two (2) contracts to provide services as a Code Enforcement Hearings
Officer. The cumulative total of all contracts resulting from this RFP shall not exceed $600,000 over the life of
the contract. The County will establish a total not to exceed amount per individual contract after determining the
number of contracts to award. The number of contracts to award shall be the sole discretion of the County.
Hourly rates shall remain the same throughout the entire term of the contract.


2023-74                                                 Page 13
5.5.     References
Provide at least three (3) references from clients your firm has served similar to the County in the past three (3)
years, including one client that has newly engaged the firm in the past thirty-six (36) months and one (1) long-
term client. Provide the name, address, email, and phone number of the references. Please note the required
three references may not be from County staff, but additional references may be supplied.


5.6.      Completed Proposal Certification (see the below form)




2023-74                                            Page 14
                                          PROPOSAL CERTIFICATION
                                                 RFP #2023-74

Submitted by:
                  (Must be entity’s full legal name, and State of Formation)

Each Proposer must read, complete and submit a copy of this Proposal Certification with their Proposal. Failure to do
so may result in rejection of the Proposal. By signature on this Proposal Certification, the undersigned certifies that
they are authorized to act on behalf of the Proposer and that under penalty of perjury, the undersigned will comply
with the following:

SECTION I. OREGON TAX LAWS: As required in ORS 279B.110(2)(e), the undersigned hereby certifies that, to
the best of the undersigned’s knowledge, the Proposer is not in violation of any Oregon Tax Laws. For purposes of
this certification, “Oregon Tax Laws” means the tax laws of the state or a political subdivision of the state, including
ORS 305.620 and ORS chapters 316, 317 and 318. If a contract is executed, this information will be reported to the
Internal Revenue Service. Information not matching IRS records could subject Proposer to 24% backup withholding.

SECTION II. NON-DISCRIMINATION:                 That the Proposer has not and will not discriminate in its employment
practices with regard to race, creed, age, religious affiliation, sex, disability, sexual orientation, gender identity,
national origin, or any other protected class. Nor has Proposer or will Proposer discriminate against a subcontractor in
the awarding of a subcontract because the subcontractor is a disadvantaged business enterprise, a minority-owned
business, a woman-owned business, a business that a service-disabled veteran owns or an emerging small business
that is certified under ORS 200.055.

SECTION ITI. CONFLICT OF INTEREST: The undersigned hereby certifies that no elected official, officer,
agent or employee of Clackamas County is personally interested, directly or indirectly, in any resulting contract from
this RFP, or the compensation to be paid under such contract, and that no representation, statements (oral or in
writing), of the County, its elected officials, officers, agents, or employees had induced Proposer to submit this
Proposal. In addition, the undersigned hereby certifies that this proposal is made without connection with any person,
firm, or corporation submitting a proposal for the same material, and 1s in all respects fair and without collusion or
fraud.

SECTION IV. COMPLIANCE WITH SOLICITATION: The undersigned further agrees and certifies that they:
   1. Have read, understand and agree to be bound by and comply with all requirements, instructions,
      specifications, terms and conditions of the RFP (including any attachments); and
   2. Are an authorized representative of the Proposer, that the information provided is true and accurate, and that
      providing incorrect or incomplete information may be cause for rejection of the Proposal or contract
          termination; and
    3.    Will furnish the designated item(s) and/or service(s) in accordance with the RFP and Proposal; and
    4.    Will use recyclable products to the maximum extend economically feasible in the performance of the
          contract work set forth in this RFP.

 Name:                                                         Date:
 Signature:                                                    Title:
 Email:                                                        Telephone:
 Oregon Business Registry Number:                              OR CCB # (if applicable):

Business Designation (check one):
[_] Corporation [_] Partnership      [_] Sole Proprietorship       [_] Non-Profit     [_] Limited Liability Company

[_] Resident Quoter, as defined in ORS 279A. 120
[_] Non-Resident Quote. Resident State:


2023-74                                                 Page 15
      EXHIBIT B
CONTRACTORS RESPONSE
                                     Proposal For
               Professional Code Compliance Hearings Officer Services
                                For Clackamas County

                    In Response To Request For Proposals #2023-74
                     By Clackamas County Board Of Commissioners

                                        Proposal Closing
                                        October 16, 2023
                                     2:00 PM, Pacific Time




Proposal Submitted by:

Mal Mx
Carl D. Cox
Attorney At Law
14725 NE 20" St. #D-5
Bellevue, Wa    98007
carldcox1@yahoo.com
(503) 504-1770

Dated:   October 9, 2023

Description of the Proposer:   | am a sole practitioner currently contracting with
Clackamas County as Code Compliance Hearings Officer. | am familiar with contested
case   litigation in the state court, with administrative   hearings,   and   rules of evidence   and
procedure.    | am a lawyer and member of the Oregon State Bar as well as a notary
public, with over 25 years’ experience. | am very familiar with the County’s enforcement
philosophy, County protocols and violation priority matrix, and the many relevant codes
and ordinances referenced in the County’s Request for Proposals (RFP).

Applicable Code Enforcement Experience:        | have substantial experience providing
Code Compliance Hearings Officer services to the County and with the Compliance
Hearings Officer Code. In the capacity of County Code Compliance Hearings Officer |
have conducted hundreds of hearings on matters that have included the County’s Solid
Waste and Waste Management Code, Zoning and Development Ordinance, Application
and Enforcement of the Clackamas County Building Code, Code for the Abatement of
Dangerous Buildings and Structures, Excavation and Grading Code, Road                    Use Code,
Oregon DEQ Onsite Sewage Disposal Rules, and other codes and ordinances
referenced in the County's RFP.    In the vast majority of cases | have rendered a
decision at the conclusion of each hearing with an explanation concerning why an

Proposal by Carl Cox                                                                         Page 1 of 12
Request for Proposals #2023-74
alleged violation in a particular matter was proven or not, provided discussion
concerning consequences, requirements for abatement of violations, and factors
considered when imposing civil penalties. In every case | have timely issued clear,
concise,   written   orders    consistent with   state   laws,   state codes,      and    County   codes   and
ordinances. | am well-qualified to conduct and decide quasi-judicial Code Compliance
violations and other matters relating to codes and ordinances authorized by the
County’s Board of Commissioners.

Credentials of Key Individual: | will personally fulfill the requirements of this project.

Similar Services to Public Entities:             Within the past five years | have served as Land
Use Hearings Officer to the City of Gresham, Oregon, Hearings Examiner for the City of
Monroe, Washington, and Hearings Examiner to the City of Gig Harbor, Washington,
conducting public hearings on various land use and zoning matters, such as
subdivisions, conditional use permits, shoreline substantial development permits, and
comprehensive plan amendments.        | also currently contract with the County to act as
Clackamas County Land Use Hearings Officer, conducting hearings and issuing written
decisions concerning a variety of land use matters, such as applications for subdivision
preliminary plats and planned residential developments, zoning changes, conditional
use permits, and appeals of administrative decisions by the County’s Planning Director.
 | have substantial experience in providing the hearings officer services the County
requires.

My past experience includes providing hearings officer services in a wide variety of
quasi-judicial matters, including hearings involving abandoned vehicles, towed vehicles,
parking,   sanitation,   animal    control,   burglar alarms,    noise,   parks,    and    other ordinances
requiring a hearing. My past experience includes contracting with the State of Oregon,
the Metro Regional Authority, and the Clackamas County Housing Authority.             | have
direct experience in state court (primarily motion practice) and experience representing
parties as plaintiff or defendant in arbitration and mediation proceedings. | represented a
collection agency operating in the State of Oregon for several years, handling 200-300
cases each year.        My responsibilities included all aspects of case management and
litigation, from initial drafting and filing of pleadings through settlement negotiations,
arbitration and trial stages, to final judgment. | also performed defense work, contract
negotiation work,     research on credit and risk management              issues, and provided counsel
concerning consumer           collections practices within the state of Oregon. | gained direct
familiarity with rules        of evidence and procedure in contested cases through this
experience.

Ability to Meet Section 3 Requirements: As stated above, | have direct experience
conducting quasi-judicial hearings for Clackamas County. My responsibilities as Code
Compliance Hearing Officer for Clackamas County include conducting hearings on the
various civil code compliance matters referenced within the RFP.     As noted, | also
currently contract with the County as Land Use Hearings Officer.   | have substantial
experience conducting land use hearings and am familiar with land use law in Oregon,
Proposal by Carl Cox                                                                                  Page 2 of 12
Request for Proposals #2023-74
related planning and development issues, real estate law concerning the sale of
property, as well as construction law and property law, in addition to my experience with
code compliance matters.

| will work with County staff to schedule one designated day per week, usually
Thursdays starting at 9:00am, also making alternate dates available as requested or
necessary.     In every case | strive to conduct the hearing quickly and efficiently,
maintaining order, fairness and respect for County employees and affected citizens.
These hearings are conducted in an informal manner that | personally direct, providing
explanations of the proceedings, answering questions, and ensuring that the affected
individuals understand what the expectations are and giving them guidance on how to
meaningfully participate. | will frequently restate the most important parts of the hearing
and will often ask participants to affirm their understanding verbally or by asking them to
restate orders, requirements or deadlines, or post-hearing actions that must be taken. |
follow each hearing by working diligently to complete a timely, clearly written, concise
order   that   is   in   alignment    with     state   laws,   state   codes,   and     County    codes    and
ordinances,     always     within    14 days     of completion     of a hearing       and   typically within   a
week.

Description of Distinguishing Qualities:        | believe a distinguishing characteristics is
strong communication skills, both verbally and in writing.           Another distinguishing
characteristics is that | work well with people. | have conducted several hundred quasi-
judicial hearings,    receiving consistently high written marks and feedback from
complainants     and    respondents    alike concerning    my   professionalism,    courtesy,
knowledge, competency, expertise, and the respect | show towards each party. | also
receive consistently positive feedback concerning my ability to promptly, fairly, and
efficiently hear and decide cases.

| have      reviewed    the relevant sections of the Clackamas           County Code    and
corresponding Oregon Revised Statutes identified within the RFP as related to the
requested County Code Compliance Hearings Officer services, and am familiar with the
County’s philosophy and protocols with respect to its approach to code compliance, and
its violation priority matrix. | understand that the County relies on voluntary compliance
and education of citizens as the primary approach to enforcing provisions of municipal
law such as these various codes and similar ordinances. Conducting a civil hearing is
an enforcement approach used when voluntary compliance proves inadequate to
resolve a violation. Enforcement of municipal law is necessary to protect the health and
safety of the residents of the County.          It is therefore important that hearings be
conducted quickly and efficiently, maintaining order, fairness and respect for County
employees and affected citizens. | will seek to render most decisions at the conclusion
of the hearing, and understand that written orders must be completed within 14 days
from the conclusion of each hearing.

Example of Written Decision:
Proposal by Carl Cox                                                                                    Page 3 of 12
Request for Proposals #2023-74
                                    BEFORE THE COMPLIANCE HEARINGS OFFICER
                                          CLACKAMAS COUNTY, OREGON

        COUNTY OF CLACKAMAS,
                                                                              File No(s):   V0042722
                                          Petitioner,
                  V.
                                                                              FINAL ORDER
        TYLER          RHETT,
                                                 Respondent

                                            I.        STATEMENT            OF THE CASE

                As Compliance Hearings Officer for Clackamas County, | held a hearing on March 9,
        2023 at approximately 10:00 a.m. in the matter of Tyler Rhett (Respondent) at the County’s
        Development Services Building located at 150 Beavercreek Road in Oregon City via the
        Zoom platform.      The County provided written and oral explanation of the procedure for
        participating in the hearing via the Zoom platform and/or by telephone. The Compliance
        Hearing Officer has jurisdiction to hear the matter pursuant to Clackamas County Code, §
        2.07.020.    Diane Bautista, County Code Enforcement Specialist, appeared and provided
        witness testimony on behalf of the County. Respondent Tyler Rhett appeared on his own
        behalf. The witnesses declared by oath or affirmation the truthfulness of their testimony.
        The Compliance        Hearings Officer did not receive any written or oral ex parte
        communication on a fact in issue during the pendency of the proceedings.

                The County presented evidence in support of its Complaint, including a Statement of
         Proof, Exhibits marked A through E, and witness testimony by Ms. Bautista. Respondent
         Tyler Rhett presented testimony and advocacy on his own behalf.             The Compliance
         Hearings Officer made an audio record of the hearing. There were no objections and |
         received the evidence offered, a record of which | incorporate in the decision in this matter.
         The record is on file with the County.

                                                              ll.    ISSUE

         Whether Respondent violated the Clackamas County Solid Waste and Waste Management
         Code Chapter 10.03 by storing inoperable and/or non-currently licensed vehicles and tires.
         This is a Priority 4 violation pursuant to the Clackamas County Violation Priorities.

                                                     lll. FINDINGS OF FACT

         1.     | Respondent’s mailing address is 15671 S. Henrici Rd., Oregon City, OR 97045.
                  Respondent owns and/or resides on property located at 15671 S. Henrici Rd., Oregon
                 City, OR       97045, also known     as T3S,       R2E,   Section   15A, Tax Lot 01013,     located within
                 Clackamas County (the “Property”).       The Property                  is the   location   of the   alleged
                 violations asserted by the County. (Exhibits A, B)

         2.      On October 31, 2022, Clackamas County received a complaint regarding an
                 accumulation of inoperable and/or non-currently licensed vehicles and debris, with the
                 Complainant submitting pictures with the complaint.     Diane Bautista, County Code
                 Enforcement Specialist, reported she could not read the date of the tags on the 2000


         1 of     6-— FINAL ORDER




Proposal by Carl Cox                                                                                                           Page 4 of 12
Request for Proposals #2023-74
                 Jeep Cherokee so she ran the license plate through DMV records and found that the
                 tags had expired in November of 2021. (Exhibit A)

         3.      On    November        1,    2022,     Ms.   Bautista    sent    a    violation        notice   to     the   Respondent
                 concerning the solid waste violation on the Property, including inoperable and/or non-
                 currently licensed vehicles and miscellaneous debris including but not limited to tires
                 and   car   parts,   with    a   deadline     of December           1, 2022      to    abate    the     violation.   The
                 correspondence included a description of the violation, the actions required to abate
                 the violation, and required notice of fines and penalties. (Exhibit B)

         4.      On December 6, 2022, Ms. Bautista conducted a site inspection of the Property,
                 taking several photos and confirming that the non-currently licensed vehicles and tires
                 remained on site. The photos taken by Ms. Bautista show numerous (approximately
                 eight to ten) apparently inoperable and/or non-currently licensed vehicles and
                 numerous tires and car parts stored out in the open on the Property, visible from
                 adjacent properties and from the public roadway. (Exhibit C)

         5.      On    December       7, 2022,       Ms.   Bautista   issued    Citation   no. 2200427           to the Respondent
                 in the amount of $200 for the priority 4 solid waste code violation confirmed on
                 December 6, 2022.        Specifically: “Inoperable and non-currently licensed vehicles,
                 tires and car parts” in violation of Chapter 10.03 of CCC Solid Waste and Waste
                 Management, Section 10.03.060.         The County issued the citation by first class mail
                 to the Respondent’s correct mailing address, the first class mail was not returned, and
                 this citation has not been paid. (Exhibit D)

         6.      On January 24, 2023, Ms. Bautista returned and conducted another site inspection of
                 the Property, taking several photos and confirming that the non-currently licensed
                 vehicles and tires remain.      The photos taken by Ms. Bautista show numerous
                 inoperable and/or non-currently licensed vehicles and numerous junk tires and car
                 parts stored out in the open on the Property, visible from adjacent properties and from
                 the public roadway. (Exhibit E)

         7.     | The County referred this matter to the Clackamas County Code Compliance Hearings
                  Officer, sending the Respondent Notice of Hearing in this matter, together with Notice
                  of Rights, copies of Exhibits submitted by the County, and information concerning the
                  Zoom meeting process. Ms. Bautista testified concerning the actions the County has
                  taken since receiving the complaint, and the County’s efforts to obtain voluntary
                  compliance in this matter, including the evidence the County submitted into the
                  record. Respondent Tyler Rhett testified that he has abated the violation in the past
                  by storing his vehicles in his shop. Mr. Rhett explained that most of these vehicles
                  are “toys” that he cannot license, and he transports them on trailers. He believes
                  there should be a “grace period” for when he returns from a trip.         The County
                  requested a Continuing Order requiring abatement of the violation.

         8.      At the close of the March 9, 2023 hearing, as Compliance Hearings Officer | found
                 that the County met its burden to prove by a preponderance of the substantial
                 evidence    in the record        that the solid waste         violation existed         and    remained       unabated.


         2 of     6-— FINAL ORDER


Proposal by Carl Cox                                                                                                                        Page 5 of 12
Request for Proposals #2023-74
                | issued a written Continuing Order on March 9, 2023, consistent with the order given
                at the conclusion of the hearing, as follows:
                   The Respondent is ordered to bring the Property into compliance with the County’s
                   solid waste code within 30 calendar days of the March 9, 2023 hearing, or by no later
                   than April 8, 2023, by screening all non-putrescible waste (solid waste such as car
                   parts) and up to 2 inoperable and/or non-currently licensed vehicles. All other vehicles
                   stored outside on the Property must be rendered operable and currently licensed to a
                   legal resident of the Property, or must be removed from the Property. No tires may
                   be stored outside.

         9.     The March 9, 2023 Continuing Order also required the County to provide a post-
                hearing status report advising whether the violations were abated as required. Ms.
                Bautista provided an April 12, 2023 written post hearing status report reporting that
                the subject property is in compliance with the Continuing Order.      Specifically, Ms.
                Bautista reported that a site inspection of the Property was conducted on April 12,
                2023, confirming that the solid waste has been abated. Specifically, the Property had
                only one operating and currently tagged vehicle on site. No debris, car parts or ties
                were stored outside. The County requested issuance of a Final Order imposing civil
                penalties, and an administrative compliance fee consistent with the Continuing Order.

                                                     IV. DISCUSSION

                The Compliance Hearings Officer has jurisdiction and authority to enforce the
         Clackamas County Solid Waste Ordinance, and various other matters.’ The County has
         the burden of proving each alleged violation by a preponderance of the substantial
         evidence in the record.? | reviewed and considered the evidence in this matter, including
         the witness testimony by Diane Bautista, County Code Enforcement Specialist, the
         County’s supporting Exhibits A-E, and the testimony and advocacy by Respondent Tyler
         Rhett.   | find that the evidence presented is reliable, probative and substantial evidence
         upon which to base a determination in this matter.

                                    A. Clackamas County Solid Waste Code

                 The County alleges that the Respondent violated the Clackamas County Solid
         Waste and Waste Management Code Chapter 10.03 by storing inoperable and/or non-
         currently licensed vehicles and tires, a Priority 4 violation.

                Clackamas County Code Chapter § 10.03.060.A. states in relevant part: “...no
         person shall store, collect, maintain, or display on private property, solid waste or wastes or
         recyclable material that is offensive or hazardous to the health and safety of the public, or
        which    creates   offensive   odors,   or    a   condition   of   unsightliness.   Storage,   collection,
         maintenance, or display of solid waste or wastes in violation of this Section shall be
         considered to be a public nuisance...” Clackamas County Code Chapter § 10.03.060.B.
         describes several solid waste or waste accumulation activities specifically identified as
         creating public nuisances. Among other things, this section prohibits:


         ' See Clackamas County Code § 2.07.020.
         * See Clackamas County Compliance Hearings Officer Rules of Procedure § 11.2 (November 3, 2005)

         3 of 6 — FINAL ORDER




Proposal by Carl Cox                                                                                                 Page 6 of 12
Request for Proposals #2023-74
                                                             *       *       *



          4.    Storing waste tires except as permitted pursuant to OAR              Chapter 340.

                                                             *       *       *



          7.    Storing, collecting, maintaining, or displaying any licensed or unlicensed special vehicle or equipment
                that is immobile, inoperable, partially dismantled or dismantled, dilapidated, or fire damaged and is
                visible from the road or surrounding properties.

                                                                 *       *       *



          9.     Storing, collecting, maintaining or displaying: residential, commercial and industrial appliances,
                equipment and furniture; vehicle parts; tires; scrap metal, or any other useless, unwanted or discarded
                material, or other similar non-putrescible solid waste or wastes, that is visible from the road or
                surrounding properties.

          10.   Storing, collecting, maintaining or displaying any antique, classic, race car or collectible vehicle that is
                inoperable and is visible from the road or surrounding properties.

          11.   Storing any inoperable vehicle or vehicles unless said vehicle or vehicles are housed within a permitted
                structure or development, except up to two vehicles per premise may be stored behind a sight-
                obscuring screen, in accordance with 10.03.060.C, and shall not be visible from the road or
                surrounding properties....”
                                                             *       *       *



                The County provided witness testimony by Ms. Bautista, and supporting Exhibits A-
        E, including numerous photographs of the accumulation of solid waste on the Property.
        Specifically, the solid waste includes numerous (approximately eight to ten) inoperable
        and/or non-currently licensed vehicles, numerous junk tires, and car parts, stored out in the
        open and visible from surrounding properties and from the public roadway.          Respondent
        Tyler Rhett does not dispute the fact present by Ms. Bautista. Rather, Mr. Rhett describes
        the vehicles as “toys” and states that they cannot be licensed. Mr. Rhett reported that he
        has stored his vehicles in his shop before, but points out it can be difficult when he returns
        from a trip late at night to do so.

             | conclude based on the preponderance of the substantial evidence presented at the
         hearing that the Respondent violated the Clackamas County Solid Waste and Waste
         Management Code Chapter 10.03 by accumulating inoperable and/or non-currently
         licensed vehicles, junk tires, and car parts, a Priority 4 violation. This solid waste violation
         existed on December 6, 2022, the date for which the County issued citation no. 2200427                            to
         the Respondent in the amount of $200 for the solid waste violation,                             but was     abated
         consistent with a March 9, 2023 Continuing Order issued in this matter.

                                                        B.   Civil Penalties

            Clackamas County Code § 2.07.120 provides for civil penalties within the range
        specified in Appendix B. | find the following aggravating and mitigating factors in this case:
        the Respondent, Tyler Rhett, abated the solid waste violation on the Property consistent
        with the requirements of the Continuing Order | issued on March 9, 2023, and as we
        discussed at the March 9, 2023 hearing. As discussed at the hearing and in the written
        Continuing Order, | stated that | would strongly consider the cooperation of Respondent in
        bringing the subject property into compliance when assessing an appropriate civil penalty in
        this matter. Based on the above discussion, | find that ordering minimum civil penalties of



         4 of     6— FINAL ORDER


Proposal by Carl Cox                                                                                                            Page 7 of 12
Request for Proposals #2023-74
         $100 for the abated Priority 4 solid waste violation,                      is    appropriate     due   to   these
         considerations, together with the unpaid $200 citation.

             The County Code provides for an administrative compliance fee calculated at the rate of
         $75 per month starting November 1, 2022, the date the County provided notice of violation
         together with notice of fines and penalties, through April 12, 2023, when the violation was
         confirmed abated, totaling $525.

                                                     V.   CONCLUSION

        The County met its burden of proving by a preponderance of the substantial evidence in the
        whole record. Specifically, Respondent violated the Clackamas County Solid Waste and
        Waste Management Code Chapter 10.03 by storing inoperable and/or non-currently
        licensed vehicles and tires, an abated Priority 4 violation.

                                                     VI. FINAL ORDER

             Clackamas County Code § 10.03.400 provides for a civil penalty for these violations
        within the range established by Clackamas County Code § 2.07.120.              The following is
        ORDERED in this matter:
        1. Within 30 days of the date of this Order, Respondent Tyler Rhett is ordered to pay each
            citation together with civil penalties pursuant to Clackamas County Code § 2.07.120
            Appendix B and an Administrative Compliance fee®, pursuant to Clackamas County
            Code § 1.01.090, as follows:
                Citation No. 2200427-1: ($200 Solid Waste)                            $    200.00
                Civil Penalty for 12/6/2022 — Abated Priority 4 Solid Waste violation $    100.00
                Administrative Compliance Fee:                                        $    525.00
                TOTAL:                                                                $    825.00

         2.   Respondent Tyler Rhett is ordered to reimburse the County for any expense the County
              incurs in collection of these monies, per Clackamas County Code Chapter 2.07.090(6).

         Respectfully Submitted,                                           Dated:        April 20, 2023


         Cid MOK
         Carl D. Cox
         Compliance Hearings Officer
         14725 NE 20" St. #D-5
         Bellevue, WA 98007
         Tel: (503) 504-1770




         > Clackamas County Code § 1.01.090 provides for assessment of an administrative fee of $75 per month to
         reimburse the County for administrative fees incurred in conjunction with this enforcement action. This fee is
         ordered as an estimated amount of the cost of enforcement, not to exceed actual cost.

         5 of 6 — FINAL ORDER




Proposal by Carl Cox                                                                                                         Page 8 of 12
Request for Proposals #2023-74
                                                      NOTICES

         This FINAL ORDER is effective ten calendar days after the date the Compliance Hearings Officer
         signs it unless, within that time, the Compliance Hearings Officer receives a written objection to the
         order. Such an objection shall be conveyed to the Compliance Hearings Officer through the County
         Code Enforcement staff mailing address or email address listed below.        Such an objection shall
         state what changes the objector requests that the Compliance Hearings Officer make to the order
         and why such changes should be made, based on the applicable law and substantial evidence in
         the records.    Absent compelling circumstances described and substantiated in an objection, the
         Compliance Hearings Officer shall consider and decide such objections without a public hearing.
         The County and/or the Respondent may file a timely objection.

        Fines and costs imposed herein are a debt owed to the County, pursuant to ORS 30.460, and may
        be collected in the same manner as any other debt allowed by law. If fines and costs are not paid
        within 60 days after payment is ordered, the County may file and record the order for payment in
        the County Clerk Lien Records. The County may also institute appropriate suit or legal action in
        any court of competent jurisdiction to enforce any provisions of any order of the Compliance
        Hearings Officer.   See Clackamas County Code § 2.07.110.

        Any aggrieved party may file a writ of review as provided in ORS 34.010-34.100 to seek judicial
        review of the final order of a Compliance Hearings Officer, unless the Compliance Hearings Officer
        makes a land use decision, in which case the decision may be reviewed by the Oregon Land Use
        Board of Appeals pursuant to ORS Chapter 197. See Clackamas County Code § 2.07.130.
        However, this is NOT a final order.

                                           CERTIFICATE OF SERVICE

         |, Carl    D. Cox, certify that on this day | sent a true and accurate copy of the foregoing
         FINAL      ORDER by US Mail, first class postage pre-paid, in a properly addressed and
         sealed      envelope, or via email transmission, to the following person(s) at the address
         shown,     the last known address in the County files:

         Tyler Rhett
         15671 S. Henrici Rd.
         Oregon City, OR 97045

         Diane Bautista
         Code Enforcement Specialist
         150 Beavercreek Rd.
         Oregon City, OR 97045
         dianebau@clackamas.us



         Dated: April 20, 2023


         Cid CK
         Carl D. Cox, Attorney at Law




         6 of      6-— FINAL ORDER


Proposal by Carl Cox                                                                                              Page 9 of 12
Request for Proposals #2023-74
Potential Conflicts of Interest: | have no conflicts of interest, and am unaware of any
potential conflicts of interest.

Certificate of Good Standing Oregon State Bar:




                                                                                                               Oregon            Bygelges Bar




                                        Certificate of Good Standing

               State of Oregon                    )
                                                  )    ss.
               County of Washington)

                       |, Troy Wood, do hereby certify that | am Regulatory Counsel of the Oregon State Bar, and
               have access to the official files and records of the Oregon State Bar.

                       The official files and records of the Oregon State Bar indicate:

                                                              CARL D. COX, BAR NO. 932406

               was admitted to practice law in the State of Oregon                           by Examination         and became    an active
               member of the Oregon State Bar on September 23, 1993.

                       There      are   no grievances           or disciplinary       proceedings       presently    pending   against this
               member.

                       No disciplinary action has been taken against this member in the past by the Oregon
               Supreme Court or the Oregon Disciplinary Board.

                       Mr. Cox is an Active member of the Oregon State Bar in good standing, licensed and
               entitled to practice law in all the courts of the State of Oregon.

                         DATED this 6" day of October, 2023.




                                                                             Troy Wood
                                                                             Regulatory Counsel
                                                                             Oregon State Bar



               *This certificate expires 60 days from the date of issuance*




                       16037 SW    Upper Boones       Ferry Road, PO Box 231935, Tigard, Oregon   97281-1935

                       (503) 620-0222    toll-free in Oregon (800) 452-8260      fax (503) 684-1366                            ww.osbar.org



Proposal by Carl Cox                                                                                                                            Page 10 of 12
Request for Proposals #2023-74
Scope     of Work:        | believe    it is the responsibility of the County            Code     Compliance
Hearing Officer to ensure that each party is treated with respect, that the process is
transparent, and each party is provided an opportunity to present evidence to support
their position.    | believe that it is the Hearing Officer’s responsibility to direct each
hearing in a manner that maintains an atmosphere of respect for each party, to be
organized and prepared, and to ask necessary questions.              It is also the Hearing
Officer's responsibility to resolve each matter in a timely manner. | will provide clear and
concise written orders resolving the issues presented, and will provide orders in an
expedited manner, as circumstances require. My decisions will be well-reasoned and
grounded in the law, with necessary research conducted in an efficient manner.               |
believe my experience and successful performance as the County’s Code Compliance
Hearings Officer makes me the best-qualified candidate for this position. | am eager to
provide the services you require.

Fees:    | will provide the requested         Code     Compliance     Hearings Officer services for an
hourly   fee   of $170,   billed    in minimum       1/4-hour   increments,       not to exceed    the   stated
contract amount.   | will submit          invoices    accurately    identifying     compensable     time    and
services rendered by case.

References:

Ken Onyima, Senior Development Planner                      Amy Bright, Planner
City of Gresham                                             City of Monroe
Phone: 503-618-2521                                         Phone: 360-863-4533
ken.onyima@greshamoregon.gov                                abright@monroewa.gov

Joe Turner
Joe Turner P.C. Municipal Hearings Officer
Phone: 503.663.7092
jtpc1 @icloud.com

Additional References:             Please feel free to contact County employees familiar with my
qualifications, including:

Jeffrey Munns                                        Michelle Amend
Senior Legal Counsel                                 Code Enforcement Supervisor
Clackamas County                                     Clackamas County
JMunns@co.clackamas.or.us                            mamend@clackamas.us
503-742-5984                                         503.742.4785




Proposal by Carl Cox                                                                                     Page 11 of 12
Request for Proposals #2023-74
                                                      PROPOSAL CERTIFICATION
                                                             RFP #2023-74

            Submitted by. Carl Douglas Cox
                              (Must be entity’s full legal name, and State of Formation)

           Each Proposer must read, complete and submit a copy of this Proposal Certification with their Proposal. Failure to do
           so may result in rejection of the Proposal. By signature on this Proposal Certification, the undersigned certifies that
           they are authorized to act on behalf of the Proposer and that under penalty of perjury, the undersigned will comply
           with the following:

           SECTION I. OREGON TAX LAWS: As required in ORS 279B.110(2)(e), the undersigned hereby certifies that, to
           the best of the undersigned’s knowledge, the Proposer is not in violation of any Oregon Tax Laws. For purposes of
           this certification, “Oregon Tax Laws” means the tax laws of the state or a political subdivision of the state, including
            ORS 305.620 and ORS chapters 316, 317 and 318.          If a contract is executed, this information will be reported to the
            Internal Revenue Service. Information not matching IRS records could subject Proposer to 24% backup withholding.

            SECTION II. NON-DISCRIMINATION: That the Proposer has not and will not discriminate in its employment
            practices with regard to race, creed, age, religious affiliation, sex, disability, sexual orientation, gender identity,
           national origin, or any other protected class. Nor has Proposer or will Proposer discriminate against a subcontractor in
           the awarding of a subcontract because the subcontractor is a disadvantaged business enterprise, a minority-owned
           business, a woman-owned business, a business that a service-disabled veteran owns or an emerging small business
           that is certified under ORS 200.055.

           SECTION III. CONFLICT OF INTEREST: The undersigned hereby certifies that no elected official, officer,
           agent or employee of Clackamas County is personally interested, directly or indirectly, in any resulting contract from
           this RFP, or the compensation to be paid under such contract, and that no representation, statements (oral or in
           writing), of the County, its elected officials, officers, agents, or employees had induced Proposer to submit this
           Proposal. In addition, the undersigned hereby certifies that this proposal is made without connection with any person,
           firm, or corporation submitting a proposal for the same material, and is in all respects fair and without collusion or
           fraud.

            SECTION IV. COMPLIANCE WITH SOLICITATION: The undersigned further agrees and certifies that they:
               1. Have read, understand and agree to be bound by and comply with all requirements, instructions,
                  specifications, terms and conditions of the RFP Gncluding any attachments); and
               2. Are an authorized representative of the Proposer, that the information provided is true and accurate, and that
                  providing incorrect or incomplete information may be cause for rejection of the Proposal or contract
                      termination; and
                3.    Will furnish the designated item(s) and/or service(s) in accordance with the RFP and Proposal: and
                4.    Will use recyclable products to the maximum extend economically feasible in the performance of the
                      contract work set forth in this RFP.

             Name: Carl D. Cox                                             Date: 10/10/2023
             Signature: GU MG                                              Title: Attorney at Law
             Email: Carldcox1 @yahoo.com                                   Telephone: (903) 504-1770
             Oregon Business Registry Number: n/a-sole         PrOp.       OR CCB d (if applicable):

           Business Designation (check one):
            [-] Corporation (] Partnership       [MY Sole Proprietorship      [_] Non-Profit      [_] Limited Liability Company

            [_] Resident Quoter, as defined in ORS 279A.120
            [¥] Non-Resident Quote. Resident State: Washington

            2023-74                                                Page 15




Proposal by Carl Cox                                                                                                                  Page 12 of 12
Request for Proposals #2023-74
