Housing Recovery Services Program
Policy Manual
February 2025




Got Questions?
Email: housingsupport@reoregon.org
Call: 877-510-6800 or 541-250-0938
Housing Recovery Services Program Policy Manual



Table of Contents
Purpose and Overview of the Program ..................................................................1
1 Purpose and Overview of the Program ........................................................................................2
  1.1 Use of This Document ...............................................................................................................2

  1.2 Program Authorization .............................................................................................................2

  1.3 Program Summary ....................................................................................................................2

  1.4 Program Allocation and Eligible Uses of Funds ..................................................................... 3

  1.5 Method of Distribution .............................................................................................................3

  1.6 Roles and Responsibilities ........................................................................................................5

CDBG-DR and OHCS Requirements .........................................................................7
2 CDBG-DR and OHCS Requirements ..............................................................................................8
  2.1 Geographic Eligibility .................................................................................................................8

  2.2 Eligible Applicants ......................................................................................................................8

  2.3 National Objective .....................................................................................................................8

  2.4 CDBG-DR Eligible Activities .......................................................................................................8
  2.5 Equity and Racial Justice ........................................................................................................ 11

  2.6 Title VI Notice, Section 504, Civil Rights Act, Fair Housing, and Accommodating
  Persons With Limited English Proﬁciency.................................................................................. 12
  2.7 Applicant Outreach, Engagement, Intake, Support, and Closeout Processes ............... 13

  2.8 Duplication of Beneﬁts........................................................................................................... 13

  2.9 Appeals, Grievances, and Section 504 Complaints and Grievances ............................... 14

  2.10 Data Sharing and Referrals to Other Recovery or Assistance Programs ..................... 15

  2.11 Conﬁdentiality and Personally Identiﬁable Information ................................................. 15

  2.12 Equal Employment Opportunity......................................................................................... 17

  2.13 Procurement ......................................................................................................................... 17

  2.14 Conﬂict of Interest ................................................................................................................ 17

  2.15 Fixed Assets (Personal Property): Reporting, Tracking, and Disposition ...................... 17




Table of Contents                                                                                                                               i
Housing Recovery Services Program Policy Manual


  2.16 Environmental Review ......................................................................................................... 18

  2.17 Records Requirement, Monitoring, and Reporting ......................................................... 18

Abbreviations and Acronyms ................................................................................ 20
3 Abbreviations and Acronyms ...................................................................................................... 21




Table of Contents                                                                                                                     ii
Housing Recovery Services Program Policy Manual



Version History and Version Policy
The version history of the policy manual is tracked in the table below, with notes for each
change. The dates of each publication are also tracked in the table.

Oregon Housing and Community Services (OHCS) will publish a new version after making
substantive changes that reflect a policy change. The updated policy manual will be
assigned a new primary version number such as 2.0, 3.0, etc.

After making non-substantial changes, such as minor wording and editing or clarification of
existing policy that does not affect the interpretation or applicability of the policy, OHCS will
publish a version of the document with a sequential number increase behind the primary
version number such as 2.1, 2.2, etc.

Amendments made to policy may go into effect on the date of the revision or may be
applied retroactively, depending on the applicant pipeline and status of applicants in the
program intake and recovery process. Whether a policy will be applied proactively or
retroactively will be detailed in the version history below and/or within the relevant
program sections.

 Version
 Number       Date Revised    Key Revisions
 0.1          12/12/2023      Initial draft submitted to HUD and ODHS

 1.0          03/04/2024      First version published incorporating HUD and OHDS
                              clarification requests (retroactively applied to effective date
                              of OHCS-ODHS contract)

 2.0          2/26/2025       Second version published to incorporate Housing Navigation
                              Services to Disaster Case Management policy




Version History and Version Policy                                                              iii
Purpose and
Overview of
the Program
Housing Recovery Services Program Policy Manual



1 Purpose and Overview of the Program

1.1 Use of This Document
This document is a high-level policy manual created by Oregon Housing and Community
Services (OHCS) for its subrecipients to understand the requirements that must be
followed in the administration of Housing Recovery Services that are funded by Community
Development Block Grant Disaster Recovery (CDBG-DR) from the U.S. Department of
Housing and Urban Development (HUD). This manual is intended to highlight the key areas
of compliance for OHCS subrecipients; however, these funds are subject to all applicable
rules, regulations, waivers, and requirements, including those in 87 FR 6364 and the state’s
CDBG-DR Public Action Plan, as amended. Therefore, this manual and compliance
requirements may need to be updated over the life of the program.

OHCS expects its subrecipients to maintain their own program policies and procedures,
or to adopt this manual for use, for OHCS subrecipients to follow to ensure compliance
with all requirements herein.


1.2 Program Authorization
The Housing Recovery Service program is funded through HUD’s CDBG-DR program,
as appropriated by Congress in response to the 2020 Labor Day wildfires and straight-line
winds (DR-4562 or disaster). Assistance for the 2020 Labor Day Disasters was appropriated
on Oct. 29, 2021, by the Extending Government Funding and Delivering Emergency
Assistance Act of 2021, the Disaster Relief Supplemental Appropriations Act of 2022,
and any applicable future allocations. CDBG-DR grants are authorized under Title I of the
Housing and Community Development Act of 1974 (HCDA) for necessary expenses related
to disaster relief, long-term recovery, restoration of infrastructure and housing, economic
revitalization, and mitigation in the most impacted and distressed (MID) areas resulting
from a major disaster. HUD maintains all federal rules, regulations, and documents related
to the CDBG-DR allocation to Oregon.


1.3 Program Summary
Oregon’s CDBG-DR Public Action Plan (“the Plan”) provides funding for public services
eligible under CDBG-DR funds, allocated as a public service program: Housing and
Recovery Services.




Purpose and Overview of the Program                                                        2
Housing Recovery Services Program Policy Manual


Housing and Recovery Services provides for two activities: disaster case management
and housing navigation. Disaster case managers (DCMs) and housing navigators will help
impacted residents, vulnerable populations, and members of underserved communities
in MID areas expedite their recovery by providing various forms of outreach, support,
and counseling to help survivors navigate and address unmet needs. Housing and
Recovery Services will provide survivors with a support person to facilitate access to a
broad range of resources.

Services provided under Housing and Recovery Services will promote (a) the effective
delivery of post-disaster case management and housing navigation services, (b) partner
integration, (c) provider capacity building, and (d) state-level program development.
The program provides social and technical assistance to ensure a whole community
approach to provide or connect local services to disaster survivors.


1.4 Program Allocation and Eligible Uses of Funds
The total program allocation for Housing Recovery Services is $6,017,576. Funds are limited
to expenses reasonably and necessarily incurred in performing the activities required
within this policy necessary to carry out the Housing Recovery Service program.


1.5 Method of Distribution
The provision of Housing Recovery Services may be carried out by the state directly and/or
by subrecipients. The following provides for the method of distribution for the Housing
Recovery Service program as provided for by the Action Plan.


1.5.1 Housing and Recovery Services
In accordance with the Action Plan, as amended, OHCS may implement its Housing and
Recovery Services program directly and/or through subrecipients. While OHCS intends to
mainly enter into agreements with subrecipients, there may be regions or communities in
the disaster-impacted areas where services may be available only through the state.
Eligible subrecipients may include qualified counties and units of general local government,
homeownership centers, culturally specific or community-based organizations (CBOs),
long-term recovery groups, and/or other nonprofit organizations qualified to provide
housing or financial counseling services to applicants.

There are two distinct activities under Housing Recovery Service: disaster case
management and housing navigation.




Purpose and Overview of the Program                                                        3
Housing Recovery Services Program Policy Manual



1.5.1.1 Disaster Case Management
OHCS has allocated funding from the Housing and Recovery Services program to the
Oregon Department of Human Services (ODHS) through an interagency agreement based
on a projection of continued need through June 2025.

ODHS has preexisting contracts with CBOs that are serving as subrecipients responsible
for administering Disaster Case Management in the disaster-impacted areas. This Disaster
Case Management work is a continuation of already established long-term case
management services.

Eligible subrecipients include:

   •   Clackamas:     ODHS-Office of Resilience and Emergency Management (OREM)
   •   Douglas:       Glide Revitalization
   •   Jackson:       Rogue Food Unites (RFU)
   •   Klamath:       RFU/ODHS-OREM
   •   Lane:          Cascade Pacific (fiscal agent for McKenzie Valley Long Term Recovery
                      Group)
   •   Lincoln:       ODHS-OREM
   •   Linn:          Santiam Service Integration Team (SIT)
   •   Marion:        SIT

Before adding additional subrecipients and/or procuring additional case management
services support, ODHS must request preapproval from OHCS. ODHS will be required to
demonstrate how additional case management services align with the intent of the
program and that they fall within the overall program budget. ODHS will also be required
to demonstrate that these funds are not supplanting other state or federal funds and
provide a clear plan for exiting program participants from the additional services at the end
of the program. Under no circumstances may ODHS or their subrecipients provide direct
financial assistance to survivors.


1.5.1.2 Housing Navigation Services
OHCS may provide grants to units of general local government qualified to provide housing
or financial counseling services to applicants.




Purpose and Overview of the Program                                                          4
Housing Recovery Services Program Policy Manual



1.6 Roles and Responsibilities

1.6.1 OHCS Responsibilities
OHCS is responsible for:

   •   Complying with all applicable state and federal requirements contained in this
       document and within any applicable subrecipient agreements (SRAs), interagency
       agreements, and any other contractual arrangements between OHCS and their
       subrecipients
   •   Providing information to subrecipients on:
       o   ReOregon policies and procedures relevant to the public services provided
           under this policy
       o   ReOregon program rules and eligibility criteria to enable subrecipients to
           provide appropriate referrals for the Housing Recovery Service program
   •   Meeting all HUD reporting requirements, including the compiling, preparing,
       and submitting of any and all reports
   •   Meeting with its subrecipients at least quarterly, or as needed, to coordinate efforts
       on program implementation for the purpose of promoting the success of OHCS’
       ReOregon program(s)
   •   Providing technical assistance to subrecipient staff on ReOregon program
       implementation, including compliance with HUD CDBG-DR rules, statutes,
       and regulations
   •   Monitoring subrecipients for program compliance


1.6.2 Subrecipient Responsibilities
OHCS subrecipients are responsible for implementing Housing Recovery Service as follows:

   •   Comply with all applicable state and federal requirements contained in this
       document, SRAs, and any interagency agreements or other contractual documents.
   •   Assess, classify, and document survivors’ recovery needs and accept eligible
       fire-impacted survivors in the wildfire-impacted communities of Clackamas,
       Douglas, Jackson, Klamath, Lane, Linn, Lincoln, and Marion counties. All Housing
       Recovery Service services must be within the bounds of the applicable programs
       provided for under the public services section of the Public Action Plan, as
       amended. Subrecipients must ensure that at least 51% of program beneficiaries
       qualify as low- or moderate-income (LMI) (defined as having gross household




Purpose and Overview of the Program                                                         5
Housing Recovery Services Program Policy Manual


       income no greater than 80% of area median income (AMI) as published by HUD
       for the relevant county) individuals.
   •   Identify potential beneficiaries for ReOregon programs and inform them of the
       opportunity to apply.
   •   Attempt to contact survivors who may be eligible for ReOregon to: (1) conduct
       pre-screening for ReOregon eligibility and (2) seek permission from survivors to
       share information with program partners, such as OHCS grantees and contractors,
       for the purpose of assisting survivors with ReOregon applications.

   •   Establish and manage agreements with sub-grantees to provide housing recovery
       services. All agreements must comply with HUD requirements.
   •   Complete and submit a monthly report by the 15th of each month for the previous
       month, or in accordance with reporting requirements detailed in the SRA. The
       report must be submitted in the form with the content specified and required by
       OHCS. OHCS will notify subrecipients in writing of the guidelines and requirements
       applicable to the submission of reports.
   •   Meet with OHCS at least quarterly, or as either party may need, to coordinate
   •   efforts on program implementation for the purpose of promoting the success of
   •   OHCS’ ReOregon program.
   •   Comply with all applicable HUD and CDBG-DR rules, regulations, and statutes,
   •   including documenting National Objective (Urgent Need or LMI) for each recipient of
       housing recovery services. Such documentation must be provided to OHCS or HUD,
       as those entities may request, within 10 business days of a request.
   •   Ensure that all expenditures funded are eligible activities under OHCS’ Action Plan
       and these program guidelines.
   •   Ensure that all grants, contracts, and other agreements made with funding from
   •   this agreement include appropriate language requiring compliance with all
   •   applicable HUD and CDBG-DR rules, regulations, and statutes.
   •   Monitor sub-grantees, if applicable, for program compliance.




Purpose and Overview of the Program                                                          6
CDBG-DR
and OHCS
Requirements
Housing Recovery Services Program Policy Manual



2 CDBG-DR and OHCS Requirements

2.1 Geographic Eligibility
OHCS and its subrecipients must use funds to benefit participants (or beneficiaries)
impacted by the disaster in the HUD- and grantee-identified MIDs and who have not
achieved a permanent housing solution.

   •   HUD-identified MID counties: Clackamas, Douglas, Jackson, Lane, Lincoln, Linn,
       and Marion
   •   Grantee-identified MID counties: Klamath


2.2 Eligible Applicants
Eligible applicants of the Housing Recovery Service program include all survivors of the
2020 Labor Day Disasters, regardless of whether they registered with the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).


2.3 National Objective
Assistance provided under the Housing Recovery Services program will meet the national
objective of benefiting LMI persons, limited clientele. To meet this national objective,
OHCS and/or its subrecipients must ensure that at least 51% of program beneficiaries
qualify as LMI (defined as having gross household income no greater than 80% of AMI as
published by HUD for the relevant county).

OHCS must ensure this requirement is met through monitoring and regular beneficiary
reviews. Subrecipients must submit OHCS-required reports, in accordance with
Section 1.6.2, that break out beneficiaries per HUD requirements using the following
income ranges and categories:

   •   0%–30% AMI: Extremely Low
   •   31%–50% AMI: Very Low
   •   51%–80% AMI: Low
   •   Greater than 80% AMI: Non-LMI (does not contribute to the 51% requirement)


2.4 CDBG-DR Eligible Activities
The services provided under the Housing Recovery Services program are allowed under
HCDA Section 105(a)8.



CDBG-DR and OHCS Requirements                                                              8
Housing Recovery Services Program Policy Manual


Eligible expenses and activities include those actual, necessary, and reasonable costs
related to performing Housing Recovery Service services and delivering goods required,
subject to all eligible and ineligible activities listed at 2 CFR 200 and 24 CFR Part 570.

OHCS and/or its subrecipients must include in their policies and SRAs specific eligible
activities that may be paid for under Housing Recovery Service activities detailed in the
manual, as provided in the Public Action Plan, as amended.


2.4.1 Public Service: New or Expanded Activity
The purpose of the CDBG-DR Housing Recovery Services program is to provide expanded
or extended services to survivors affected by and continuing to recover from the 2020
Labor Day wildfires and straight-line winds. OHCS has recognized the importance of
providing ongoing support to the individuals and households displaced during the fires
that continue to be without permanent housing and face evolving and changing recovery
and housing support needs that, for many, look very different than they did at the
beginning of their recovery.

Since the end of the FEMA-funded Disaster Case Management Program (DCMP), ODHS was
able to identify state funding to extend that program and continue managing the DCM
effort, utilizing both ODHS employees and ODHS-funded positions at CBOs. The funding
provided under this agreement does not supplant any other available funding, as all state
and FEMA funds for this purpose have been exhausted. The continued operations of DCM
are critical to ensure that other non-housing barriers do not prevent ReOregon
beneficiaries and other fire-impacted households from completing their recovery.


2.4.1.1 Housing and Recovery Services Eligible Activities
OHCS may provide grants to subrecipients that may include the following types of services
in accordance with HCDA, Sections 105(a)8, 15, and 19; applicable waivers identified in the
Allocation Announcement Notice and Consolidated Notice (87 FR 6364); and other
applicable waivers or alternative requirements:

   •   Performing outreach and engagement to understand impacted participants’
       unmet needs
   •   Assessing housing needs and financial resources, and addressing other concerns
       about short- and long-term housing
   •   Discussing unique assistance needs and the resources available
   •   Connecting with state and local recovery resources
   •   Communicating with lenders, insurance companies, and government agencies




CDBG-DR and OHCS Requirements                                                                 9
Housing Recovery Services Program Policy Manual


   •   Supporting application intake and assisting with the necessary paperwork for
       recovery programs
   •   Reviewing income, expenses, credits and debts, and helping to develop ways
       to improve a participant’s financial situation
   •   Creating a personalized action plan
   •   Providing other housing navigation services
   •   Providing financial counseling services to owners of small rental properties who will
       rent housing at affordable rates to income-qualified tenants


2.4.1.2 Disaster Case Management Specific Activities
Disaster Case Management is a time-limited program that involves a partnership between
a case manager and a disaster survivor to assess and address that a survivor’s verified
disaster caused unmet needs through the development of a Disaster Recovery Plan.
The Disaster Recovery Plan includes resources, decision-making priorities, guidance, and
tools to assist disaster survivors. Disaster Case Management services include a range of
social and technical assistance services to support survivors in multiple areas of recovery,
including referrals to other programs and providers that offer mental/behavioral health,
trauma, financial recovery, and other supports. In addition, Disaster Case Management
may help survivors pull together information or documentation required to be referred to
or participate in other programs but will not have a role in determining program eligibility
or award amounts for other programs. Subrecipients shall also conduct demobilization,
as appropriate based on case status, as survivors are determined to no longer require
Disaster Case Management services.


2.4.1.3 Housing Navigation Specific Activities
Housing Navigation services provide comprehensive housing navigation to help disaster
survivors overcome barriers to accessing recovery resources and sustain affordable
housing beyond the life of the CDBG-DR assistance. Specific activities include, but are not
limited to:

   •   Creating a comprehensive list of survivors who are not permanently and/or safely
       housed to identify and assist remaining disaster survivors and their unmet needs
   •   Helping disaster survivors create a plan for permanent housing by helping them
       understand needs, challenges, barriers, and opportunities for permanent housing
   •   Referring disaster survivors to appropriate housing and working with agencies that
       provide wildfire-specific housing on outreach efforts for available housing units
       for survivors




CDBG-DR and OHCS Requirements                                                                 10
Housing Recovery Services Program Policy Manual


   •   Locating and accessing financial resources for application fees, move-in expenses,
       or shortages on manufactured home purchases
   •   Providing support for ReOregon’s Homeowner Assistance and Reconstruction
       Program (HARP) and Affordable Housing Development (AHD) program applications
       to provide needed assistance beyond available outreach and intake
   •   Assisting with the remaining cleanup of properties in preparation for rehabilitation
       or reconstruction
   •   Coordinating with planning departments so that survivors understand the process
       for rebuilding and permitting to ensure compliance with building code requirements
       and other required construction standards
   •   Carrying out resiliency efforts, such as work on defensible space resources to clear
       remaining dead/downed debris that is now a fire hazard
   •   Carrying out any additional housing navigation activities required to provide
       comprehensive housing navigation, case management, and county-wide
       coordination on wildfire recovery activities directly tied to housing


2.5 Equity and Racial Justice
OHCS is committed to advancing equity and racial justice through Housing Recovery
Services program. Disaster-impacted households are facing monumental challenges
and are making life-changing decisions related to housing and household finances. Due to
financial pressures, insufficient insurance, confusing application processes, lack of
affordable housing, and other circumstances, many households are forced to make quick
decisions, even as they are reeling from the shock, confusion, and long recovery process
that accompanies a disaster. These decisions can have long-term consequences,
particularly for those impacted residents with access to the fewest resources and Oregon’s
most vulnerable populations. One way of achieving this commitment and goal is to remove
as many barriers and unnecessary steps as possible for low-income individuals and
households, Latino/Latina/Latine individuals and households, individuals living with
disabilities, single parents, people of color, and other protected classes who have faced
historic discrimination or limited access to recovery resources.

Within their policies and procedures, OHCS subrecipients are required to describe and
document how its services reduce or remove barriers and promote equity in recovery
for vulnerable populations and underserved communities. In addition, as part of HUD
reporting requirements, subrecipients are required to report on the race and ethnicity of
all beneficiaries supported through the activities carried out under the Housing Recovery
Services program.




CDBG-DR and OHCS Requirements                                                               11
Housing Recovery Services Program Policy Manual



2.6 Title VI Notice, Section 504, Civil Rights Act,
Fair Housing, and Accommodating Persons With
Limited English Proficiency

2.6.1 Title VI
OHCS, agencies, subrecipients, contractors, and subcontractors who receive federal
or state financial assistance for their programs and services must comply with Title VI
of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, 42 U.S.C. 2000(d) et seq.; Executive Order 13166; and the
U.S. Department of Labor Revised Guidance Regarding the Title VI Prohibition Against
National Origin Discrimination Affecting Limited English Proficient Persons.


2.6.2 Section 504 and Civil Rights
Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990,
and related federal and state laws and regulations forbid discrimination against those who
require accommodation to access facilities, services, and programs. Furthermore, these
laws require subrecipients to take affirmative steps to reasonably accommodate
ADA-qualified individuals and ensure that their needs are equitably represented in
programs, services, and activities, including in disaster recovery, resiliency, and mitigation.


2.6.3 Fair Housing Act
The Fair Housing Act requires all agencies and subrecipients funded in whole or in part
with HUD financial assistance to certify that no person was excluded from participation in,
denied the benefit of, or subjected to discrimination in any housing program or activity
because of their age, race, color, creed, religion, familial status, national origin, sexual
orientation, military status, sex, disability, or marital status. OHCS subrecipients must
include in their Housing Recovery Services policies how they will:

   •   Comply with and enforce the civil rights requirements of Title I of the HCDA and the
       Fair Housing Law.
   •   Follow policies and procedures for compliance with Affirmatively Furthering Fair
       Housing (AFFH), including an assessment of the demographics of the impacted
       residents, socioeconomic characteristics, environmental hazards or concerns,
       and other factors material to the AFFH determination.
   •   Prioritize supports to protected classes or individuals challenged in achieving
       eligibility or realizing benefits.



CDBG-DR and OHCS Requirements                                                                12
Housing Recovery Services Program Policy Manual



2.6.4 Accommodating Persons With Limited English Proficiency
Subrecipients must adopt and describe in their policies how they will follow
OHCS’ CDBG-DR language access plan, or subrecipients can develop their own plan
to ensure that individuals with limited English proficiency (LEP) receive the language
assistance they need to participate in Disaster Case Management Plan. This can include:

   •   Translation of vital documents into Spanish
   •   Language Line services
   •   Language Bank
   •   “I Speak” cards for individuals whose first language is not English
   •   Bilingual DCMs
   •   LEP outreach and engagement


2.7 Applicant Outreach, Engagement, Intake, Support,
and Closeout Processes
Subrecipients are required to include policies and procedures that detail any outreach
and engagement steps or requirements taken to engage survivors who have not recovered,
how survivors may apply for support services, limitations and requirements for receiving
services, and exit or closeout processes for survivors receiving services as listed herein.
OHCS may require subrecipients to submit outreach plans for approval and participate
in training on outreach methods.


2.8 Duplication of Benefits
Section 312 of the Stafford Act prohibits any person, business, or other entity from
receiving duplicative financial assistance for the same disaster recovery purpose from
multiple sources of federal and other support (42 U.S.C. 5155(a) and (c)). Duplication occurs
when an entity receives assistance from multiple sources for a cumulative amount that
exceeds the total need for a particular disaster recovery purpose. The amount of the
duplication is the amount of assistance provided in excess of need.

Subrecipients are required to include policies and procedures for ensuring that no
duplication of benefit occurs for subrecipients and/or beneficiaries receiving services under
the programs listed herein.




CDBG-DR and OHCS Requirements                                                             13
Housing Recovery Services Program Policy Manual



2.9 Appeals, Grievances, and Section 504 Complaints
and Grievances
Subrecipients are required to have a written process for addressing applicant grievances
for decisions, including the termination, reduction, or denial of services or other
grievances. At a minimum, the process must include the following components.


2.9.1 Program Appeals
Subrecipients must describe the appeals process for applicants or participants to appeal
decisions made by OHCS or its subrecipients.


2.9.2 Program Complaints
Subrecipients must keep a record of each complaint received. Upon receipt of the
complaint, staff must log the complaint and respond to the complainant within 15 business
days where practicable.


2.9.3 Section 504 Complaints and Grievances
Section 504 prohibits discrimination on the basis of disability in programs receiving federal
financial assistance, in federal employment, and in the employment practices of federal
contractors. Each subrecipient must designate a Section 504 coordinator, publish their
contact information, and include a process for filing a grievance, such as:

   •   Applicants may file grievances alleging Section 504 violation in writing with the
       program within 180 calendar days of the alleged violation. Grievances must contain
       detailed information to allow an investigation, including:
       o   Alleged violation date, location, and description of the problem
       o   Applicant name, address, telephone number, and applicant ID, if applicable
   •   Once a grievance is received, the subrecipient will contact the applicant within
       three to five business days, by phone or in writing, to acknowledge receipt of the
       grievance and arrange for the Section 504 Coordinator to meet with the
       complainant to discuss the grievance and possible resolution. Within 15 business
       days after the meeting, the Section 504 Coordinator will respond in writing.
       The response shall be in a format accessible to the complainant (such as large print
       or audiotape). The response will explain the position of the subrecipient and offer
       options for resolving the grievance.




CDBG-DR and OHCS Requirements                                                              14
Housing Recovery Services Program Policy Manual



2.9.4 Complaints of Fraud, Waste, or Abuse
Complaints alleging the violation of fair housing laws will be directed to HUD for immediate
review. Complaints regarding fraud, waste, or abuse of government funds should be
forwarded to the HUD Office of the Inspector General Fraud Hotline (phone 800-347-3735
or email hotline@hudoig.gov). Subrecipients will make available to OHCS detailed fraud,
waste, and abuse policies and procedures to demonstrate that adequate procedures are in
place to prevent fraud, waste, and abuse.


2.10 Data Sharing and Referrals to Other Recovery
or Assistance Programs
OHCS will establish processes and data sharing agreements with county and local
subrecipients, CBOs, long-term recovery groups, public housing authorities, and other
providers for referring participants to services and/or supports for which they may qualify.

OHCS and its subrecipients will develop a process and data sharing processes for referring
program participants to ReOregon or other state recovery programs managed by OHCS.
Subrecipients may refer to the ReOregon Survivor Support Staff: Roles and Responsibilities
table, which is available on the ReOregon website. The chart is a helpful reference guide for
subrecipients to further understand specific roles and responsibilities for engagement
partners for ReOregon wraparound support services associated with the programs
referenced herein.

Subrecipients shall share specific participant personally identifying information (PII) with
OHCS, as necessary, to carry out any assistance or service for the benefit of the participant.
Subrecipients may disclose this PII to OHCS with an authorized Release of Information from
the participant.


2.11 Confidentiality and Personally Identifiable
Information
Subrecipients must have policies and procedures to maintain all participant information
and records securely and confidentially. Confidential records include applications, records,
files, and communications relating to participants.

Subrecipients must have procedures for ensuring confidentiality in the electronic collection
of participant information, including:




CDBG-DR and OHCS Requirements                                                              15
Housing Recovery Services Program Policy Manual


   •   Computer terminals must be in a secure location, limiting access only to those
       persons who have a legitimate interest in and are responsible for participant
       records.
   •   Computer monitors must be cleared (or a screen saver activated) immediately
       after accessing a participant record.
   •   Computer terminals must be on a “locked” mode or turned off if the terminal is
       unattended.
   •   Access to personally identifiable data shall be given to only authorized personnel
       as necessary for performing the work required for programs funded by CDBG-DR.

PII is protected by federal laws (Privacy Act of 1974, as amended) and will be collected for
the purpose of providing assistance/service, reporting, and monitoring. PII can be used to
distinguish or trace individual’s identities. Examples of PII include names, addresses,
income verification documents, disability status, employment status, etc., which can be
linked or is linkable to a specific applicant and/or program applicant. As the subrecipient
receives direct applications from applicants requesting assistance, the subrecipient keeps
all PII information for the duration of the project in the system of record.

If records containing PII are subject to the Freedom of Information Act or Oregon Public
Records Law requests, subrecipients shall release only such records in accordance with
state and federal law. The program, including subrecipients, shall store PII records only as
long as necessary, in accordance with record retention requirements at 2 CFR Part 200.333
and 24 CFR Part 570.502(a)(7).


2.11.1 File Security
Subrecipients must have adequate procedures in place to collect and process
participant-provided information and to handle PII properly and with sufficient protection.
Subrecipients will:

   •   Maintain all records in an electronic format.
   •   Secure all files to ensure the privacy of all applicant PII located within the files.
   •   Save electronic files containing PII in password-protected electronic folders.
   •   Back up files on a routine basis.

Required reports to HUD and/or OHCS may include participant identification numbers
or property addresses but will not include unique identifiers such as Social Security
numbers, names, dates of birth, etc.




CDBG-DR and OHCS Requirements                                                                  16
Housing Recovery Services Program Policy Manual



2.12 Equal Employment Opportunity
Executive Order 11246 (EO11246), Equal Employment Opportunity, as amended, prohibits
federal contractors and federally assisted construction contractors and subcontractors,
who do over $10,000 in government business in one year from discriminating in
employment decisions on the basis of race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation,
gender identity, or national origin. The executive order also requires government
contractors to take affirmative action to ensure that equal opportunity is provided in all
aspects of their employment. Subrecipients will be required to execute a certification
indicating compliance with EO11246.


2.13 Procurement
Subrecipients must follow federal, state, and local procurement standards, including
procurement standards set forth at 2 CFR Parts 200.317–200.327. Whenever procurement
processes conflict, entities must comply with the more stringent regulation.


2.14 Conflict of Interest
In accordance with 24 CFR Part 570.489(h), 24 CFR Part 570.611, 2 CFR Parts 200.317–318,
and 2 CFR Part 200.112, no covered persons (defined as an employee, agent, consultant,
officer, or elected official who exercise or have exercised any functions or responsibilities
with respect to activities assisted by CDBG-DR, or who are in a position to participate in a
decision-making process or gain inside information with regard to such activities), may
obtain a financial interest or benefit from an activity assisted by CDBG-DR, or have a
financial interest in any contract, subcontract, or agreement with respect to an activity
assisted by CDBG-DR, or with respect to the proceeds of the activity assisted by CDBG-DR,
either for themselves or those with whom they have business or immediate family ties,
during their tenure or for one year thereafter.

Covered persons who have a potential or actual conflict of interest in relation to activities
funded in whole or in part with CDBG-DR are required to disclose this potential or actual
conflict to OHCS. This policy and requirement must be included in DCMP program policies
and procedures.


2.15 Fixed Assets (Personal Property): Reporting, Tracking,
and Disposition
If a subrecipient receives funds to purchase equipment or personal property with a life of
more than one year and an acquisition cost of $5,000 or more, they will be required to



CDBG-DR and OHCS Requirements                                                               17
Housing Recovery Services Program Policy Manual


manage these assets and to ensure that the assets continue to be used for their intended
purposes in accordance with the CDBG-DR regulations and property standards.

Subrecipients must maintain appropriate records of their assets, whether in their
possession or in the possession of a sub-awardee organization. Specifically:

For personal property, subrecipients must maintain a fixed assets ledger that includes
a description of the property; any identifying information such as a serial number;
the funding source (grant number); the acquisition date and cost; the federal share of the
cost; the location, use, and condition of the property; and disposition data. Subrecipients
are required to conduct a physical inventory of personal property biannually to ensure that
the property is being maintained in good condition and that there are procedures in place
to prevent loss, damage, or theft of the property.

Prior to disposing any equipment purchased with CDBG-DR funds, subrecipients must
request disposition instructions from OHCS.


2.16 Environmental Review
Programs included in this policy manual are exempt from performing environmental
reviews according to 24 CFR Part 58.34(a)—per the language below:

   §58.34 Exempt activities.

   Except for the applicable requirements of §58.6, the responsible entity does not have to
   comply with the requirements of this part or undertake any environmental review,
   consultation, or other action under NEPA and the other provisions of law or authorities cited
   in §58.5 for the activities exempt by this section or projects consisting solely of the following
   exempt activities:

   4. Public services that will not have a physical impact or result in any physical changes,
   including but not limited to services concerned with employment, crime prevention,
   child care, health, drug abuse, education, counseling, energy conservation and welfare
   or recreational needs


2.17 Records Requirement, Monitoring, and Reporting
All subrecipients are required to maintain their project and program files within the
applicable system of record as detailed in their SRA. All project-related documents,
correspondence and records must be in the file for each participant. Subrecipient must
submit reports, as required by OHCS, and in accordance with the requirements detailed
in program-specific SRAs.




CDBG-DR and OHCS Requirements                                                                    18
Housing Recovery Services Program Policy Manual


OHCS shall monitor subrecipients per the OHCS CDBG-DR Monitoring and Compliance
Plan. Subrecipients are required to monitor any sub-grantees, if applicable, to ensure
compliance. When OHCS monitors subrecipients, it will include a review of any sub-grantee
monitoring performed by subrecipients.

Subrecipients shall create and maintain records documenting their performance.
The Oregon Secretary of State's office, the federal government, OHCS, and their duly
authorized representatives shall have access to subrecipients’ books, documents, papers,
and records that are directly related to the programs provided herein for the purposes
of making audit, examination, excerpts, and transcripts for a period of six years after
termination of this agreement.

Subrecipients shall retain all program records pertinent to Housing Recovery Service
services and expenditures incurred in a manner consistent with the requirements of state
and federal law. This includes, but is not limited to, those requirements listed in 2 CFR Part
200 and 24 CFR Part 570.

Subrecipients shall retain and keep accessible all such fiscal and program records,
participant records, digital and electronic records, books, documents, papers, plans,
and writings for five years after the closeout of the grant between HUD and OHCS, or such
longer period as may be required by applicable law, whichever date is later.


2.17.1 Participant Files
Documentation of participant eligibility and services received must be maintained in
participant case files, within the applicable system of record, by the assigned subrecipient.
This includes documentation for participants found to be ineligible for services or for
participants who are no longer receiving or are no longer eligible to receive services, and
shall include the participant’s request for services, why they are ineligible, and how it was
communicated to the applicant.

OHCS will use subrecipient program policies and procedures and file documentation as the
basis for monitoring to ensure subrecipients follow program requirements and regulations.


2.17.2 Closeout
Subrecipients must submit a reconciliation of funds and a final performance report to
OHCS. OHCS may request additional information from subrecipients before closing
out the program.




CDBG-DR and OHCS Requirements                                                               19
Abbreviations
and Acronyms
Housing Recovery Services Program Policy Manual



3 Abbreviations and Acronyms
 Abbreviation
 or Acronym          Meaning
 AFFH                Affirmatively Furthering Fair Housing

 AMI                 area median income

 CBO                 community-based organization

 CDBG-DR             Community Development Block Grant Disaster Recovery

 DCM                 disaster case managers

 DCMP                Disaster Case Management Program

 FEMA                Federal Emergency Management Agency

 HCDA                Housing and Community Development Act of 1974

 HUD                 U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development

 LEP                 limited English proficiency

 LMI                 low- or moderate-income

 MID                 most impacted and distressed

 ODHS                Oregon Department of Human Services

 OHCS                Oregon Housing and Community Services

 OREM                Office of Resilience and Emergency Management

 PII                 personally identifying information

 RFU                 Rogue Food Unites

 SIT                 Santiam Service Integration Team

 SRA                 subrecipient agreement




Abbreviations and Acronyms                                                 21
