     AUDIT REPORT




  USE OF CONTRACTORS BY THE
DEPUTY CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER


           2001-AO-0002

            JUNE 4, 2001



  OFFICE OF AUDIT, CAPITAL DISTRICT
           WASHINGTON, DC
Management Memorandum




                                                                          Issue Date

                                                                                       June 4, 2001

                                                                          Audit Report Number
                                                                                       2001-AO-0002




TO:   Daniel R. Murphy, Chief of Staff, S
      V. Stephen Carberry, Chief Procurement Officer, N



FROM:     Saundra G. Elion, District Inspector General for Audit, Capital District, 3GGA



SUBJECT:     Use of Contractors by the Deputy Chief Financial Officer



In response to an anonymous complaint, we performed a limited review of the Deputy Chief Financial
Officer’s (CFO) use of contractors. The complaint alleged that the Deputy CFO misused contract staff
to perform inherently governmental functions and personal services, the contract staff duplicated work
performed by HUD employees, and contract staff displaced HUD employees from their workspace.

We concluded that PricewaterhouseCoopers (PwC), at the request of the Deputy CFO, prepared
statements   of work   (SOWs),   submitted   proposals,   and won   two   Federal      Housing   Administration
contracts worth $12.9 million. Neither the Deputy CFO nor PwC disclosed PwC’s participation in
preparing the SOWs or the resulting organizational conflict of interest. In addition, PwC was directed
to perform inherently governmental functions ad personal services. We did not find duplication of
work being performed by the contractors. However, we did find that HUD employees were moved
from their workspace. Such movement did not violate any laws or regulations.

Within 60 days, please provide us with a status report of corrective actions taken on each
recommendation made in this report. The status report should be prepared in accordance with
Appendix 6 of HUD Handbook 2000.06 REV-3 and should include the corrective action taken or
proposed corrective action and the date to be completed, or why the action is considered unnecessary.
Also, please furnish us copies of any correspondence or directives issued because of this review.
Executive Summary
In response to an anonymous complaint, we completed a limited review of the Deputy Chief Financial
Officer’s   (CFO)   use   of contractors.    The      overall   audit    objective     was    to determine      whether     the
allegations regarding the misuse of contractors were valid. Our specific objectives were to determine if
contractors: (1) performed inherently governmental functions and personal services; (2) duplicated
work performed by HUD employees; and (3) displaced HUD employees from their workspace.




                                            We determined that the complaint was partially valid.
                                            Contractors were performing both inherently governmental
                                            functions and personal services that consisted of drafting
                                            Congressional testtmony and correspondence, and responding
                                            to   Inspector      General       (iG)   and     General    Accounting       Office
                                            (GAO) audit reports. The allegations concerning duplication of
                                            work and displacement of government employees were not fully
                                            substantiated.  We found that contractor employees were
                                            performing functions that had been performed by HUD staff
                                            before downsizing, retirements, and other personnel changes.
                                            Also,     four HUD          CFO     employees        were   moved    from     their
                                            workspace to other office locations, but their movement to new
                                            space was based on a management decision and did not violate
                                            any laws or regulations.

                                            Although not specifically addressed in the complaint, we
                                            determined that PricewaterhouseCoopers (PwC) prepared
                                            statements        of work     (SOWs)        at the    request    of the   current
                                            Deputy CFO. Neither the Deputy CFO nor PwC disclosed
                                            PwC’s participation in preparing the SOWs or the resulting
                                            organizational conflict of interest.

                                            We recommend that the Deputy Secretary: take appropriate
                                            administrative and disciplinary actions against the Deputy CFO
                                            for her role in requesting PwC to violate the FAR; and review
                                            whether     the  Chief    Procurement   Officer  (CPO)   acted
                                            appropriately in ceciding to allow PwC to recompete for the
                                            Funds Control contract.

                                            We recommend that the CPO: develop additional procedures
                                            for contracting staff; exclude PwC from recompetition; and
                                            require     Government        Technical        Representatives      (GTRs)      and
                                            Government           Technical           Monitors       (GTMs)       to _ report
                                            inappropriate contracting actions.


                                                    Page ii                                                     2001-A O-0002
                                            Executive Summary




The Deputy Assistant Inspector General for Audit notified Saul
Ramirez, former Deputy Secretary, of the problems with the
SOW in a memorandum dated November 2, 2000, and they
met to discuss the issues on November 15, 2000. We also
discussed these issues with the former Assistant Secretary for
Housing on October 17, 2000.

We provided a draft of this report to the Chief of Staff and the
Chief Procurement Officer on April 23, 2001. We held an exit
conference with the Chief of Staff on May 3, 2001, and the
Chief Procurement Officer on May 14, 2001. The Chief of
Staff and Chief Procurement Officer provided written responses
to the draft report   on   May 18, 2001,   and May    24, 2001,
respectively.     We have summarized and evaluated the
responses in the findings and have included the complete text of
the comments in Appendix C.




     Page ti                                         2001-A O-0002
Table of Contents

Management Memorandum                                                                    i


Executive Summary                                                                PA



Introduction                                                                         1
|
      ji ©
      Cu


              DN
          ga
      >

           >




1            PwC Prepared SOWs and Won Contracts Worth Millions                  5

             Contractor Performed Inherently Governmental Functions
ie)




             and Personal Services                                              13


Management Controls                                                             20


Follow-Up On Prior Audits                                                       21
OO
eeeerer——SSCs|

Appendices

      A Audit Response Timeline                                                 22

      B Funds Control Timeline                                                  23

      C Auditee Comments                                                        24

      D Distribution                                                            42




                                      Page iv                         2001-A O-0002
Introduction
During May 2000, we received an anonymous complaint alleging that the Deputy Chief Financial Officer
(CFO) had misused contract staff to perform inherently governmental functions and personal services,
duplicate work performed by HUD employees, and displace HUD employees from their workspace.

Prior to becoming the Acting Deputy CFO in March 2000, the Deputy CFO was the Federal Housing
Administration’s (FHA) Comptroller and had been working with PricewaterhouseCoopers (PwC) on
the FY 1998 Credit Reform contract. The Deputy CFO’s main focus was to obtain an unqualified
opinion on the Department’s FY 1999 financial statements by reconciling HUD’s account balance with
the U.S. Treasury. To that end, she immediately requested the assistance of PwC, more specifically the
PwC Program Manager who had oversight of FHA’s credit reform activities, to resolve material
discrepancies identified by the OIG. This request included the physical relocation of the PwC Program
Manager to an office closer in proximity to the Deputy CFO to assist her in her new position. The
Deputy CFO stated that this move was necessary because she had a certain trust and comfort level with
the PwC staff that she did not have with the CFO staff.




                                       Since June 1998, PwC has been awarded four FHA contracts
                                       valued at $22.4 million. The two FHA Credit Reform contracts
                                       for FYs 1998 and 1999 tasked PwC to assist with the year-
                                       end closing and the financial statement preparation in
                                       accordance with OMB Bulletin 97-01 and Fed-GAAP. PwC
                                       was also tasked to review the credit reform budget models and
                                       provide solutions for any models that were not in compliance
                                       with Fed-GAAP. The overall objective of the contracts was to
                                       ensure that the work performed would lead to an unqualified
                                       opinion on FHA’s audited financial statements. The services
                                       requested on the third contract, Audit Response, required the
                                       development and implementation of an Activity Based Costing
                                       (ABC)   model, the design of a funds control process, and the
                                       validation and development of plans to resolve over 400 audit
                                       recommendations.      On the fourth and most recent contract,
                                       Funds Control, the services included redesigning and improving
                                       the funds control process, expanding ABC methodology across
                                       all FHA programs, implementing Fed-GAAP accounting,
                                       assisting with the implementation of Commercial Off-The-Shelf
                                       (COTS) software, and validating and developing plans to
                                       resolve over 400 audit recommendations. The following table
                                       shows the details of the FHA contracts with PwC.




                                            Page 1                                        2001-A O-0002
                                                                                                 Introduction



                 FHA Contracts with PricewaterhouseCoopers

Contract Number and       Contract          Base or                 Period of
      Description          Type              Option               Performance              Amount

C-OPC-21217              Labor Hour         Base Year           6/26/98 - 6/25/99           $2,194,390
Task Order 1
FY 1998 Credit Reform


C-OPC-21273              Labor   Hour       Base Year           5/14/99   - 5/14/00         $2,100,000
Task Order 3             Labor   Hour       Option |            5/15/00   - 5/14/01         $2,508,947
FY 1999 Credit Reform    Labor   Hour       Option 2            5/15/01   - 5/14/02         $1,581,437
                         Labor   Hour       Option 3            5/15/02   - 5/14/03         $1,152,801

C-OPC-21217              Labor Hour         Base Year           9/30/99 — 11/30/00          $2,287,471
Task Order 4                                                    (With a 2-Month
Audit Response                                                  Extension)

C-OPC-21799             Time &              Base Year           8/09/00 - 8/08/01           $3,450,144
Funds Control            Material           Option |            8/09/01 - 8/08/02           $3,695,464
                        Labor Hour
                        Labor Hour          Option 2            8/09/02 - 8/08/03           $3,460,193

Total Awarded                                                                             $22,430,847

                                 During February 2000, the CFO’s office issued a purchase
                                 order to have PwC assist in reconciling the $70 billion variance
                                 in HUD’s accounts with the U.S. Treasury. As a continuation
                                 of the purchase       order,    PwC      was   awarded   task     order   17,
                                 noncompetitively, for Audit and Accounting Support to
                                 complete the Treasury reconciliation and ensure auditable
                                 support for the reconciliation. Task order 18, was subsequently
                                 awarded to have PwC              review the HUDCAPS           and
                                 Procurement Accounting System, Office of the CFO roles and
                                 responsibilities, and management decisions for all reportable
                                 conditions and material weaknesses. Tasks in task order 18
                                 related to resolving outstanding audit recommendations were
                                 also included in the FHA Audit Response and Funds Control
                                 contracts. Most noteworthy is that each of the three contractual
                                 instruments (CFO purchase order and subsequent task orders
                                 for Audit and Accounting Support) also identified the
                                 Secretary’s priority of obtaining an unqualified audit opinion on
                                 HUD’s financial statements. The following table shows the
                                 details of the CFO contracts with PwC.


                                          Page 2                                             2001-A O-0002
                                                                                                           Introduction



                CFO Contracts with PricewaterhouseCoopers

     Contract Number           Contract              Base or                 Period of
        Description              Type                 Option               Performance                     Amount

SO2000CAP-0008                 Purchase              N/A               2/26/00 — 2/27/00                    $25,000
Treasury Cash Reconciliation   Order

C-OPC-18542                    Fixed Price           N/A               3/01/00 — 3/15/00                   $250,000
Task Order 17
Audit and Accounting Support

C-OPC- 18542                   Time &              Base                3/16/00 — 3/15/01                $2,926,055
Task Order 18                   Materials        Year
Audit and Accounting Support

      Total Awarded                                                                                  $3,201,055




                                The overall audit objective was to determine whether the
                                allegations in the complaint regarding the misuse of contractors
                                were valid. However, we expanded our scope to include a
                                review of the process used to award contracts to PwC. Other
                                 specific     objectives        were      to    determine       if contractors:         (1)
                                performed inherently governmental functions and personal
                                services; (2) duplicated work performed by HUD employees;
                                and (3) displaced HUD employees from their workspace.

                                The review covered he period June 1998 through October
                                2000. The field work was conducted May 19, 2000, through
                                November 2000. Our audit methodology included:

                                 e     Reviewing Federal rules and regulations and Departmental
                                       policies and procedures for contracting;
                                 e     Examining PwC ontract files maintained by the Office of
                                       the Chief Procurement Officer;
                                 e     Evaluating PwC monthly status reports;
                                 e     Reviewing the deliverables and documents                            prepared by
                                       PwC;
                                 e     Conducting interviews with                   HUD        staff and    PwC       staff,
                                       attorneys, and partners; and
                                 e     Reviewing        prior     audit        reports    on    HUD’s       contracting
                                       activities.

                                              Page 3                                                       2001-A O-0002
                                                 Introduction




We conducted our audit in accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards.




         Page 4                                  2001-A O-0002
                                                                                                      Finding 1


 PwC Prepared SOWs and Won Contracts Worth
                                            Millions
PricewaterhouseCoopers (PwC) prepared statements of work (SOWs), submitted proposals, and won
two Federal Housing Administration (FHA) contracts worth millions. PwC’s actions violated the
Federal Acquisition Regulation (FAR) and created an organizational conflict of interest that was not
disclosed to HUD. Also, PwC had an unfair competitive advantage and HUD did not obtain adequate
competition due to FHA’s selection of firms to receive the Request for Proposals (RFPs). These
conditions occurred because the Deputy Chief Financial Officer requested PwC to prepare the SOWs.
As a result, HUD’s procurement integrity was compromised and HUD may not have received the best
value for contracted services totaling over $12.9 million.




                                      HUD      Handbook   2210.3,     Procurement     Policies   and
                                      Procedures, Chapter 5.3(d), states, “... the program office is
                                      responsible for preparing the SOW.         When assistance is
                                      required, the contracting officer should provide technical
                                      assistance in drafting and revising the SOW as requested.”

                                      The    FAR,     Subpart   9.505-2(b)(1), states that     if a contractor
                                      prepares or assists in preparing the SOW to be used in
                                      competitively acquiring a system or service, that contractor may
                                      not provide the system or service. To overcome the possibility
                                      of bias, contractors are prohibited from supplying services
                                      acquired on the basis of work statements developed out of their
                                      Services.

                                      The FAR, Subpart 9.501, states an organizational conflict of
                                      interest exists when activities or relationships might result in (1)
                                      an    unfair    competitive   advantage;   or   (2)    the   contractor's
                                      objectivity being impaired in performing the contract work.

                                      PwC prepared SOWs for two FHA contracts, Audit Response
                                      and Funds Control. PwC prepared tasks and objectives that
                                      contained essentially the same information as the SOWs the
                                      Office of the Chief Procurement Officer (OCPO)               used in the
                                      RFP process. Our comparison of the SOWs in the RFPs
                                      prepared by OCPO and the SOWs prepared by PwC for the
                                      Audit Response and Funds Control contracts showed that over
                                      90 percent of the objectives and tasks that PwC wrote were

                                             Page 5                                                2001-A O-0002
                                                        Finding 1

included in the RFPs.        (See Appendices    A   and B    for a
complete timeline of events).

Audit Response.       On September   14, 1999, OCPO      sent the
RFP containing essentially the same SOW prepared by PwC
on June 23,   1999, to PwC    and two   other contractors.   PwC
knew that the SOW in the RFP was the same one it had
prepared. PwC submitted a proposal to the solicitation and
subsequently received a $2.3 million award on September 30,
1999,

Funds Control.      On December 21, 1999, only 3 months after
receiving the Audit Response contract, PwC wrote the SOW
for the Funds Control contract. On June 1, 2000, OCPO sent
the RFP containing essentially the same SOW that PwC had
written to PwC and two other contractors.      PwC was awarded
the 1-year contract with an effective date of August 9, 2000,
and 2 option years totaling $10.6 million.

PwC should not have prepared the SOWs since OCPO
provides assistance to program offices to develop SOWs. If
the program office determines that industry experts, such as
PwC, are needed to determine the tasks that should be included
in the SOW, then OCPO allows the program office to award a
contract to the experts for this purpose. However, the experts
used to define the SOW are prohibited from competing for the
Services.

Although PwC stated that it only had limited participation in
providing advice and recommendations for the tasks that would
be included in the SOWs, we concluded that PwC prepared
complete SOWs and even submitted proposals after learning
that the services for Audit Response and Funds Control were
being competed. PwC originally believed the additional tasks
would be added to the existing task orders as modifications.

PwC had organizational conflicts of interest (OCI) for both the
Audit Response and Funds Control contracts, but this was not
disclosed to HUD.    A PwC partner received an electronic copy
of the Audit Response SOW      on June 24, 1999, that had been
prepared by the PwC Program Manager. However, PwC did
not sign or submit an OCI certification for the Audit Response
contract and OCPO did not request one.           Another PwC

     Page 6                                          2001-A O-0002
                                                                     Finding 1

partner attended meetings held by FHA to discuss and define
the objectives and tasks for the Funds Control SOW.      On
June 26,     2000,    that   same       PwC     partner   signed     the     OCI
certification for the Funds Control contract that stated, “‘...the
bidder or offeror certified that to the best of its knowledge and
belief and except as otherwise disclosed, he or she does not
have any organizational conflict of interest which is defined as a
situation in which the nature of work to be performed under this
proposed government contract and the bidder or offeror’s
organizational, financial, contractual or other interest may,
without some restriction or [sic] future activities: (a) result in an
unfair competitive advantage to the offeror; or (b) impair the
offeror’s objectivity in performing the contract work.”

The FAR, Subpart 8.404, requires agencies to place orders
with the contractors on the GSA schedule that can provide the
services at the best value by soliciting at least three contractors.

The   FAR,       Subpart      15.201,      Solicitation   and      Receipt     of
Proposals      and   Information,      states   when   specific    information
about a proposed acquisition that would be necessary for the
preparation of proposals is disclosed to one or more potential
offerors, that information shall be made available to the public
as soon as practicable in order to avoid creating an unfair
competitive advantage.

HUD         Handbook         2210.3,       Procurement       Policies        and
Procedures,      Chapter     4,   states    that the program       offices are
responsible for developing a list of potential contractor sources
to provide the services.

PwC had an unfair competitive advantage over the other two
firms solicited for the Audit Response contract. PwC, Arthur
Andersen, and Deloitte and Touché were the three firms chosen
from the GSA schedule to receive the RFP for the Audit
Response contract.        Of the three firms, PwC and Arthur
Andersen were the only firms to submit proposals.            By
preparing the SOW, PWC had 3 months advance knowledge
of the tasks listed in the SOW while Arthur Anderson had only
7 days to prepare a proposal. Consequently, PwC was better
able to address the requested objectives and tasks. This is one
of the fundamental reasons the FAR restricts contractors from
submitting proposals in which they have had direct and material

      Page 7                                                      2001-A O-0002
                                                             Finding 1

involvement in preparing the SOW          at the exclusion of other
contractors.

Arthur Andersen’s proposal was not selected even though it
was significantly lower in price than PwC’s proposal.
However, if Arthur Andersen had been given the same amount
of time as PwC to review the SOW and submit an extensive
proposal, HUD may have received a better value for these
services from Arthur Andersen.

HUD did not obtain adequate competition                 for the Funds
Control or Audit Response contracts.

Funds   Control.     OCPO     solicited     proposals     from   PwC,
Deloitte and Touché, and KPMG.      Deloitte and Touché did not
prepare a proposal because of its existing workload and a
potential conflict of interest, and KPMG       declined to submit a
proposal.    KPMG performs the audit of FHA’s financial
statements and had reported material weaknesses and
reportable conditions on the most recent audit. The current
FHA Comptroller told us that KPMG would have had a
conflict of interest since the Funds Control SOW required
performing tasks to improve areas where KPMG had reported
material weaknesses. FHA’s management knew that the tasks
included in the Funds Control SOW were necessary to resolve
the material weaknesses and should have also excluded KPMG
as a potential source for the Funds Control contract. As a
result, PwC had inadequate competition since no other bids
were received. FHA’s failure to exclude Deloitte and Touché
and KPMG         as potential contract sources created the
appearance that contracts may have been steered in favor of
PwC,

Audit Response.           OCPO solicited three contractors, but
Deloitte and Touché chose not to submit a proposal because its
existing workload in FHA and Ginnie Mae would have caused
a conflict of interest. FHA’s management was aware of this
conflict and should have excluded Deloitte and Touché from the
list of potential sources.

Responsible contract specialists stated that they did not follow-
up with Deloitte and Touché or KPMG to determine why they
did not submit proposals. If OCPO had performed this follow-

     Page 8                                               2001-A O-0002
                                                      Finding 1

up, they may have determined the extent of FHA’s actions to
steer the contracts to PwC.

The Deputy CFO (former FHA Comptroller) should have
known that it was improper to request PwC to write SOWs
and allow them to compete for the contract. She was well
aware that PwC had prepared the SOWs but she did not make
any attempt to disclose PwC’s preparation of the SOWs to
OCPO. The request for PwC to prepare the SOWs may have
occurred because of the close working relationship between the
current Deputy CFO and the PwC Program Manager. During
interviews with the Deputy CFO, she stated that part of the
agreement for moving from the FHA Comptroller position to
the Deputy CFO position was that she could bring her PwC
staff with her from FHA. The PwC Program Manager, a key
employee, was relocated from FHA to a private CFO office.
In our opinion, it was clear from our discussions with the
Deputy CFO, that she was not being impartial in her decisions
regarding PwC.

On August 17, 2000, we requested HUD’s Chief Procurement
Officer’s (CPO) intervention in stopping the award of the Funds
Control contract to PwC.      The CPO not only allowed the
contract to be signed on September 30, 2000, but gave a
verbal approval to start work on August 9, 2000. The CPO
and an Office of General Counsel attorney met with PwC on
September 13, 2000, and agreed to remedies for PwC’s
participation in preparing the SOWs for the Audit Response
and Funds Control contracts. The five remedies are:

e   PwC will return 20 percent of the funds received under the
    FHA Audit Response contract.
e   PwC will return 20 percent of the funds received to date
    under the FHA Funds Control contract.
e   HUD will conduct a new competition for the Funds Control
    contract as soon as possible using accelerated procurement
    procedures which will allow all interested bidders to
    propose changes or additions to the proposed SOW.
e   PwC will continue to credit HUD 20 percent on all new
    billings under the Funds Control contract until the new
    competition is completed.        If PwC is selected, the
    requirement of a 20 percent credit will cease.


     Page 9                                        2001-A O-0002
                                                                                         Finding 1

                   e   PwC will provide HUD with documentation of the
                       measures it has taken to sensitize its staff to future
                       organizational conflicts of interest issues of this kind.

                   We do not believe PwC should be allowed to compete in the
                   new competition for the Funds Control contract. Although,
                   under accelerated contract procedures, other contractors will
                   be able to review the SOW and propose changes and
                   additions, PwC has had an extraordinary amount of exposure to
                   the work specifications and has been performing the work since
                   August 9, 2000. The competitive advantage is even greater
                   now because PwC has had knowledge of the work
                   specifications    since     December 21,    1999,   and        will   continue
                   performing the work until the contract is recompeted.

                   HUD’s procurement integrity was compromised and contracted
                   services totaling over $12.9 million ($2.3 million for the Audit
                   Response contract and $10.6 million for the Funds Control
                   contract) may not have been provided to HUD at the best
                   value.    The Deputy Secretary needs to ensure that HUD
                   managers do not work with contractor staff to write SOWs and
                   allow the same contractors to bid on the contract. Contractors
                   and management should be admonished for allowing these
                   actions to occur.




Auditee Comments   The Chief of Staff, as the Acting Deputy Secretary, agreed with
                   the finding and the related recommendations concerning
                   administrative and disciplinary actions against the Deputy Chief
                   Financial Officer.     Management also plans to implement
                   additional     corrective    action,   if warranted,      to     address    the
                   recommendation concerning the decisions made by the Chief
                   Procurement Officer (CPO) in allowing PwC                 to compete for
                   the Funds Control contract.

                   The CPO agreed with the finding and concurred with all but one
                   of the recommendations.        The CPO stated that he cannot
                   require an organizational conflict of interest certification because
                   the 1996 Federal Acquisition Reform Act mandated the
                   removal of non-statutorily based certifications from agency
                   supplements to the Federal Acquisition Regulation. However,

                        Page 10                                                    2001-A O-0002
                                                                                Finding 1

                    he stated that he would ensure that current solicitation
                    provisions and contract clauses are used in all HUD contracts
                    and purchases using GSA schedules. Current HUD/OCPO
                    policy addresses the identification and mitigation of such
                    conflicts and the HUD         Acquisition Regulation requires
                    contractors to disclose potential or actual conflicts of interest
                    after contract award and provides for the termination of
                    contracts.




OIG Evaluation of   We concur with the Chief of Staff's response.
Auditee Comments
                    We believe the CPO’s alternative to our recommendation
                    regarding organizational conflicts of interest satisfies the intent of
                    the recommendation and the use of the recently implemented
                    Accelerated Contracting procedures will also help to facilitate
                    this effort.




Recommendations     We recommend that the Deputy Secretary:

                    1A.           Take appropriate administrative and disciplinary
                             actions against the Deputy CFO for her role in
                             requesting PwC to take actions that violate the FAR.

                    1B.    — Evaluate whether the CPO acted appropriately in his
                             decision to allow PwC             to _ participate in the
                             recompetition process, and ensure that appropriate
                             administrative actions are taken.

                    We recommend that the CPO:


                    IC.           Develop procedures that will ensure OCPO staff
                             obtains a signed organizational conflict of interest
                             certification for all contracts.

                    1D.           Obtain and evaluate reasons why contractors
                             decline to submit proposals. When only one proposal
                             is received, consider reannouncing the contract
                             solicitation to expand competition.


                          Page 11                                           2001-A O-0002
                                                        Finding 1

1E.      Develop procedures to ensure that potential source lists
         do not include contractors with known conflicts of
         interest.


1F.      Ensure that PwC returns 20 percent of the amount
         received on the completed Audit Response contract
         ($456,604) and 20 percent of the amount billed on the
         Funds     Control   contract    ($277,195)    through
         February 28, 2001.

1G.          Exclude   PwC     from     participating in   future
         competition for the   contracts resulting from    PwC-
         prepared SOWs.




      Page 12                                       2001-A O-0002
                                                                                                         Finding 2


  Contractor Performed Inherently Governmental
                 Functions and Personal Services
PwC performed inherently governmental functions and personal services that included preparing
Congressional testimony, drafting responses to IG and General Accounting Office (GAO) audit reports,
and preparing an annual report to Congress. This occurred because the Deputy CFO directed PwC to
complete these tasks and limited the responsible Government Technical Representatives (GTR) and
Monitors (GTM) from monitoring the contractor’s activities. As a result of the Deputy CFO requesting
these tasks, one of PwC’s contracts required a time extension and a $335,397 increase in the funding
ceiling.




                                      The FAR, Subpart 7.501, defines an inherently governmental
                                      function as a function that is so intimately related to the public
                                      interest as to mandate performance by government employees.
                                      The FAR, Subpart 7.503(a), states that, “...contracts shall not
                                      be    used    for   the   performance     of   inherently   governmental
                                      functions...(c) the following is a list of examples of functions
                                       considered to be inherently governmental functions or which
                                       shall be treated as such...(20)         the drafting of Congressional
                                      testimony, responses to Congressional correspondence, or
                                      agency responses to audit reports from the Inspector General,
                                      the General Accounting Office, or other Federal audit entity.”

                                      The    FAR,     Subpart   37.104(a),    characterizes   personal    service
                                      contracts by the employer-employee relationship it creates
                                      between the Government and the contractor’s personnel.
                                      Unless specifically authorized by Congress, the Government is
                                      restricted from circumventing the civil service laws when hiring
                                      employees. This section provides six elements to determine
                                      whether a contract is personal in nature:

                                       e    Performance on site.
                                       e    Principal tools and equipment furnished by the Government.
                                       e    Services are applied directly to the integral effort of
                                            agencies or an organizational subpart in furtherance of
                                            assigned function or mission.
                                       e    Comparable services, meeting comparable needs are
                                            performed in the same or similar agencies using civil service
                                            personnel.

                                            Page 13                                                2001-A O-0002
                                                                   Finding 2

e   The need for the type of service provided can reasonably
    be expected to last beyond 1 year.
e   The inherent nature of the service, or the manner in which it
    is provided, reasonably requires directly or indirectly,
    Government    direction or supervision of contractor
    employees in order to adequately protect the Government’s
    interest, retain control of the function involved, or retain full
    personal responsibility for the function supported in a duly
    authorized Federal officer or employee.

HUD         Handbook        2210.3,      Procurement         Policies    and
Procedures, states that the GTR is the Department’s primary
point of contact with a contractor. In this capacity, the GTR is
responsible for providing contractors with technical advice and
guidance related to the work required by the contract. The
GTR is also the principal judge of a contractor’s performance,
including the quality and timeliness of work and products.

HUD violated the FAR by allowing PwC to prepare
Congressional testimony, which is an inherently governmental
function.       During    the   period   March16    to 22,     2000,    PwC
assisted the Deputy CFO and HUD’s Office of General
Counsel in preparing for the Deputy Secretary’s Congressional
testimony before the House Government Reform Committee,
Subcommittee on Government Management Information and
Technology. The testimony was given to provide Congress
with the status of the Department’s financial management
systems,    and the material weaknesses         reported in the OIG’s
attempt to        audit   the    Department's      FY   1999       Financial
Statements.

The Deputy CFO selected the PwC Program Manager as her
liaison with the CFO staff, Office of General Counsel, and other
senior HUD management because the PwC Program Manager
was knowledgeable of HUD’s financial reconciliation process.
The PwC Program Manager developed and set the tone of the
Deputy     Secretary’s     presentation,   thereby    significantly
influencing the final version of the testimony given to Congress.
PwC presented the testimony in a manner that lessened the
magnitude of

the problems. Even though the HUD staff provided input and
responded to a list of potential questions, the PwC Program

      Page 14                                                  2001-A O-0002
                                                              Finding 2

Manager used her discretion to structure the wording and
substance of the testimony.         The PwC Program Manager
acknowledged that she softened and clarified the language,
checked the facts, and added detailed paragraphs describing
the work PwC was performing under the CFO’s Audit and
Accounting Support contract. | However, it is HUD’s
responsibility to ensure that testtmonies represent the agency
and not the contractor’s interests.

PwC’s contract with the office of the CFO did not include
services to draft Congressional testimony and the manner in
which PwC performed this function for the Deputy CFO met
the elements for personal services.      We attribute PwC’s
involvement in the drafting of Congressional testimony to the
fact that the Deputy CFO directed the task be performed. The
Deputy CFO relied on the PwC Program Manager to perform
tasks that were outside the SOW because she had established a
good working relationship with the PwC Program Manager
while in FHA. The Deputy CFO advised us that she felt she
could trust the PwC Program Manager, but she did not have
the same trust in the CFO staff.

PwC drafted responses to IG and GAO audit report
recommendations and openly acknowledged this on the weekly
status reports for three different contract task orders with FHA
and the CFO. Drafting such responses was outside the scope
of the contract and is an inherently governmental function.
PwC’s task, under the Audit Response contract, was to
evaluate management’s responses to material weaknesses and
reportable conditions. PwC status reports specifically stated
that   PwC       provided   assistance in coordinating,   drafting, and
redrafting the responses to the IG’s material weaknesses and
GAO’s statements of fact.

The Deputy CFO asked PwC to assist in responding to a GAO
audit report by developing the HUDCAPS Corrective Action
Plan and evaluating the proposed completion dates. PwC also
responded to GAO statements of fact and addressed whether
or not the actions to be taken were sufficient to resolve the
recommendations. PwC added specific language and detailed
plans as necessary to ensure resolution. In other instances,
PwC made suggestions for clarifying and enhancing the
responses to the recommendations. FHA’s annual procurement

       Page 15                                             2001-A O-0002
                                                               Finding 2

plan for the Audit Response contract stated there was
insufficient staff to resolve the past recommendations or prevent
future material weaknesses. In some instances, PwC was the
only decision maker for the audit responses because HUD
employees were unfamiliar with the issues. The annual plan
describes       the   Audit   Response   contract   as,   “...to   obtain
technical assistance in responding to 400 GAO and OIG audit
weaknesses.” OCPO contract specialists should have identified
this function as inherently governmental in nature and should
have questioned the use of contractors to perform these
Services.

The   FHA       Andit Liaison Officer (ALO) and other HUD           staff
also stated that one of the reasons the audit resolution tasks
were in the SOW was because there was not enough staff
remaining to perform this function after the downsizing from the
HUD Reform 2020. Because of insufficient staff, HUD senior
management requested PwC to aggressively pursue the
resolution of over 400 recommendations that had accumulated
over the past several years. But, management did not consider
that PwC’s involvement would include drafting corrective
actions    and     responses    necessary     to   resolve   the
recommendations.          However, the audit resolution tasks in the
Audit Response contract were repeated verbatim in the Funds
Control contract because at the end of the Audit Response
contract nearly 400 recommendations remained unresolved.
PwC resolved some of the original 400 recommendations but
the number of recommendations on more recent audits
increased the total to nearly 400 again. HUD needs to manage
its audit resolution using HUD program personnel that are more
familiar with the program issues. During our recent discussions
with the ALO, she stated that FHA was in the process of hiring
additional staff for audit resolution.

Although not contracted to perform this task, PwC prepared
input for HUD’s Annual FHA Report to Congress dated
March 31, 2000.         Section 1709(x) of 12 U.S.C. requires HUD
to submit an Annual Report to Congress that describes the
Secretary’s plans to address material weaknesses, reportable
conditions, and noncompliance with applicable laws or
regulations identified in FHA’s audited financial statements.
PwC edited and revised some of the original documents FHA
staff prepared for the annual report.

      Page 16                                              2001-A O-0002
                                                              Finding 2


As stated earlier, with the drafting of Congressional testimony,
the Deputy CFO requested PwC’s assistance in preparing the
Annual Report to Congress. The Deputy CFO assigned this
task to PwC because PwC was already assisting HUD in its
audit resolution under the Audit Response contract. However,
the FAR specifically defines the drafting of Congressional
correspondence as an inherently governmental function.

The GTRs and GTMs within FHA were limited in their abilities
to perform their contract monitoring responsibilities because the
Deputy CFO was continuously redirecting the work of the
contractors and not keeping the GTR and GTM informed of the
changes in the tasks. According to HUD’s regulations, the
GTR can delegate responsibilities to the GTM. The GTMs on
PwC contracts were delegated the responsibility for resolving
discrepancies between the work being performed and the
contract SOW.        However, the GTRs and GTMs did not speak
up about discrepancies between the SOW and work being
performed because they had personally witnessed retaliatory
actions or had retaliatory actions taken against them by the
Deputy CFO. Had the GTRs and GTMs been allowed to
perform their monitoring functions without the fear of retaliation,
they would have reported the inherently governmental functions
and personal       services   to the CPO.     Also,    the GIMs’    and
GTRs’ responsibilities and authority were not clearly defined
because the Deputy CFO did not prepare appointment
memoranda, as required by HUD             Handbook 2210.3,
Procurement Policies and Procedures.

The use of PwC to perform inherently governmental functions
and personal services that are outside the scope of the contract
SOW reduces the time available for contractors to perform
actual contract work. Allowing PwC to draft responses to
recommendations under the Audit Response contract resulted in
a contract modification to increase the funding ceiling by
$335,397 to complete the contract services.           The contract was
then modified again to add an additional 2 months to the original
contract period.

Adequate       monitoring,    free from   management    intervention, is
essential to ensure that HUD is not paying the contractor to
perform functions that are outside the contract SOW. Also, the

     Page 17                                               2001-A O-0002
                                                                                   Finding 2

                    purpose of monitoring contractor performance is to ensure that
                    HUD receives quality deliverables on schedule and that contract
                    personnel are providing the services requested in the contract
                    SOW.




Auditee Comments    The Chief of Staff, as the Acting Deputy Secretary, agreed with
                    the    finding     and _ related  recommendation      concerning
                    administrative and disciplinary actions against the Deputy Chief
                    Financial Officer.

                    The CPO agreed with the finding with the exception of the issue
                    regarding use of contractors for inherently governmental
                    functions. The CPO’s position is that contractors can provide
                    expert technical assistance and advice on many aspects of the
                    Government’s business without actually performing any
                    inherently governmental activity.

                    The CPO       agreed with our recommendations but offered an
                    alternative to Recommendation           2D.     The   CPO   believes the
                    GTR/GTM should first use the official chain of command and if
                    resolution does not occur, then other avenue, such as reporting
                    the situation to OIG, should be explored. In addition, the CPO
                    stated that if the issue involves an ongoing procurement action
                    or existing    contract,   concurrent    with   the above    attempts   at
                    resolution, the matter should also be brought to the attention of
                    the cognizant contracting officer in the OCPO.




OIG Evaluation of   We acknowledge that contractors who only provide advice and
Auditee Comments    recommendations are within the guidelines of the Office of
                    Management     and  Budget     policy  regarding  inherently
                    governmental     functions.    However,       PwC’s    actions extended
                    beyond providing advice and recommendations, since they
                    actually drafted the responses to the recommendations. We
                    were told on numerous occasions that the HUD staff did not
                    have the expertise to respond to the audit findings since
                    contractors were actually performing the work. PwC’s actions
                    were inappropriate because PwC’s direct involvement in
                    drafting    the   responses    could    result  in __ resolving


                        Page 18                                                 2001-A O-0002
                                                                         Finding 2

                  recommendations while setting themselves up to          perform
                  additional contract work based on those responses.

                  We agree with the alternative approach provided by the CPO
                  for the GTRs/GTMs to report inappropriate contract actions.
                  His plan to issue a memorandum to outline the procedures for
                  resolving inappropriate contract actions meets the intent of our
                  recommendation.




Recommendations   We recommend that the Deputy Secretary:

                  2A.           Take appropriate administrative and disciplinary
                           actions against the Deputy CFO for allowing PwC to
                           perform inherently governmental functions and personal
                           services in violation of the FAR.

                  We recommend that the CPO:

                  2B.    — Evaluate SOWs to identify and eliminate tasks that may
                           be inherently governmental functions.

                  2C.          Instruct the Deputy CFO and other HUD managers
                           not to interfere with the GTRs and GIMs when they
                           are performing their contracting duties.

                  2D.           Require GTRs and GTMs to report inappropriate
                           contract actions directly to the CPO and guarantee
                           protection from retaliation for those who report such
                           actions.

                  2E.   — Ensure that GTRs and GTMs are formally designated in
                          writing     and   trained in executing    contractual
                          responsibilities.




                        Page 19                                       2001-A O-0002
Management Controls
In planning and performing our audit, we considered management controls to determine our auditing
procedures.    We obtained an understanding of the controls relevant to our audit objectives.
Management controls include the plan of organization, methods, and procedures adopted by
management to ensure that its goals are met. Management controls include the processes for planning,
organizing, directing, and controlling program operations. They include the systems for measuring,
reporting, and monitoring program performance. Management controls also include the process by
which an entity obtains reasonable assurance as to achievement of specified objectives.




                                      We determined that management controls over the following
                                      areas were relevant to our audit objectives:

                                      ¢   Compliance with Federal laws and regulations.
                                      ¢   Compliance with HUD policies and procedures.
                                      e   Monitoring and oversight of contractors.



                                      A significant weakness exists if management controls do not
                                      give reasonable assurance that resources are safeguarded
                                      against waste, loss, and misuse; and that reliable       data   is
                                      obtained, maintained, and fairly disclosed in reports.


                                      Based on our review, we believe significant weaknesses exist in
                                      the areas of compliance with the FAR and HUD policies and
                                      procedures, and contractor monitoring and oversight. These
                                      weaknesses are discussed in the findings.




                                           Page 20                                        2001-A O-0002
Follow-Up On Prior Audits
The Office of Inspector General issued an audit report on September 30, 1997, on HUD’s Contracting
Operations. The report contained two findings related to issues addressed in this audit: Prohibited
Services and Contractor Oversight and Monitoring.




                                           Page 21                                      2001-A O-0002
                                                                                         Appendix A

Audit Response Timeline
C-OPC-21217 — Task Order 4




                                  PricewaterhouseCoopers
                                       Created SOW
                                          6/23/99



                                              ’
                                  Office of Procurement and
                                      Contracts (OPC)
                                  Received SOW    from FHA
                                            8/09/99


                                              ,
                                          OPC Sent
                                         Request for
                                          Proposals
                                           9/14/99




          Arthur Andersen
                            ral               ’
                                   PricewaterhouseCoopers
                                                              iy
                                                                   Deloitte   & Touche




                     >»
                                              y
                                        OPC Received
                                          Proposals
                                           9/21/99




                                     Contract Awarded to
                                   PricewaterhouseCoopers
                                    Period of Performance
                                        9/30/99-11/30/00
                                      (includes a 2-month
                                           extension)




                                  Page 22                                                2001-A O-0002
                                                                            Appendix B

Funds Control Timeline
C-OPC-21799



                        PricewaterhouseCoopers
                             Created SOW
                                12/21/99




                       Office of Procurement and
                             Contracts (OPC)
                        Received SOW from FHA
                                  5/17/00


                                   .
                               OPC Sent
                              Request for
                               Proposals
                                6/01/00


                 all               }             in
          KPMG          PricewaterhouseCoopers        Deloitte   & Touche

                                   :
                               Received
                                Proposal
                                6/26/00




                           Contract Awarded to
                         PricewaterhouseCoopers
                          Period of Performance
                             8/09/00-08/09/03
                        (includes two option years)




                                            Page 23                         2001-A O-0002
                                                                                                                          Appendix C

Auditee Comments

                                                             aiMENTo,



                                                    Sts
                                                     a



                                                             “TM "=
                                                    a
                                                    z
                                                    %
                                                         &
                                                             Say peve?



                               U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT
                                           THE OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
                                                WASHINGTON, DC 20410-0001

                                                    May
                                                     3, 2001


    MEMORANDUM     FOR:         Saundra     G.     Elion,                 District        Inspector      General
                                   for    Audit,             Capital          Distrfact,        3GGA


    FROM:      Daniel     R.    Murphy,     Chief             of         Staff,     S                i


    SUBJECT:      Draft Report - Use of                          Contractors
                                                                           by                  the    Deputy     Chief
                     Financial Officer


         This is in response to your memorandum of April 23, 2001,
    and attached draft report, “Use of Contractors by the Deputy
    Chief Financial Officer,” and our subsequent meeting of May 3,
    2001,  to discuss   your  report  and recommendations.     In                                        the draft
    report   OIG concluded   that  PriceWaterhouseCoopers  (PWC)                                         at the
    request of the current Chief Financial Officer prepared
    statements of work for Departmental contracts that PWC later
    competed for and won in apparent contradiction of applicable
    Federal Acquisition Regulation principles.  In accordance with OIG
    recommendations we have taken the following actions as indicated
    in the attached memorandums:

          1.  The Deputy Chief Financial Officer is no longer
    responsible   for contracting operations in the Office of the                                                  CFO.
    Margaret Young has been placed in operational charge of CFO
    functions pending confirmation of a new CFO.

          2.     The Office         of the   Chief   Procurement    Officer  has been
    directed     to restart         the  funds   control   contract   solicitation   with
    safeguards     to assure a fair and open competition,                                            including
    precluding     PWC from competing for the contract.

          3.      Principal Staff has               been                 informed        of   the    administrative
    changes     in the CFO’s office.

             4.   Additional action will be taken                                   if    warranted      based     upon
    our     review of the final audit report.




                                                                                    Page 24                               2001-A O-0002
                                                                                                  Appendix C

Auditee Comments




                DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT

                                . Office of the Chief Financial Officer

                                        [Docket No.    FR-         ]

                                           Order of Succession

     AGENCY:        Office of the Chief Financial Officer, HUD.

     ACTION:       Notice of Order of Succession.

     SUMMARY:          In this notice, the Chief of Staff for the Department of Housing and

     Urban Development designates the Order of Succession for the office of Chief Financial

     Officer.

     EFFECTIVE DATE:

     FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: _ Erie T. Davis, Jr., Administrative
     Officer, Office of the Chief Financial Officer, Department of Housing and Urban

     Development, Room 3128 , 451 7th Street, SW, Washington, DC 20410,            (202) 708-

     0313.   (This is not a toll-free number.)   This number may be accessed via TTY by calling

     the Federal Information Relay Service at 1-800-877-8339 (toll-free).

     SUPPLEMENTARY            INFORMATION:            The Chief of Staff for the Department of

    - Housing and Urban Development is issuing this Order of Succession of officials

     authorized to perform the functions and duties of the Office of the Chief Financial

     Officer when, by reason of absence, disability, or vacancy in office, the Chief Financial

     Officer is not available to exercise the powers or perform the duties of the office. This

     Order of Succession is subject to the provisions of the Vacancy Reform Act of 1998, 5

     USC 3345-3349d,




                                                                       Page 25                    2001-A O-0002
                                                                                                   Appendix C

Auditee Comments




            Accordingly, the Chief of Staff designates the following Order of Succession:

     Section A. Order of Succession

            Subject to the provisions of the Vacancy Reform Act of 1998, during any period

     when, by reason of absence, disability, or vacancy in office, the Chief Financial Officer

     is not available to exercise the powers or perform the duties of the Chief Financial

     Officer, the following officials within the Office of the Chief Financial Officer are

     hereby designated to exercise the powers and perform the duties of the Office:

       1)     Senior Advisor to the Chief Financial Officer;

       2)     Assistant Chief Financial Officer for Budget.

     These officials shall perform the functions and duties of the Office in the order specified

     herein, and no official shall serve unless all the other officials, whose position titles


     precede his/hers in this order, are unable to act by reason of absence, disability, or

     vacancy in office.

     Section B. Authority Superseded

                This Order of Succession supersedes the Order of Succession for the Officeof the

     Chief Financial Officer, published at 65 FR 51016 (August 22, 2000).




     Authority:     Section 7(d), Department of Housing and Urban Development Act, 42 U.S.C.

     Sec. 3535(d).                 |
     Dated:       Moy       &, Yo                              Wh
                                                               Daniel R. Murphy \
                                                               Chief of Staff
                                                               Department of Housing and
                                                                  Urban Development




                                                                       Page 26                     2001-A O-0002
                                                                                                                                      Appendix C

Auditee Comments

                                                                  EFM ENT
                                                                        EN




                                                                              Ro)
                                                      oe US og,




                                                                                  Say onis™
                                                                  *           *




                                                                             "o,,
                                                                      Pan neve”




                                                            s
                                U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT
                                              OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
                                               WASHINGTON, D.C. 20410-0001


                                                      MAY                     3 2001




     MEMORANDUM           TO:        Principal     Staff



     FROM:      Daniel          R.   Murphy,      Chief                of         Staff,            $



     SUBJECT:         Items     Submitted   to the Office  of                                             the     Chief
                           Financial   Officer  for Action



             Until        further       notice,     all                matters                 forwarded             to    the
     Office     of    the       Chief    Financial                Officer                     for       action       should      be
     directed        to    Margaret       A.   Young,                  Senior                 Advisor           to   the    Chief
     Financial        Officer:                                                                                         ;



     Cc:     Margaret           A.   Young




                                                                                                        Page 27                       2001-A O-0002
                                                                                                        Appendix C

Auditee Comments

                                                          ae WENT Oe 4




                                                                     3
                                                    on Uta,




                                                                             Cy owss™
                                                        aie
                                                                         *




                                                        bd
                                                              Say ove”


                           U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT
                                         OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
                                           WASHINGTON, D.C. 20410-0001




                                                 May 3, 2001




      MEMORANDUM           FOR:   V. Stephen Carberry, Chief Procurement Officer, N


      FROM: Daniel R. Murphy, Chie
                                 of Staff,
                                     f §                                                My

      SUBJECT:      Funds Control Solicitation


              On April 2, 2001 the Department suspended the Tecompetition of the Funds
      Control contract supporting activities of the FHA Comptroller’s Office pending
     - completion of an OIG audit and Departmental reassessment of its requirements. At that
      time, I also directed that the related CFO procurement for Phase I for the Department
                                                                                            al
      General Ledger be suspended.

             Effective immediately, your Office shall continue processing the solicitation.
      Note, however, that because of the organizational conflict of interest created by
      Price WaterhouseCoopers’ (PWC) significant involvement in drafting the statement
                                                                                                   of
      work for the Funds Control Contract, PWC should be precluded from the competition as
      the prime contractor or as a subcontractor. Based on discussions with OGC, the
      solicitation shall proceed in a manner consistent with the following guidelines:

             1.   The drafting of the statement of work for the replacement Funds Control
                  Contract shall be by an independent team assisted as needed by procurement
                  attorneys in OGC.                 :

             2.   The statement of work shall be ‘outcome-based’,

             3.   In order to insure a fair and open competition, the Department shall actively
                  solicit offerors to submit proposals.

             4.   To further reinforce full and open competition, since the previous solicitation
                  only provided 10 days for submission of proposals, the new solicitation shall
                  provide prospective offerors with adequate time to develop and submit
                  proposals.




                                                                                         Page 28        2001-A O-0002
                                                                                                Appendix C

Auditee Comments




              5.   Insure that HUD personnel involved in the evaluation and award process
                                                                                          are
                   not influenced by PWC’s prior and current contracts with the Office of the
                   CFO and the FHA Comptroller’s Office. In the absence of a confirmed
                                                                                        FHA
                   Commissioner, the General Deputy Assistant Secretary for Housing shall
                                                                                          be
                   the Source Selection Official. The solicitation shall continue to use an
                   integrated program team comprised of staff from Housing, CIO, CFO and
                   OCPO.   OGC will provide legal assistance as necessary.

             Should you need additional information, please contact me or George
     Weidenfeller at 708-2864.

     Ce:   George Weidenfeller
           Margaret A. Young




                                                                     Page 29                    2001-A 0-002
                                                                                                                         Appendix C

Auditee Comments

                                                                     XEN On, 4
                                                                 a                 ,

                                                                               I %,%




                                                         4,
                                                     ort YS og
                                                                 *        |        xo

                                                             &, “a>,     Hl s
                                                                       San peve™
                                                                                       ke




                            ULS. DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT
                                          OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
                                            WASHINGTON,                       D.C. 20410-0001




                                             May 3,                           2001


     MEMORANDUM       TO:         Victoria L. Bateman,                                      Deputy   Chief   Financial
                                    Officer, F



     FROM:      Daniel R. Murphy,             Chief of Staff,                                   S            \

     SUBJECT:        Items Submitted to the Office of the Chief
                       Financial           Officer                   for           Action




           As a follow-up  to my memorandum  to you dated April 2,
     2001,   effective immediately,  I am directing that all matters
     forwarded to the Office of the Chief Financial     Officer for
     action     be   directed        to    Margaret                      A.         Young,      Senior    Advisor   to
     the     Chief   Financial        Officer.



     Cc:      Margaret       A.    Young




                                                                                                Page 30                  2001-A O-0002
                                                                                                    Appendix C

Auditee Comments

                                                             AmENToO,
                                                     a                      % 0,
                                                                                   ©




                                                 US O6
                                                     “i
                                                                    {              Zz
                                                         *      |       |   *      e

                                                                                &=




                                                 ont
                                                             SAny yEveY



                         U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT
                                       OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
                                         WASHINGTON, D.C. 20410-0001

                                           May 18,                          2001
     MEMORANDUM          FOR:   Saundra G. Elion, District Inspector General for Audit,
                                  Capital District, 3GGA


     FROM: Daniel R. Murphy, Chiefof Staff, §                           NSE

     SUBJECT:     Draft OIG Audit Report - Follow-up regarding CPO Actio


             This is in response to your follow-up inquiry regarding actions taken by the
     Department to ensure that PwC returns 20 percent of the amount received on the
     completed Audit Response contract and 20 percent of the amount billed on the Funds
     Control contract. According to the Office of the Chief Procurement Officer (CPO),
     $733,798 has been credited against PwC invoices. This reflects reductions in billings
     from PwC for work completed under the Audit Response and Funds Control contracts
     through February 28, 2001. These credits were consistent with prior discussions
     between PwC, the CPO, and former Deputy General Counsel for Programs and
     Regulations, Kevin M. Simpson, memorialized in a letter signed by Mr. Simpson
     dated October 10, 2000. (A copy of this letter is attached as Exhibit 1).

             I do not agree with the award of this contract to PwC in light of the circumstances
     surrounding the procurement process as outlined in your report. Moreover, I do not
     approve of the terms as modified in the October 10" Simpson letter. However, I am
     advised by attorneys in OGC of the difficulties the Department would have in enforcing a
     further reduction in fees by reinstating the 20% requirement at this time. In addition, the
     contract awarded to PwC expires on August 9, 2001, unless the Department exercises an
     option to renew. This is unlikely since the Department is resoliciting these services. |
     have also expressed my concern to the CPO regarding the circumstances associated with
     the award of the initial contract to PwC and directed that the resolicitation be carried out
     using fair and open competitive procedures in conformance with my memorandum to him
     dated May 3, 2001.

            If additional information is required, do not hesitate to let me know.


     Attachment




                                                                                        Page 31     2001-A O-0002
                                                                                                                  Appendix C

Auditee Comments

                                                                                  EXNIDIU   1




   _               SVEN   on          ;           .,                     .
               s               *                U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
               ; *             x                          Washington, D.C. 20410-5000
               “oa oe                                    _                              ,



               OFFICE OF GENERAL COUNSEL




                                                                                October 10, 2000


               James D. Gibbs
               Assistant General Counsel
       °       Pricewaterhouse Coopers LLP
               1616 North Fort Myer Drive
               Arlington, VA 22209

                           Re:     Resolution of procurement issues concerning FHA Funds Control and FHS      .
                                   Audit Response Contracts

       “       Dear Jim: ;

                           I am writing to memorialize the resolution of our discussions about issues that
               have arisen concerning the applicability of the regulatory prohibitions on organizational
               conflicts of interest to the above-captioned contracts (the" FHA contracts"), As you
               know, HUD received anonymous allegations that PwC helped HUD prepare the
               statements of work for the FHA contracts. PwC also submitted successful bids for both
               contracts, thereby raising an issue as to whether PwC's involvement in HUD's drafting of
       *   '   the SOWs resulted in an unfair competitive advantage. In response to these allegations,
               we have conducted our own inquiries and have met with you to offer you an opportunity _
               to respond to both the allegations and our concems about their potential significance,
               Subsequent to meeting with you, wé invited you to make a written submission to HUD
               conceming these issues, which we have carefully reviewed.

                           PwC and HUD have been unable to agree on whether there have been violations
       ;       of the regulatory provisions on organizational conflicts-of interest and the significance of
               any such possible violations. Nonetheless, considering all of the circumstances in their
               totality, PwC and HUD have agreed to certain measures in the interest of resolving
               HUD's concerns without the cost or disruption of adversarial administrative or judicial -
               proceedings, and in the interest of preserving a productive and valued business
               relationship. Specifically, PwC bas agreed to cooperate with HUD in implementing the
               following actions:




                                                                              Page 32                             2001-A O-0002
                                                                                                            Appendix C

Auditee Comments



                  ©       PwC will return to HUD 20% of the funds it received under the FHA Audit
                          Respouse contract (the parties will agree on details about the manner and
   .                      timing of this);

                 «PwC will retum to HUD 20% ofany funds it has received to date under the
                          FHA Funds Control contract (the parties will agree on details about the
                          manner and timing of this);

                      »   HUD will conduct a new competition for the FHA Funds Control contract as
                 soon as posssible using accelerated procurement procedures which will
                   provide all interested bidders an opportunity to propose changes or additions
                          to the proposed Statement of Work. PwC will be permitted tot participate iin
                          this new.competition;

                 ~¢       PwC will continue to credit HUD 20% on all new billings under the FHA
                          Funds Control contract until such time as tlie new competition for the contract
                          is completed. In the event that PWC is selected to continue the FHA Funds
       ’          -        Control contract, the requirement of a 20% credit on all billings will cease;

                      ©    PwC will provide HUD with a memorialization of the measures it has
                          undertaken to sensitize its staff to future OCT issues of this kind.

                      Please advise me as soon as possible if you feel this correspondence has misstated
           the mutual agreement we have reached on these issues. Also, please feel free to call me if
           you have any questions. I thank you for your cooperation throughout this process.




                                                             ‘Kevin M, Simpson
                                                              Deputy General Counsel
                                                               Programs and Regulations




                                                                           Page 33                          2001-A O-0002
                                                                                                                      Appendix C

Auditee Comments

        ENT Ox,                          U. S. Department of Housing and Urban        Development
  ~     [ah %                                            Washington, D.C. 20410
         (\ | rs

  e, ull
      ey oer
                                                                   May   ay
                                                                              24, 2004
                                                                                ;



  OFFICE          OF THE CHIEF PROCUREMENT     OFFICER




            MEMORANDUM            FOR:     Saundra G. Elion, District          Jnspector General for Audit, Capital
                                              Disfrict, 3GGA



            FROM:       V. Stephen Carberry, Chief Procurement Officer,



            SUBJECT:        Draft Report - Use of Contractors by the Deputy Chief Financial Officer


                     Thank you for the opportunity to respond to the above draft audit report. The comments
            provided in this memorandum were discussed with Joan Hobbs and Jacqueline Jimmerson of your
            staff on May 14, 2001.

                     The instances cited in the draft audit report deal with two primary issues: a specific
            conflict of interest involving one contractor; and a program official directing or allowing that
            same contractor to perform improper tasks. I suggest that the draft be revised to accurately
            portray the collaborative efforts of our respective offices to successfully address these issues.

                     The conflict of interest problem was brought to my attention by representatives from your
            office in August 2000. At that time, I considered several options to address the circumstances
            presented. Termination of the affected contract was chief among them, but I explained that such
            an action required written documentation of your findings. Absent that documentation, I
            conducted separate meetings with the Deputy Chief Financial Officer and senior contractor
            representatives. I was able to obtain the contractor’s admission that they had played a significant
            role in writing the statement of work. I then worked with the Office of General Counsel to
            develop an appropriate mitigation plan. The terms of the mitigation plan were negotiated with the
            contractor and I ensured that its implementation was completed. I believe that the mitigation plan
            was properly developed and implemented, and I will be pleased to cooperate in the recommended
            evaluation of its effectiveness.

                     Most of the recommendations stemming from the conflict of interest issue call for systemic
             changes in procurement policies and procedures. In most circumstances, I believe that sufficient
             written policy exists to prevent conflicts of interest from having a negative impact on work
             performed by HUD contractors. With our increased reliance on Accelerated Contracting
             procedures, we have the opportunity to address this issue in a more direct manner as we conduct
             industry briefings and one-on-one meetings with participating contractors. My staff will develop




                                                                                          Page 34                     2001-A O-0002
                                                                                                              Appendix C

Auditee Comments




    procedures to accomplish this objective and I will ensure that OCPO personnel are trained in their
    application. Additionally, to heighten overall sensitivity to the critical issues raised in the report,
    my staff will draft a memorandum for the Deputy Secretary addressing these issues to Principal
    Staff.

             With regard to the issue of inherently governmental functions, current policy and direction
    from the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) on reporting commercial activities under the
    Federal Activities Inventory Reform (FAIR) Act is very different than the Inspector General
    position taken in this audit. OMB has advised that contractor provision of expert advice and
    recommendations on matters having an impact on Federal Government policy is mot an inherently
    governmental function. The actual determination of policy after consideration of such advice is
    inherently governmental. Consequently, it is often proper for contractors to provide expert
    technical assistance and advice on many aspects of the Government’s business without actually
    performing any inherently governmental activity.

            Specific comments on each of the draft recommendations is provided in the attachment to
    this memorandum. It also provides suggested changes to the text to clarify facts.

            If you have any questions concerning this response, please contact Tere A. Demer, Deputy
    Chief Procurement Officer, on (202) 708-1290, x7118.

    Attachment




                                                                        Page 35                               2001-A O-0002
                                                                                                            Appendix C

Auditee Comments



                                    Office of the Chief Procurement Officer

                            Comments    on Draft Audit Report - Use of Contractors
                                     by the Deputy Chief Financiai Officer

    General Comments

    1.   Throughout the draft, please remove the references to “the Office of Procurement and
         Contracts” and “OPC”. Replace them with “the Office of the Chief Procurement Officer”
         and ‘OCPO", respectively.

         Page 9 - The discussion of contract remedies (OIG request for OPC intervention) should
         be clarified that the payments were received in the form of a credit against costs incurred in
         contract performance.

         Page 10 - The conclusion incorrectly states the prohibition against contractors writing
         statements of work (SOW). A contractor may be used to perform that task; the prohibition
         is against writing a SOW and then competing for and subsequently performing that same
         work. Also, on March 26, 1998, the Deputy Secretary issued a memorandum to Principal
         Staff entitled “HUD 2020 Procurement Reform-Prohibited Contract Services.” This memo
         restated in detail HUD’s policies prohibiting the procurement of personal services and
         inherently Governmental functions. Attachment B to the memo set forth the specific
         prohibition against the procurement of inherently Governmental functions.         To stress the
         continuing importance of these issues, OCPO will update the memorandum for signature
         and issuance by the current Deputy Secretary.

         Page 12 - Add the word personal to the second paragraph and correct the FAR            reference
         cited. The revised sentence should read as follows:

                    “FAR 37.104(a) characterizes personal services contracts....... “

         Page 15, first paragraph - We disagree that relying on a contractor “....to obtain technical
         assistance in responding to 400 GAO and OIG audit weaknesses...” represents an
         inherently governmental function. According to the most recent guidance from OMB, a
         contractor may provide expert technical assistance and advice on many aspects of the
         Government's business without actually performing any inherently governmental activity.
         The actual determination of policy or the approval of the recommended          course of action
         are representative of actions that are inherently governmental.

         Page 16, second paragraph - HUD Handbook 2210.3, paragraph 11-3 requires that the
         cognizant program office head or designee prepare GTR and GTM appointment
         memoranda.       Accordingly, the final sentence of this paragraph should be revised as
         follows:

             “Also, the GTR and GTM responsibilities and scope of authority were not clearly
             defined because the Deputy CFO        did not prepare appointment memoranda....”




                                                                         Page 36                            2001-A O-0002
                                                                                                         Appendix C

Auditee Comments



    Specific Comments to Recommendations

    1C.   Develop procedures to ensure that OPC staff obtains a signed organizational
          conflict of interest certification for all contracts.

    Concur in principle, but we cannot require a certification.     Section 4301o0f the 1996 Federal
    Acquisition Reform Act (FARA) mandated the removal of non-statutorily based certifications
    from agency supplements to the Federal Acquisition Regulation (FAR).

    Rather, we will ensure that current solicitation provisions and contract clauses are used in all
    HUD contracts and purchases using GSA         Schedules.      Current HUD/OCPO   policy addresses
    the identification and mitigation of such conflicts.   The HUDAR clause at 2452.209-72,
    “Organizational Conflicts of Interest,” (see Exhibit 1, attached) requires contractors to disclose
    potential or actual conflicts of interest after contract award and provides for the termination of
    contracts “In the event the Contractor was aware of an organizational conflict of interest before
    the award of this contract and intentionally did not disclose the conflict to the Contracting
    Officer...”

    In addition, the solicitation provision at HUDAR   2452.209-70,    “Potential Organizational
    Conflicts of Interest,” (see attached Exhibit 1) requires the Contracting Officer to describe in
    the clause the nature of the potential conflict. The program office must provide the Contracting
    Officer with a description of the portions of the proposed statement of work or specifications
    which, in the program office’s judgment, present a potential organizational conflict of interest.

    Our increased reliance on Accelerated Contracting (AC) procedures provides an opportunity to
    address this issue in a more direct manner as we conduct industry briefings and one-on-one
    meetings with participating contractors. We will develop procedures to accomplish this
    objective and will ensure that contracting personnel are trained in their application. We
    suggest that you re-cast this recommendation to focus on this course of action.


    1D.  Obtain and evaluate reasons why contractors decline to submit proposals. When
          only one proposal is received, consider re-announcing the contract solicitation to
          expand competition.
    Concur.


    1E.   Develop procedures to ensure that potential source lists do not include contractors
          with known conflicts of interest.

    Concur.    OCPO will revise the current guidance governing requests for contract services in
    Chapter 4 of Handbook 2210.3 to require program offices to disclose whether or not any
    outside party (consultant, contractors, etc.) assisted in the development of the statement of
    work or any other part of the requirement. In addition, we will add a similar provision to the
    Acquisition Strategy required by our call for FY 2002 procurement plans.




                                                                         Page 37                         2001-A O-0002
                                                                                                           Appendix C

Auditee Comments



    1F.   Ensure that PWC returns 20 percent of the amount received on the completed Audit
          Response contract ($457,500) and 20 percent of the amount billed on the Funds
          Control contract (amount to be determined when the contract is terminated).

    Concur.   The Contracting Officer has recovered,     in the form of credits, the appropriate
    amounts for each contract. The recovered amounts are: $456,604 (Audit Response) and
    $277,195 (Funds Control). The latter figure was taken against costs incurred through February
    28, 2001.

    As the Funds Control contract is still active, we suggest that this recommendation be revised to
    drop the parenthetical note. Originally, we anticipated that a new Funds Control award
    (through GSA/FEDSIM) would be in place by that date. Due to the problems encountered with
    the re-competition, OCPO stopped that effort and authorized the original contract to continue.


    1G. - Exclude PWC from participating in future competition for the contracts resulting
          from PWC prepared SOWs.

    Concur.   (This policy applies to any contractor with a conflict of interest of this nature.)


    2B.  Evaluate SOWs to identify and eliminate tasks that may be inherently governmental
         functions.
    Concur.


    2C.   Instruct the Deputy CFO     and other HUD    managers     not to interfere with the GTRs   and
          GTMs when they are performing their contracting duties.

    Concur. OCPO will draft a memorandum for issuance by the Deputy Secretary to Principal
    Staff addressing this issue. We suggest that this recommendation be re-worded so as to not
    single out any specific HUD organization. This policy applies across the board.


    2D.   Require GTRs and GTMs to report inappropriate contract actions directly to the CPO
          and guarantee protection from retaliation for those who report such actions.

    Concur in part. GTRs and GTMs report to and are employees of the program office head
    sponsoring the procurement action. Upon nomination to that role, they are authorized to act
    on the behalf of the program office head and the Contracting Officer in monitoring the
    programmatic/technical aspects of the contractor's performance. If a GTR or GTM believes
    that an official within their chain of command has acted inappropriately, the first attempt at
    resolution should be made through their chain of command. /f not resolved, they may turn to
    the Inspector General for Investigations or invoke other administrative rights that may apply
    (e.g., the Whistleblowers Protection Act-- employee rights under this statute are administered
    by the Office of Special Counsel, an independent agency).

    If the issue involves an on-going procurement action or existing contract, concurrent with the
    above attempts at resolution, the matter should also be brought to the attention of the




                                                                         Page 38                           2001-A O-0002
                                                                                                               Appendix C

Auditee Comments



    cognizant Contracting Officer. The information presented will be assessed in terms of current
    statutory/regulatory requirements (e.g., HUD Standards of Conduct, the FAR, Procurement
    Integrity, etc.), contracting policy (e.g., inherently governmental services), and/or the specific
    contract (e.g., work not authorized). The Contracting Officer will assess the facts and
    circumstances and involve appropriate HUD officiais (Office of General Counsel, Inspector
    General for Investigations, etc.) to address the issues involved.

    We will address these issues in the memorandum to be issued by the Deputy Secretary to
    Principal Staff.


    2.E. - Ensure that GTRs     and GTMs    are formally designated      in writing and trained in
           executing contractual responsibilities.

    Concur.   This recommendation mirrors current HUD policy which is recapped below.

    During our meeting to discuss the draft audit, however, the IG representatives characterized
    the problem as a training deficit for those serving as GTMs. The concern was that some GTRs
    were delegating the full scope of their duties to GTMs who were not trained to carry them out.
    To address this concern, we will prohibit GTRs from inappropriately delegating their duties to
    GTMs. We will also work with the HUD Training Academy and program offices to train those
    GTMs performing GTR functions.

    CURRENT POLICY:
    e  Designation - Chapter 11, paragraph 11-3 of Handbook 2210.3 requires that GTRs and GTMs be
       appointed in writing, and that the duties and limitations of the GTR’s and GTM’s authority be stated
       in the appointment. [It is recognized that program office compliance with this requirement has been
       sporadic. Therefore, OCPO will revise the handbook to require written appointment of GTRs (and
       GTMs, when identified) be included with each Request for Contract Services or, if not practicable, no
       later than the contract award date.]

    e   Training of GTRs and GTMs is adequately addressed by the Department’s GTR Certification
        Program, which was developed by OCPO. The certification program includes basic and advanced
        training requirements for individuals serving as GTRs and GTMs. OCPO maintains a list of certified
        GTRs, so program clients and OCPO staff can determine if specific individuals have met program
        requirements. This list is posted on HUDWeb.

    The scheduling of program personnel for GTR/GTM training is the responsibility of program
    office heads. We will stress this issue in the memorandum from the Deputy Secretary to
    Principal Staff. OCPO has taken leadership of this effort by providing and arranging for
    classroom training.   To date, over 300 HUD     staff have completed classroom training courses in
    basic and advanced contract management topics. This fiscal year, OCPO has scheduled two
    formal GTR training classes and has included staff designated as GTMs.

    OCPO has also créated an electronic self-instruction GTR Orientation Course which any HUD
    employee may take. The course is accessible via the OCPO HUDweb site. To date, over 400
    HUD employees have completed this orientation course. While not a substitute for the formal
    training requirements of the GTR certification program, it does provide information to enable
    GTRs and GTMs to perform the basic duties of their job. It also serves as refresher for
    certified GTRs and just-in-time training when formal training is not immediately available.




                                                                          Page 39                              2001-A O-0002
                                                                                                              Appendix C

Auditee Comments



                     EXHIBIT 1 - HUDAR Organizational Conflict of interest Provisions

    2452.209-70 Potential Organizational Conflicts of Interest
            As prescribed in 2409.507-1, the Contracting Officer may insert a provision
    substantially the same as follows in solicitations:

                    POTENTIAL ORGANIZATIONAL CONFLICTS OF INTEREST (FEB 2000)

        (a) The Contracting Officer has determined that the proposed contract contains a potential
    organizational conflict of interest. Offerors are directed to FAR Subpart 9.5 for detailed
    information concerning organizational conflicts of interest.
        (b) The nature of the potential conflict of interest is [Contracting Officer insert description):
        (c) Offerors shall provide a statement which describes concisely all relevant facts
    concerning any past, present or planned interest (financial, contractual, organizational, or
    otherwise) relating to the work to be performed under the proposed contract and bearing on
    whether the offeror has a possible organizational conflict of interest with respect to:
           (1) Being able to render impartial, technically sound, and objective assistance or
           advice, or
              (2)   Being given an unfair competitive advantage.     The offeror may also provide
    relevant facts that show how its organizational structure and/or management systems limit its
    knowledge of possible organizational conflicts of interest relating to other divisions or sections
    of the organization and how that structure or system would avoid or mitigate such
    organizational conflict.
        (d) No award shall be made until any potential conflict of interest has been        neutralized or
    mitigated to the satisfaction of the Contracting Officer.
        (e) Refusal to provide the requested information or the willful misrepresentation of any
    relevant information by an offeror shall disqualify the offeror from further consideration for
    award of a contract under
    this solicitation.
        (f}   If the Contracting Officer determines that a potential conflict can be avoided, effectively
    mitigated, or otherwise resolved through the inclusion of a special contract clause, the terms of
    the clause will be subject to negotiation.
                                                (End of provision)


    2452.209-71       Limitation on Future Contracts.
              As prescribed in 2409.507-2, the Contracting Officer may insert a clause substantially
    the same as follows in solicitations and contracts for services:

                             LIMITATION ON FUTURE CONTRACTS               (FEB 2000)

       (a) The Contracting Officer has determined that this contract may give rise to potential
    organizational conflicts of interest as defined at FAR Subpart 9.5.
       (b) The nature of the potential conflict of interest is [Contracting Officer insert description]:
       (c) If the contractor, under the terms of this contract or through the performance of tasks
              pursuant to this contract, is required to develop specifications or statements of work that
              are to be incorporated into a solicitation, the contractor shall be ineligible to perform the
              work described in that solicitation as a prime or first-tier subcontractor under any
              ensuing HUD contract.




                                                                           Page 40                            2001-A O-0002
                                                                                                           Appendix C

Auditee Comments



       (d)    Other restrictions-- [Contracting Officer insert description]
        {e) The restrictions imposed by this clause shall remain in effect until {Contracting Officer
    insert period or date].
                                                 (End of clause)


    2452.209-72       Organizational Conflicts of interest.
              As prescribed in 2409.508-2, insert the following contract clause in all contracts:

                        ORGANIZATIONAL CONFLICTS OF INTEREST (APR 1984)

       (a) The Contractor warrants that to the best of its knowledge and belief, and except as
   otherwise disclosed, he or she does not have any organizational conflict of interest which is
   defined as a situation in which the nature of work under a Government contract and a
   Contractor's organizational, financial, contractual or other interests are such that:
             (1) Award of the contract may result in an unfair competitive advantage; or
             (2) The Contractor's objectivity in performing the contract work is or might be otherwise
   may be impaired.
      (b) The Contractor agrees that if after award he or she discovers an organizational conflict
   of interest with respect to this contract, he or she shall make      an immediate and full disclosure
   in writing to the Contracting Officer which shall include a description of the action which the
   Contractor has taken or intends to take to eliminate or neutralize the conflict.
      The Government may, however, terminate the contract for the convenience of the
   Government if it would be in the best interest of the Government.
       (c) In the event the Contractor was aware of an organizational conflict of interest before
   the award of this contract and intentionally did not disclose the conflict to the Contracting
   Officer, the Government may terminate the contract for default.
      (d) The provisions of this clause shall be included in all subcontracts and consulting
   agreements wherein the work to be performed is similar to the service provided by the prime
   contractor. The Contractor shall include in such subcontracts and consulting agreements any
   necessary provisions to eliminate or neutralize conflicts of interest.

                                                 (End of clause)




                                                                              Page 41                      2001-A O-0002
                                                                                           Appendix D

Distribution

Principal Staff
Secretary’s Representatives
Departmental Audit Liaison Officer, FM, Room 2206
Acquisitions Librarian, Library, AS, Room 8141
Director, Office of Troubled Agency Recovery, PB, Room 4112
The Honorable Fred Thompson, Chairman, Committee on Governmental Affairs, 340
 Dirksen Senate Office Building, United States Senate, Washington, DC 20510
The Honorable Joseph Lieberman, Ranking Member, Committee on Government Affairs,
 706 Hart Senate Office Building, United States Senate, Washington, DC 20510
The Honorable Dan Burton, Chairman, Committee on Government Reform, 2185 Rayburn
 Building, House of Representatives, Washington, DC 20515
The Honorable Henry A. Waxman, Ranking Member, Committee on Government Reform,
 2204 Rayburn Building, House of Representatives, Washington, DC 20515
Cindy Fogleman, Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations, Room 212, O’Neil House
 Office Building, Washington, DC 20515
Steve Redburn, Chief, Housing Branch, Office of Management and Budget, Room 9226,
 72517" Street, NW, New Executive Office Building, Washington, DC 20503
Stanley Czerwiniski, Associate Director, Resources, Community, and Economic
 Development Division, U.S. General Accounting Office, 441 G Street, NW, Room 2T23
 Washington, DC 20548
Armando Falcon, Director, Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight, 1700 G Street,
 NW, Room 4011, Washington, DC       20552
Frank Edrington, Deputy Staff Director, Counsel, Subcommittee on Criminal Justice, Drug
 Policy and Human Resources, B373 Rayburn House Office Bldg., Washington, DC 20515
Sharon Pinkerton, Staff Director, Subcommittee on Criminal Justice, Drug Policy & Human
 Resources, B373 Rayburn House Office Bldg., Washington, DC 20515
Andrew R. Cochran, Senior Counsel, Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of
 Representatives, 2129 Rayburn House Office Building, Washington, DC     20515




                                                           Page 42                         2001-A O-0002
