                  |        Oregon
          ]                Department
                           of Transportation




      Title Vi Implementation Plan
                             FFY 2025




Oregon Department of Transportation
Office of Equity and Civil Rights
800 Airport Road SE

Salem, Oregon 97301-4792
Table of Contents
INTRODUCTION TO ODOT .............cceeeccccceeseececeeeeeccsenseseeeeseeeeeeesaeaeeeesseaseeeeessaneeeeees 1
ODOT’S COMMITMENT TO NONDISCRIMINATION ..........cccssseseececeesseceeeeeseeseeseeeeees 2
THIS TITLE VI PLAN AND ASSURANCES ............:0sceccecceeseeceeseeseeeeeaeeeeeeeseeseeeessaeeeeees 2
ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURE ............ccccccccssseececeeseeeeccaeueeeeeeseeueeeesseueeeeessaseeeeenaees 4
PROGRAM AREA REVIEW PROCEDUREG.............ccccccsseeeeceeeseeeeeceeeeeeeessaeeeeeesaaeeeeees 8
SUBRECIPIENT MONITORING PROGRAM ............::::ccccceeeseeeceeeeeeesseeseeeeeeseeeeeenaees 16
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS METHODS. ...........ccccccseseeeeceeeeeeeeseseeeeeesaeeeeenes 17
TRAINING .......ccccccsssseeccccceseeccceeeeceeseesseceesseaseeeesseuseeeeseeseceeeeseeeeeessaaeeeeessaeeesessages 19
COMPLAINT DISPOSITION PROCESS. ...........::cccccccsseeeeeceesseeeeceeseeeeesseseeessaeeeeeesaees 19
DISSEMINATION OF TITLE VI INFORMATION ............:cccccccssseececeeseeeeeeeseeesesseeeeeees 20
LIMITED ENGLISH PROFICIENCY .............::csccccccssseeccceeesecccceeeeeeeeeeeueeeesseuseeessaaneeees 23
REVIEW OF STATE TRANSPORTATION AUTHORITY DIRECTIVES ............ccccsseeeeeeees 23
COMPLIANCE AND ENFORCEMENT PROCEDUREG............cc.c:sseeceeceesseeeeeseeeeeessenees 24
SUBRECIPIENT COMPLIANCE REQUIREMENTS ............sssssecccceeeeececeeeseeeeesesseeeeseaees 24
APPENDIX 1: Signed ASSUrANCeS...........cccccseecccceneeeceeceeeeceeseseceseuecesseeesseneeeseneeeesaes ii

APPENDIX       2: NONGISCrIMINATION           POSTESS ............cccececcecececececececcceaccecececucecataeaeeenenes Xi
INTRODUCTION TO ODOT
The Oregon Department of Transportation’s (ODOT) mission is to provide a safe and reliable
multimodal transportation system that connects people and helps Oregon's communities and economy
thrive.

ODOT’s values inform decision making and guide our actions in working with each other, our partners
and the communities we serve:

       e        Integrity: We are accountable and transparent with public funds and hold ourselves to the
                highest ethical standards.
       e       Safety: We share ownership and responsibility for ensuring safety in all that we do.

       e        Equity: We embrace diversity and foster a culture of inclusion.

       e        Excellence: We use our skills and expertise to continuously strive to be more efficient, effective
                and innovative.

       e        Unity: We work together as One ODOT to provide better solutions and ensure alignment in our
               work.

ODOT was established to bring together programs that meet the objectives of contributing to the
growth and economy of the state by providing for the movement of persons and goods rapidly, safely,
and economically. ODOT develops and administers Oregon’s system of highways and their
infrastructure; public transportation services; rail passenger and freight systems; bicycle and pedestrian
paths and routes; ports and marine transportation; pipelines; transportation safety programs; driver and
vehicle licensing and registration; and the enforcement of statutes, policies, and procedures relating to
commercial motor carriers.

ODOT divides its operations into five geographical regions. Each region is responsible for developing and
managing transportation construction projects and maintaining state, federal, and interstate highways
and other transportation infrastructure within its boundaries. This map depicts the boundaries of the
five ODOT regions:


            CLATSOP
                      COLUMBIA
                WASHINGTON        [|             y)                  me,                   |                 UMATILLA                 WALLOWA
                         t     MULTNOMAH                                   —
           4 TILLAMOOK       am,=                                                                  MORROW
                                 Nal   1   )                                           |                                  UNION


                                   Ge                       masco               atu                                                                     (Region   1: Portland Metro
           =o.               oo                      4
                                                           ia                    WHEELER
                                                                                                        |   =
                                                                                                                                  BAKER
                                                                                                                                          f
                                                                                                                                              { /
                                                                                                                                                           Region 2: Willamette Valley, North and Mid-Coast
                                                 ,                     4       CROOK                                                          " 2

           po                    te                      cesceares                                  J                6)                         /          Region 3: Southern Oregon and South Coast
       |                 . —_z                                                                 |                                                |
      fe                      XN                                                                                                  ee                       Region 4: Central Oregon
  y          3)       se                   ewe                                                              HARNEY

             \o)                           7!                                  Reel                                                                           :
  » en                             a”                                                          TT                                                   |      Region 5: Eastern Oregon
ODOT is organized into four major areas: Revenue, Finance and Compliance; Delivery and Operations;
Government and External Relations; and Social Equity. As this document illustrates, ODOT’s
commitment to nondiscrimination and implementation of Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 spans
across the organization and is an example of the agency’s “One ODOT” approach to living our values and
implementing our mission.


ODOT’S COMMITMENT TO NONDISCRIMINATION
ODOT is a recipient of federal financial assistance. As a condition of receiving these funds, the
Department must comply with various nondiscrimination laws and regulations, including Title VI of the
Civil Rights Act of 1964. Title VI provides that:

        “Tnjo person in the United States shall, on the ground of race, color, or national origin, be
        excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be subjected to discrimination
        under any program or activity receiving Federal assistance.” 42 U.S.C. § 2000d.

Subsequently, federal authorities extended these protections to include sex, age, disability, income
level, and Limited English Proficiency. As a result, public or private entities that receive federal
assistance (called recipients) from any federal agency, including the Federal Highway Administration
(FHWA), must take concrete steps to ensure nondiscrimination in their programs and activities.




        It is the Oregon Department of Transportation’s policy to assure
        that no person shall, on the grounds of race, color, national
        origin, age, sex, disability, income level or Limited English
        Proficiency as provided by Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964
        and related authorities, be excluded from participation in, be
        denied the benefit of, or be otherwise discriminated against
        under any of the programs or activities it administers.



THIS TITLE VI PLAN AND ASSURANCES
Title 23, CFR Part 200.0 (b) (11) and the Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) specifically requires
recipients of Federal-Aid Highway Program funds, including ODOT, to prepare a Title VI Implementation
Plan. Title VI plans should describe the roles, responsibilities, and procedures for assuring compliance
with Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and related regulations and directives by the state
transportation agency.
The ODOT Office of Equity and Civil Rights (OECR) Title VI Program measures compliance and
implementation of Title VI federal directives. This document outlines ODOT’s Title VI implementation
processes and procedures, including information about the ODOT organization and staff structure,
program monitoring, compliance review of external agencies in receipt of Federal-aid Highway Program
funds through ODOT and other Title VI activities and assurances.

This Title VI Implementation Plan additionally provides guidance regarding language access for
individuals with Limited English Proficiency (LEP) and referral for additional information to ODOT’s
Limited English Proficiency Plan. Executive Order 13166 on Improving Access to Services
                                                                                      for Persons with
Limited English Proficiency requires federal agencies to examine the services they provide, identify any
need for services to LEP individuals, develop, and implement a system to provide those services in a way
that LEP people can have meaningful access to them. FHWA                        requires ODOT to take the necessary
actions to ensure that LEP people are provided an equal opportunity to benefit from and have access to
ODOT programs, facilities, and services. Access for LEP people is a component of Title VI implementation
under protection from discrimination based on national origin. Together, the Title VI Program and the
language access principles described in the LEP Plan advance the inclusion of marginalized community
members and protect against discrimination.

On April 24, 2013, the Secretary of Transportation signed the DOT Standard Title VI Assurances and
Nondiscrimination Provisions, Order 1050.2A, requiring that recipients of federal aid assure they will
promptly take any measures necessary to implement Title VI as a condition to receiving any federal
financial assistance from the U.S. Department of Transportation, through the Federal Highway
Administration. It also requires that such recipients are subject to and will comply with the following
statutory/regulatory authorities.

    e   Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. § 2000d et seq., 78 stat. 252), (prohibits
        discrimination on the basis of race, color, national origin);

    e   A9C.F.R. Part 21 (entitled Nondiscrimination In Federally-Assisted Programs Of The Department
        Of Transportation -- Effectuation Of Title VI Of The Civil Rights Act Of 1964);

    e   28C.F.R. section 50.3 (U.S. Department of Justice Guidelines for Enforcement of Title VI of the
        Civil Rights Act of 1964);

A copy of the Standard Title VI Assurances and Nondiscrimination Provisions signed by the ODOT
Director or his designee for Federal Fiscal Year 2025 appears as an appendix at the end of this
document.

    This 2025 Title VI Implementation Plan is available online:
                               Doo             te
                                  Ast          sRMTN Se
                                                     ee
                                                      GCE FP TE OD PO eee
                                                                RPA     A eee   fl lee
                                                                            ye ri  rere FRIeS   t
                                      sak? ;    Business: : CARLA : OES ASSESS i LiStay 3 won

                                               ve
                               wet ye    a
                              ne
                               VGA
                                           Ta aa
                                      be Raat
ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURE
The Oregon Department of Transportation Title VI Program is implemented by the Office of Equity and
Civil Rights and coordinated by the Title VI/Environmental Justice/ADA Program Manager.

The Program Manager is responsible for implementing this plan, providing assistance regarding Title VI
nondiscrimination information and activities, and monitoring subrecipients of federal financial
assistance through ODOT. This position reports to Angela Crain, Office of Equity and Civil Rights
Manager.


Title VI/EJ/ADA Program Manager:

        Brenda Gessner
        Telephone: 855-540-6655


To contact the ODOT Office of Equity and Civil Rights:

        Oregon Department of Transportation
        Office of Equity and Civil Rights
        800 Airport Road SE
        Salem, Oregon 97301-4792
        Telephone: 503-986-4350


Within the Office of Equity and Civil Rights, staff at multiple levels participate in Title VI implementation
functions:


Office of Equity and Civil Rights Manager:

    e   Works collaboratively with federal and state authorities in communicating Title VI program
        requirements.

    e   Works closely with ODOT’s Title VI program staff to implement the Department’s Title VI work
        plan through programs, procedures and ongoing monitoring.

    e   Advises Title VI Program staff of Title VI related problems and discrimination complaints.

    e   Communicates with the Title VI program staff regarding projects that are in development phases
        where Title VI issues may arise.

    e   Leads OECR reviews of agency directives to determine if there are any Title VI implications.
Title VI Program Manager:

        Coordinates Title VI Program development and implementation with internal program areas.

        Provides technical assistance and advice on Title VI matters to program area subject matter
        experts (SMEs) and program area managers.

        Conducts Title VI reviews of internal program areas, metropolitan planning organizations
        (MPOs) and local subrecipients to ensure Title VI compliance.
        Review ODOT program areas to correct identified Title VI problems, including discriminatory
        practices of policies.
        Provides Title VI training for ODOT internal staff and subrecipients.
        Completes ODOT’s Title VI Implementation Plan for submission to FHWA by October 1 of each
        year and the Title VI Annual Accomplishment Report for submission to FHWA          by November 1
        each year.

        Manages complaint documentation, resolution and, when applicable, interagency case transfer
        to FHWA.
        Works with program areas to collect and document statistical data.

        Distributes and, where necessary, translates, Title VI documents for the public.

        Reviews ODOT program manuals, contracts and policy documents to determine whether Title VI
        is appropriately addressed and implemented department wide.



Civil Rights Programs Coordinator:

        Assists the Title VI/EJ/ADA manager and the Intermodal Civil Rights manager with
        implementation of the nondiscrimination programs within OECR.
        Provides training, support, and outreach to ODOT staff and ODOT interest groups.

        Assists with data coordination and analysis, tracking concerns, and supporting customers and
        interested parties.
Civil Rights Field Coordinators:

    e   Serve their assigned regions to help ODOT provide statewide support throughout Oregon's five
        geographical regions.

    e   Serve as liaison between the Office of Equity and Civil Rights and regional planning and
        development, construction, maintenance, and operations staff.

    e   Provide assistance, guidance, and training to regional programs pertaining to planning,
        monitoring, training, evaluation, reporting of disadvantaged business enterprise (DBE),
        emerging small business (ESB), equal employment opportunity, Title VI, and workforce
        development.
    e   Facilitate internal pre-construction (pre-con) meetings; review affiliated information and
        document in the data tracking system; review DBE forms for accuracy and completion.
    e   Assist in responding to inquiries from the partner agencies and the public, including referring
        inquiries to OECR Title VI Program staff as necessary.
    e   §=Assist in fact-finding as necessary during investigations and take action to mitigate potential
        Title VI complaints in their regions.



Additionally, Title VI Subject Matter Experts (SMEs) based within key ODOT organizational sections and
program units participate in Title VI implementation, monitoring and reporting in collaboration with
OECR staff. Functions and objectives for this role are discussed in the next section in this document
under the Program Area Review Procedures section.

The Director of ODOT has ordered that the Title VI Program Manager has direct and unfettered access
to contact and/or meet with them when there is a civil rights concern that needs to be brought to
their attention, whether internal to ODOT or through our external partners, customers or contractors.
Under this policy, the Program Manager does not need any other organizational or managerial approval
and has full staff support to work directly with the Director of ODOT to address civil rights matters. The
Title VI Program Manager serves as ODOT’s Title VI Coordinator. As Coordinator, the Program Manager
will receive the full participation and cooperation of affected ODOT staff, as needed, in implementing
ODOT’s Title VI compliance activities, including compliance with 49 C.F.R. part 21 (Nondiscrimination In
Federally-Assisted Programs Of The Department Of Transportation -- Effectuation Of Title VI Of The Civil
Rights Act Of 1964).

The following organizational chart illustrates the position of the Office of Equity and Civil Rights and
these programs’ relationship to the Office of the ODOT director.
          Oregon
          Department                                                      Kris Strickler                                         September 2024
          of Transportation                                             ODOT Director



    Office of Equity
                                                                Serena Stoudamire Wesley
    and Civil Rights                                                    Assistant Director
                                                                           Social Equity




                         Angela Crain*                                        Cye Fink”
                      Equity & Civil Rights Mgr.                     Field & Business Support Mgr.
                                                                                                                          Equity Team




  Diponker Mukherjee”                              Patrick Sanders                                                          Susie Ashenfelter
Small Business Prog. DBE                            OECR Support                                                        Policy & Procedure Mgr




   Carroll Cottingham’                                Darcy Hesselgesser                        Tricia Vrana                 Terrence McTier
Intermodal Civil Rights Mgr                        Field Coordinator Reg 1                Field Coordinator Reg 1      Social Equity Program Mgt




     Brenda Gessner*                                  Meena   Gunturu                            Alyssa Soots              David Morrissey*
     Title VI Program                        Data & Website Mgmt Coor.                     Field Coordinator Reg 2          Equity Manager




                                                          Matt Rubic
        Anay Hausner                                                                           Christie Meacham                 Lisa Brown
                                                       Data & Website
 Civil Rts Innov.Prgm Mgr                                                                  Field Coordinator Reg 3     Social Equity Program Mgr
                                                        Mgmt Coord.




                                                     James Myers                                 Heidi Brown
       Ailsa Kellam                                                                                                         Catherine Biscoe
                                             Alternative Contracting Q.A.        r+            WE Prgm/EEO/
 Small Bus Dev Prog Mgr                                                                                                 Small Business Program
                                                   Program Manager                           Field Coord Reg 4




      Joe Hanseling                                      Anisha Datta                            Rex Stanley                    Vacant
Small Business Navigator 2                          Equity Data Manager                    EEO/Field Coord Reg 5         Labor Equity Manager




      Omar Alvarado             |_|                     Kai Rose                                Michele Ehara             Christine Thompson
Small Business Navigator 2                     Labor Equity Goals Coord                   Labor Equity Coordinator               Intern




                                                                                                Amanda Toney
       Ryan Simonis                                     Jennifer Erickson
                                                                                 -——_     Civil Rights Prog. Support
           Intern                                  Civil Rights Prgm Coord.
                                                                                                    Specialist




                                                                                 * Program managers have direct
                                                                                 and unfettered access to the
                                                                                 director on program matters
PROGRAM AREA REVIEW PROCEDURES
The Office of Equity and Civil Rights Title VI program staff reviews ODOT programs and organizational
sections to assess compliance, support nondiscrimination enforcement through technical assistance and
reporting, and identify opportunities for systems improvement, including through training.

OECR staff also work in partnership with Title VI Nondiscrimination Subject Matter Experts (SMEs),
based in key program areas across the agency, who serve as focal points for nondiscrimination
information and compliance practices within their program. The positioning of Title VI SMEs within the
agency is a collaborative strategy for implementing, monitoring and reporting Title VI functions,
including language access for people with limited English proficiency (LEP) throughout the year.

INTERNAL REVIEW PROCEDURES

Scheduling

The internal monitoring program is designed to reach the public facing ODOT program areas on a three-
year cycle. This means that each program area will undergo an assessment for compliance with Title VI
obligations at least once every three years. However, some years, two program areas will be reviewed to
keep internal reviews to a three-year cycle. The cycle is structured as follows:

    e   Year One: Construction (completed in 2024)
    e   Year Two: Right-of-Way (ROW)
    e   Year Three: Geo-Environmental

The schedule is flexible based on the following factors:

    e    Complaints
    e    Staffing changes
    e    Changes in protocol, policies, and procedures
    e    Rollout of projects
    e    High impact projects
    e    New legislation

Procedure

Programs scheduled for review will be notified in writing at least 60 days in advance to coordinate a
date that ensures the attendance of key leadership. The notice of review will include a compliance
review questionnaire that programs are required to complete in writing and return 30 days prior to the
scheduled on-site review.

The Title VI staff will review the response to the questionnaire during the desk review process in
advance of the on-site review. The on-site review will be conducted over a one-day period and consist of
an introductory meeting, review of files and documentation, staff interviews, and an exit meeting. One
day should be sufficient since we monitor compliance throughout the year. However, the number of
days for the on-site review could increase, if warranted.
A Determination of Findings will be issued within a 30-day period following the exit meeting. A copy of
the findings will be provided to the key leadership of the program     being reviewed. No action on the part
of the program will be required on findings of compliance unless a condition of compliance is specified.
However, programs found noncompliant will require a Corrective Action Plan to overcome noted
deficiencies in the Determination of Finding. The Corrective Action Plan will be due within a period not
to exceed 90 days. If it is determined that the matter cannot be resolved voluntarily, action will be taken
to escalate compliance by engaging senior ODOT leadership.

Methodology

The assessment process is designed to give ODOT Title VI staff an opportunity to understand the
business practices of each program area and to identify areas of improvement and corresponding
corrective actions. This is accomplished through the following methods listed below:

Desk Audits

By requesting and reviewing the documents used by ODOT’s program areas, the Title VI staff can
determine the extent to which Title VI activities are woven into the activities of those units. This review
looks primarily for the presence of standard Title VI assurance language, as needed. This is also an
opportunity for ODOT’s Title VI staff to identify opportunities for Title VI data gathering and/or training
opportunities.

Interviews

ODOT’s Title VI staff relies on in-person interviews of program area staff to determine the extent of
compliance with Title VI obligations. These interviews will include managerial and frontline staff. It is
critical for managers to be sufficiently trained on Title VI principles to articulate its importance to their
staff and to instruct on how adherence to Title VI is demonstrated throughout the program area. It is
equally important that front-line staff be able to articulate the ways in which Title VI activities are a part
of their course of business as well as the resources available to address Title VI concerns by members of
the public.

Shadowing

This describes instances where ODOT’s Title VI staff will accompany program area staff on their business
meetings and public engagement to better understand the nature of the work and to monitor staff for
compliance with Title VI obligations.

Technical Assistance

ODOT’s Title VI staff provides technical assistance on Title VI compliance across the agency. This can
include identifying language needs in impacted communities, informing reasonable accommodation
interactive process, developing new methods of data collection and analysis, and providing
recommendations on new Title VI related questions and issues. Technical assistance can be directed at
the request of program area staff or via trainings throughout the agency. These interactions and
trainings will gauge current levels of Title VI compliance throughout the agency as well as areas for
improvement.
Attendance at Public Outreach Events

By attending public outreach events, such as public hearings, meetings, and information sessions,
ODOT’s Title VI staff can observe program area staff in their direct interactions with members of the
public. This gives the Title VI staff an opportunity to identify any needs or additional training and to
ascertain the effectiveness of Title VI related request processes (such as language services and
reasonable accommodations). Attending these sessions also provides an opportunity to learn of project-
level community concerns that may be Title VI related.

Outcome

The internal assessment process culminates in the development of specific work plans to examine
possible deficiencies and identify areas of improvement in the Title VI activities of ODOT’s programs,
with specific timeframes for deliverables and action items. ODOT’s Title VI staff drafts these tailored
work plans immediately following the close of assessment activities. Once developed, an exit interview
with management and staff is arranged. These sessions afford the opportunity for Title VI staff to
explain the content/purpose of work plans as well as schedule technical assistance sessions, if required,
and to establish cycles and methodologies for program areas to report on and demonstrate their
progress to address all work plan items. The intervening years between assessments consist of Title VI
staff providing both planned and ad hoc technical assistance and training, meeting regularly with
program leadership and staff to track progress on work plan items, and monitoring the programs,
services, and activities of program areas for Title VI compliance.

ODOT's mission is to provide a safe and reliable multimodal transportation system that connects people
and helps Oregon's communities and economy thrive. To measure the effectiveness of the program and
ensure mission advancement, ODOT monitors and collects program data related to transportation
issues.

The following describes the various program areas, the activities conducted, and the data reviewed for
nondiscrimination and the key organizational sections engaged in ongoing Title VI compliance, data
collection and reporting, and related content development:

          Construction:

          ODOT’s Construction Section leads and administers continuous improvement of the roads,
          highways, and bridges through the statewide construction program.

          The Construction Section:

              e   Partners with local entities to ensure successful construction and project delivery for the
                  local agency construction program.

              e   Gathers data illustrating minority, disadvantaged, emerging small business entities
                  participating in construction contracts and subcontracts.

              e   Ensures that Appendix A of the FHWA Standard Assurances for Title VI and other
                  Nondiscrimination statutes and regulations are all included in prime contracts and
                  consultant agreements.




                                                       10
        Ensures that prime contractors include the FHWA Standard Assurances in all
        subcontracts, regardless of tier.

        Collaborates with the Office of Equity and Civil Rights in outreach and training efforts to
        address labor compliance with contractors doing business with ODOT.



Driver and Motor Vehicle Services:

ODOT’s Driver and Motor Vehicle Services (DMV) has a significant volume of direct interaction
with Oregonians. DMV strives to provide excellent service to all customers regardless of race,
color, national origin, sex, age, disability, income and limited English proficiency.

Oregon DMV:

        Provides the noncommercial driver license knowledge test in seven languages in
        addition to English.
        Employs 140 bilingual employees in key positions — mostly customer facing in field
        offices and call centers, but also in policy and other supporting roles in headquarters.
        They have skills across seven languages in addition to English necessary for assisting
        their diverse customer base. Field office staff also utilize translation devices called
        Pocketalk. These handheld devices allow talk-to-text and text-to-text translation for
        more than 80 languages so that customers with language needs beyond the seven
        languages, or staff without bilingual skills, can interact effectively.
        In addition to English, DMV offers the printed, PDF and audio Oregon Driver Manual in
        Spanish, professionally translated by a third party vendor and verified by Spanish-
        speaking staff at DMV. The Spanish audio is read by a live person (not automated) and
        verified by Spanish speaking staff. DMV offers the online Oregon Driver Manual in HTML
        format for ease of use with web-based translation programs; for example, more than
        150 languages are available using the Google Translate tool.
        Maintains field offices that comply with ADA accessibility requirements.

        Works closely with ODOT’s Office of Equity and Civil Rights to resolve concerns and
        complaints received from customers.

        Learns from specific cases to identify if additional employee training is needed.
        Explores areas of continuous improvement based on our Strategic Action Plan, including
        making progressive strides to make our customer communications clearer, more
        accessible and inclusive.



Maintenance and Operations:

The Maintenance and Operations Branch leads and supports highway maintenance activities
throughout the state by developing and implementing programs to ensure efficient, effective,
and consistent maintenance of Oregon's transportation infrastructure.




                                              11
The Maintenance and Operations Branch:

    e   Ensures that the development and implementation of the Maintenance Program is
        compliant with Title VI/Nondiscrimination requirements.

    e   Periodically reviews its processes to ensure the Maintenance Program is being
        implemented in a nondiscriminatory manner.



Geo-Environmental Program:

The National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) is a broad-reaching mandate for federal agencies
to work together with state, local, and tribal governments, public and private organizations, and
the public, to achieve and balance social, economic, and environmental goals.

ODOT’s NEPA program:

    e   Develops and provides guidance and tools for region NEPA staff to adequately address
        environmental justice (EJ), Limited English Proficiency (LEP) and other FHWA directives
        as required.

    e   Uses training and current knowledge to address NEPA and other environmental laws
        related to historically underserved communities.

    e   Ensures NEPA processes and FHWA-ODOT established exemptions are followed when
        conducting detailed environmental justice analyses.
    e   Assists in determining which NEPA classified projects meet the established exemption
        conditions in the project’s affected communities.


Policy, Data, and Analysis:

The Policy, Data, and Analysis Division develops the long-term statewide transportation system
plans and guidance documents affecting Oregon transportation agencies and planners. They
work with the Oregon Transportation Commission (OTC) to establish a vision and policy
foundation to guide transportation system development and investments.

The Division provides:

    e   Statistical data on race, color, national origin, age, disability, and sex of participants in
        attendance at public participation opportunities.

    e   Data relating to LEP populations including census analysis, surveys, public meetings,
        focus groups, and online open house sources.

    e   Information on demographics of members of advisory councils and policy boards.

    e   Public involvement opportunities (hearings, open houses, public meetings) including
        special outreach to minority and low-income populations.
    e   Alternative language translations for vital documents and communicating with LEP
        populations.




                                              12
        Support for requests for accommodation at public meetings.

        Assurance that all state planning and research (SPR) and metropolitan planning funds
        (PL) used for research are awarded in a nondiscriminatory manner.

        Assurance that statewide plans are developed in an open, transparent and inclusive
        process.


ODOT Procurement Office:

The ODOT Procurement Office (OPO) collaborates with the Office of Equity and Civil Rights to
provide training, tools, and engagement/outreach opportunities promoting small businesses,
equity and inclusion, and to ensure nondiscrimination in the provision of solicitations.

The Procurement office:

        Ensures that all procurement solicitation and contract documents include the Title VI
        nondiscrimination provisions.

        Ensures competition in all publicly advertised solicitations is fair and open.

        Ensures procurement mechanisms for language access services, such as interpretation
        and translation, are understood by OPO staff for guiding other ODOT offices when
        requested.

        Actively seeks engagement/outreach/networking opportunities (such as Capitol
        Connections, Governor’s Marketplace, etc.)

        Follows procurement processes and data reporting agreed to by OECR and OPO related
        to the Disadvantaged Business Enterprise (DBE) Program

        Assist with processes related to the Emerging Small Business (ESB) Program.

        Participates in the Subject Matter Expert Title VI and LEP Program.



Right of Way:
The Right of Way section provides expertise in real estate to ODOT. They are responsible for the
appraisal, acquisition, and management of property acquired for public projects.

The Right of Way section:

        Provides demographic data on relocatees and shares annual reports with FWHA and the
        ODOT Office of Equity and Civil Rights.
        Maintains database records regarding approved relocation and acquisition consultants
        and appraisers. All ODOT consultants performing relocation or appraisal activities are
        vetted and preapproved; consultants and local agency staff performing acquisition tasks
        are preapproved by the Region Right of Way Manager.

        Provides supporting data that illustrates required objectivity when valuing property for
        ODOT appraisal reports. Appraisal reports are reviewed and approved for accuracy and
        compliance.



                                             13
        Implements standard FHWA Standard Assurances for Title VI and other
        Nondiscrimination statutes and regulations.

        Ensures management, appraisers, the appraisal review process,
        relocation/condemnation liaisons, and the FHWA Right of Way Liaison all support Title
        VI compliance.



Statewide Project Selection and Delivery:
Project selection results from a variety of processes and organizational units, including Planning,
Procurement, and region-based project management and public engagement staff. Processes
include community involvement, problem and solution identification, prioritization,
development of area programs, as well as system planning programs described below.

Compliance responsibilities include:

        Ensure community involvement processes and techniques are designed to surface
        potential Title VI issues in the project selection phase.

        Ensure that DBEs have maximum                                opportunity to compete for and participate in
        consultant contract work.

        Where appropriate, make special efforts to contact and involve historically marginalized
        communities and low-income groups (population) in the project selection phase.



                            TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM PROJECT LIFECYCLE


                            Preservation &



                                                                                                                                          =    _/   Se Adoption
                                                                                                                                               \. oe
             Construction              ;
                                           j                          4 STAGE PROCESS
               Close-Out          Hy
                              y                PROGRAM               PROJECT        (3                       CONSTRUCTION        MAINTENANCE
                             iy                OCVELOPMENT           DEVELOPMENT                             MANAGEMENT          OPERATIONS




                                               £F*   Intergovernmental Agreements                       AGA Public input & Involvement

                                               f&    Complete Project Charter
                                                                                     a7FD 25h yg Oplma ers




                                                                         14
Transportation Safety:
The Transportation Safety unit provides data-driven solutions and education to encourage safe
practices to save lives and reduce injuries and costs related to crashes on Oregon roads.

Transportation Safety:

    e   Ensures subrecipients receiving federal funds include the Title VI Assurances.
    e   Ensures that all Project Development phases for Safety projects follow the same
        processes that non-Safety projects follow.
    e   Ensures the development of the Highway Safety Improvement Plan (HSIP), Strategic
        Highway Safety Plan (SHSP), TSAP, and other Safety related documents requiring public
        input are developed according to ODOT’s Public Participation Process.



Commerce and Compliance Division:
CCD implements Title VI through a supplemental plan submitted annually to the Federal Motor
Carrier Safety Administration (FMCSA) and works in partnership with the Office of Equity and
Civil Rights to fulfill the requirements and activities outlined in the plan.

ODOT’s 2025 FMCSA Title VI Supplemental Plan is available here:




The plan provides detailed information regarding:

    e   Motor carrier safety compliance processes, including partnerships with law enforcement
        agencies to conduct on-highway commercial vehicle/driver inspections.

    e   Commercial Motor Vehicle Inspection Selection and Unbiased Enforcement Policies.

    e   Subrecipient compliance monitoring and reporting processes.

    e   Staff training in Title VI and related nondiscrimination policies.

    e   Public notification of nondiscrimination policies.

    e   Public safety education and awareness campaigns in partnership with the ODOT
        Transportation Safety Division.

    e   ODOT’s discrimination complaint channels for filing and procedures for resolution.




                                               15
SUBRECIPIENT MONITORING PROGRAM
All subrecipients of federal funding through ODOT are subject to Title VI compliance reviews.
Subrecipients include metropolitan planning organizations (MPOs) and local public agencies (LPAs) like
cities and counties. Their responsibilities include maintaining Title VI Implementation Plans and annually
reporting their program accomplishments. Moreover, contractors who perform work at the direction of
subrecipients must agree to comply with federal nondiscrimination laws and applicable regulations.

Annually, the Title VI Manager conducts up to four external compliance reviews of ODOT subrecipients.
A Title VI compliance review consists of multiple processes. First,   a desk review involves examining a
subrecipient’s self-completed questionnaire and their agency’s Title VI implementation plan. Second,
ODOT's Office of Equity and Civil Rights representatives conduct a panel review and discussion online or
on site with the subrecipient agency's staff.

Critical elements for Title VI program reviews include signed FHWA Assurances for Title VI and other
Nondiscrimination statutes and regulations at least every three years; the application of Title VI
Nondiscrimination Assurance annexes in all solicitations for bid requests, proposals, prime and sub
contracts, including the FHWA-funded Project Agreement paragraph; identification of a Title VI
Coordinator; a Title VI Implementation Plan that is updated every third anniversary year of the original
approved Plan; data-informed planning and public participation strategies, including in service to LEP
individuals; and a complaint process that ensures prompt processing, investigation, and resolution.

ODOT’s Certification Programs Office (CPO) collaborates with OECR to ensure the compliance of
certified LPAs in Oregon. OECR tracks which subrecipients comply with the federal requirements found
in Title 23, CFR Part 200.0 (b) (11) and shares that information with the CPO. Additionally,   a new
database tool has been developed to track each Title VI Plan and Annual Accomplishments Report
submitted to OECR. This information is shared with the Local Agency Certification Program staff for up-
to-date and accurate LPA information.

ODOT’s Commerce and Compliance Division (CCD) monitors Title VI compliance of subrecipient
agencies participating in ODOT’s Motor Carrier Safety Assistance Program, in adherence with policies set
forth by the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration. CCD has developed a supplement to this Title
VI implementation plan detailing the ODOT’s motor carrier compliance functions.

ODOT subrecipients are charged with Title VI responsibilities such as submitting a Title VI Plan and an
Annual Accomplishment Report. The Title VI Program Manager communicates annual Title VI reporting
requirements to subrecipients through training events and written communications. ODOT’s Title VI
technical assistance supports functional compliance, timely annual report submission, and statewide
capacity building for nondiscrimination.




                                                     16
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS METHODS
Collecting Title VI nondiscrimination and community demographics data is crucial for examining whether
burdens disproportionately impact specific populations. Each organizational area will collect and review
respective data for reporting purposes. Similarly, collected data can identify trends or patterns to
suggest training needs and other issues. Data analysis also provides a measure of monitoring to ensure
ODOT's services, projects, and programs address nondiscrimination.

Examples of relevant data collection include:

    e      Statistical data on race, national origin, age and sex.
    e      Statements of disability of participants in and beneficiaries of ODOT programs based on surveys
           and questionnaires completed by impacted individuals.

    e      The number of complaints filed each year and the outcomes reached.
    e      Summary statements (final reports) of compliance reviews.
    e      Training and technical assistance provided.

    e      Public engagement processes.

    e      Diversity of community representation on public advisory boards.

ODOT uses both qualitative and quantitative data to inform decision-making. Applied data sources
include:



EJScreen - https://ejscreen.epa.gov/mapper/

    e      The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) developed a tool to identify EJ disparities in US
           populations. The tool utilizes the US Census and the American Community Survey to calculate
           demographic data through GIS. The software analyzes demographic and environmental factors
           from the area of study. It compares them to different geographic locations, states, or the rest of
           the US to answer whether environmental values are rare or common.



ODOT DBE Disparity Study - https://www.oregon.gov/odot/Business/OCR/Pages/Disadvantaged-
Business-Enterprise.aspx

    e      Beginning in 2021, ODOT contracted with Keen Independent Research to develop a disparity
           study that would analyze whether there is a level playing field for minority- and woman-owned
           businesses in the Oregon transportation contracting industry. The Draft 2022 DBE Disparity
           Study Report and ODOT’s Proposed FHWA Overall DBE Goal FFY 2023-2025 are now available. It
           calculates the relative availability and participation of minority- and women-owned firms in
           ODOT's contracts. It also provides recommendations and specific steps to foster the utilization
           of all small businesses in ODOT contracting and programs specific to DBEs.




                                                         17
                           ee   a
                                Myttesce   fd: Passe
                                               fot        a
                                                       eretant x
                                                             eteatin   x
                                                                     ave   x
                                                                         coe fbearwenie fos       .   i
  TransGIS                      -} HTS       PRIS      QUOT STATE    OP USP     ase iss


                          The application presents an interactive map format offering multi-level views of Oregon's
                          transportation system needs and accomplishments. TransGIS content includes transportation
                          management system data, asset inventory, Statewide Transportation Improvement Program
                          (STIP) projects. Also, environmental data is accessible for analysis, planning, and research needs
                          (Limited English Proficiency is not a function of this application.)


ODOT ADA CQCR Database — Accessible to ODOT staff

                          ODOT maintains a database of customer-submitted accommodation requests and inquiries
                          related to the Americans with Disabilities Act. The ADA Comments, Questions, Concerns or
                          Requests (CQCR) system facilitates timely customer response, solution-focused processes, and
                          analysis for effective ADA implementation monitoring and reporting.


ArcGIS Social Equity Map                                           -
                                                                                    fa         as ‘       boos
                                                                                                          tates pryeee   er Catiee
                                                                                                                             e     en wes   iy BASE
                                                                                                                                                WeeT    a   4AY we
                                                                                   Xe Pimiar   seta                                eet                 Te
                     Fee sawyer
                             TELS Are WB)
                                        gic ASPET
                                              sory                         sans:
i ay   ke   =       aot
eaePa           &    rf
PIMOS
   S                                                                       Choe    WER DAW     PPA
                                                                                                 A EYE               Oo RIAE SS ie
                                                                                                                     SALE       NG           SOS            LCOS


                          The Social Equity Map is an ArcGIS geographical tool that analyzes recent block group data from
                          the American Community Survey. It estimates the degree to which Oregonians may be
                          experiencing less than excellence in service and public service investments. This tool assists with
                          improving ODOT’s equitable transit decisions that impact the quality of life for Oregon's
                          vulnerable populations by examining the age, disability, poverty status, limited English
                          proficiency, and non-white population of communities.



REMIX Transportation Planning Tools — Accessible to ODOT staff

                          REMIX is an online data management tool that examines impacts in public transportation design
                          and informs planning decisions. REMIX allows users to map Census demographic variables
                          alongside other real-time transportation datasets for specific geographic areas useful in Title VI
                          applications. ODOT offers statewide REMIX access for approved internal staff and public
                          transportation providers and funding recipients to access the application.



Other relevant data collected will vary depending on each program area. Each organizational area
Subject Matter Expert will work with staff in their respective area to gather data for reporting purposes.
The SME will analyze the data to assist the Title VI Program Manager in identifying training needs and
any compliance issues that may require addressing.




                                                                                                                 18
TRAINING
OECR provides Title VI training and technical assistance opportunities for both ODOT internal staff and
external partners. Diverse interest groups such as LPA's, regional Civil Rights Field Coordinators, and
federal partners like FHWA regularly attend the OECR training events. OECR provides responsive training
solutions to the core elements of Title VI and other civil rights programs, including subrecipient
compliance, Disadvantaged Business Enterprises, Americans with Disabilities Act implementation, and
language access for LEP individuals. OECR's training events include:

    e   Title VI Implementation Planning and Reporting.

    e   Nondiscrimination for New Employees of the Commerce                                                                 and Compliance Division.

    e   Title VI Compliance Framework Training for Subject Matter Experts.

    e   Title Vl and ADA Complaint Disposition Practice for Subrecipients (in development).
    e   Language Access for LEP: Census Data Review and Implementation Planning.

    e   Environmental Justice Foundational Concepts for ODOT staff.

Nondiscrimination Subject Matter Experts (SMEs) engage in Title VI training planning and design
processes in their respective offices. Their guidance ensures OECR's training capacity serves ODOT
organizational sections with correct information and procedures.


COMPLAINT DISPOSITION PROCESS
ODOT has a unified discrimination complaint procedure for receiving formal complaints under Title VI of
the Civil Rights Act of 1964, Title Il of the Americans with Disabilities Act, and related authorities. The
process for filing a complaint is posted on the ODOT web page about the Title VI program, a link to
which is posted in the footer of all ODOT web pages, as well as a QR code on public posters. Web-based
and PDF Discrimination Complaint Forms are also available on the Title VI program                                                             page.




    e   Web-based Discrimination Complaint Form
                                                                          2   a  2    wy                  rey   en
                                                           we     ovens   foment      Pace        ae an    FY
                                                                                                                     r Ed




                                                           POY                POCO   CS BAAS         SS
                                                                                                           sf
                      we

                      on




                                                                                                          Pe
                        ”
             7]




                      a
                      a

                      a




                                          fa


                                                                 fe
                                      a


                                          ae




                                                                      w
                                          Q




                                                                                                           ;




    e   PDF Discrimination Complaint Form (English)
                                                                      ;
                                                                      Faw                         :
                                                                                               ar O38
                                                      me         ons
                                                                   af     fre wry    PMMaeene)e
                                               SAST             USAW  SSS                er Prine




           eye    :
                  F Fem   ey asians    oN PN                      oven    :
                                                                          TS
           LOST       SWAN            OFS
                                      eee             SOM Boy                  yo




                                                                                                                19
ODOT’s Discrimination Complaint Process Overview informs members of the public that they have a
right to file a complaint with ODOT if they feel they have been discriminated against on the basis of a
protected class. The overview also informs complainants of their right to file with outside enforcement
agencies, the right to appeal, and the prohibition against retaliation by ODOT staff. Complaints must be
filed within 180 days of the alleged discriminatory event or practice and are requested in writing, but
complainants may contact the Office of Equity and Civil Rights if they need assistance, alternate formats,
or translation. ODOT will confirm receipt of the complaint within 10 working days.

        ,       rome
                Per        na
                       EMayrinsys -   Tare PosSAPO yarcirs   =
                                                             frye   ca Comet ygesbisats
                                                                               baat   Be   FAATbbsnerieyey
                                                                                                      t      Nt   i  es
                                                                                                             Afiepecariegege -   eep foetal
                                                                                                                                        favs




                                                                                                                                           “re
FHWA        S    VAUIE    STIOMS      ATO    AS    Wers      TOY    COM            lyis    AAS               VWEGHG    OES       GAP   Peng




                                                                                                                                           mb


                                                                                                                                                 o




                                                                                                                                                         «
                                                                                                                                                     r
1964 provides steps for investigating and resolving the complaints.

    e           All complaints will be routed to the FHWA Headquarters Office of Civil Rights (HCR) for
                processing. HCR is responsible for all determinations regarding whether to accept, dismiss, or
                transfer Title VI complaints filed against State DOTs or Subrecipients of Federal financial
                assistance.

    e           Complaints will be forwarded from the initial receiving agency through the Federal-aid highway
                oversight hierarchy until the complaint reaches HCR. For example, if a complaint is filed with a
                Subrecipient City, that receiving agency should forward the complaint to the State DOT, which
                should forward the complaint to the State’s FHWA Division Office, which should forward the
                complaint to HCR. If a complaint is filed with a State DOT, then the State DOT should forward
                the complaint to the State’s FHWA Division Office, which should forward the complaint to HCR.

    e           State DOTs and Subrecipients must log all complaints received.

    e           When         HCR decides on whether to accept, dismiss, or transfer the complaint, HCR will notify the
                Complainant, the FHWA Division Office, State DOT, and Subrecipient (where applicable).

The ODOT Office of Equity and Civil Rights maintains a secure log of complaints with potential Title VI
implications. It includes a summary of those complaints in its annual Title VI Goals and Accomplishments
Report to the Federal Highway Administration. This log contains the name of the complainant; the basis
of the complaint (i.e., race, color, national origin, age, sex, disability, income level, or Limited English
Proficiency.); allegation(s); complaint date; date of Report of Investigation; determination made and
date; and any other relevant information as deemed appropriate. ODOT also maintains case files of
complaint investigations.

ODOT makes case files and the complaint log available to the FHWA upon request.


DISSEMINATION OF TITLE VI INFORMATION
A poster notifying ODOT employees of its nondiscrimination policy is available in multiple languages.
Copies of the annually updated posters are in the appendix at the end of this document. The poster
illustrates ODOT’s nondiscrimination policy in compliance with Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and
related nondiscrimination authorities. It provides additional information for filing complaints of
discrimination. The updated poster is disseminated annually to all ODOT facilities for public display.




                                                                                                 20
ODOT’s weksite displays its nondiscrimination policy statement. ODOT’s website is compliant with
Section 508 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1974 and accessible to visitors with disabilities. The website
provides submission forms for filing complaints under Title VI and the Americans with Disabilities Act. A
toll-free discrimination complaint phone line, 855-840-6655, is also disseminated online and through
various ODOT printed materials, including                              a QR code on Title VI notification posters. ODOT staff in
project delivery are responsible for fostering effective public involvement.

Accordingly, the methods used to include the public will vary based on the composition of the
population impacted by the project. Planning, Project Development, Right-of-Way, NEPA and other
program areas implement public involvement based on the needs within the program area. Regardless
of the strategy, a Public Involvement Plan is required for each project.

ODOT’s core objectives in carrying out its public participation obligations include:

    =    Tailor outreach to underrepresented groups such as minority, low-income, elderly, and disabled
         populations to gather input to determine the targeted community’s issues and concerns.

    =    Ensure outreach is translated to reach limited English proficient populations.

    «=   Maintain a record of all updates or significant changes to the project based on information
         obtained through public engagement.

Providing access for persons with disabilities is key for ODOT projects. ODOT teams and public
information officers use the nondiscrimination policy statement, offer the availability of reasonable
accommodations, inform the public of their rights in transportation planning processes, announce
construction project updates, and hold public participation events.

Oregon employs several guidelines for inclusive public involvement:

    e    ODOT Public Involvementnt Policy, Oregon Transportation Commission-11, October 2020.
         hae
         Shh: ~                       .                        fol      .                               sfOTC          =             5                        pe    Ni               20         re
         ry toss! AAW.)reson   oe
                         ESON gOve                   x 4    tiPiar
                                                           OURS    AM ngsa i‘BoacumentsfOTC
                                                                            Tse   are) te FEATS                        Dialie
                                                                                                                       | GQ           f-
                                                                                                                                     PRY     raant
                                                                                                                                         ovens:   WP               OHCY,      oe 7         mah
                                                                                                                                                                                          JO,

         This 2020 Public Involvement Policy provides policy direction applicable tot the Public
         Involvement Policies and Procedures adopted by the Oregon Transportation Commission.

    e    ODOT Project Delivery Leadership Team Operational Notice — June 25, 2015
                        :                       .         Serr y fr                            ity                :                     .      fey ect       ae     a         Le           .
         bea Heya   e        AY   ryote Q      Soy   my      a        Nn gh Pare) er nreger   SP as   vw cards   eps          iefa   Verto   Sf TENE   RAE tien     TF     eat       Th
         Pt   Osi AN AAW          OPS SESAME   YY    FLAG       r a    TROPPO                    A    OD         Wes   Gaal      CEPA         Pe      PIN           be ta,                 IS

         2015 Project Delivery Leadership Team Operational                                              Notice provides guidance in Project
         Management and Public Involvement Expectations for Project Delivery.

This plan and the following guidelines strive to aid local jurisdictions in preparing or updating their
transportation system plans:

    e    Statewide Transportation improvement Program (STIP) 2021-2024
         byAtos:
            Sey             WW           oy gov FODEYP
                                  Ore gan.                       syASTID
                                                                      Py (Oa ce
                                                                         f ages!     ees
                                                                                 eX.as SX

         ODOT arovides 45-day ublic treview periods for the draft STIP and any significant revisions.




                                                                                         21
    e      Oregon Transportation Plan Goals, Policies and Strategies
           ingdoneeff sua
           Intioyes     ovasseonag oye ere      .
                                               cre
                                                    few  ey ene fay
                                                   PERERA VE
                                                                        .
                                                                 PDA AAAs
                                                                            ip.
                                                                                 oral ‘Slans ASO
                                                                                             ye
           PPL OS)    FAA AW LOPS       PROM. SRV
                                               ROVE AAS GUNG EGEP ted
                                                                    lang    sy ARKSS/PPIANS

           Provide equal access to public information and decision-making about transportation planning,
           financing, construction, operations and maintenance activities.

The development of each STIP involves early citizen participation. Citizens can get involved in the
transportation planning process in their community and influence what projects are included in adopted
plans. Local plans that are used to prepare the STIP include:

    ®      City and county transportation system plans (TSP).

    ®      Regional transportation plans for metropolitan areas (RTP).

    ®      Transit agency plans.

    ®      Tribal government transportation improvement plans (TIP).

    ®      ODOT facility plans.

ODOT accomplishes significant public involvement on project selection for STIP through collaborations
with Area Commissions on Transportation {(ACTs} and Metropolitan Planning Organizations (MPQs}.
ACTs pravide a critical communication link for ODOT with local governments, the business community
and the public. Federal agencies, tribal governments, and local officials, including MPs, are members af
an ACT. For regional and local olanning, planners should maintain a customized list with appropriate
lacal representatives of these groups.

The following agencies and interest groups are involved in project selection and the STIP development
process:

    @      Area Commissions on Transportation (ACT}.

    @      Cities and counties.
    @      Federal agencies.

    @      Freight Advisory Committee (FAC).
    @      indian tribal governments.

    @      Metropalitan Planning Organizations (MPO}.
    ®      ODOT program advisory groups.
    @      Transit districts, port districts.

OECR staff collaborate with the Planning and Corrmunications units of ODOT. They assist in reviewing
public participation plans and outreach tools within ODOT to enhance capabilities and foster inclusive
processes for public involvement.




                                                                              22
LIMITED ENGLISH PROFICIENCY
Protection from discrimination based on national origin is a component of Title VI implementation. Thus,
language access is provided for Limited English Proficiency (LEP) populations to benefit from or have
access to federally conducted and funded involved programs, including activities, facilities, and services.

The ODOT Limited English Proficiency Plan was adopted in 2010 to provide ODOT divisions and business
lines with guidelines and resources to help fulfill ODOT's commitment to the LEP populations. The plan
aims to establish how ODOT will assess the relevance of the LEP programs executed by the agencies and
organizations that are ODOT subrecipients of Federal Highway Administration funds.

In developing the plan, OECR aims to provide a framework to help ODOT Program, Region and Area
Managers, and ODOT subrecipients better serve Oregon's LEP members. The plan includes providing the
2017 U.S. Census Bureau American Community Survey demographic state profile, completing the Four
Factor Analysis for Language Access, and describing resources available to procure interpretation and
translation services. ODOT Directors, Division Administrators, and managers develop meaningful
services for LEP persons in their respective divisions, programs and regions. Additionally, region-based
OECR Field Coordinators and Title VI Subject Matter Experts are available to provide guidance and
referral to the Office of Equity and Civil Rights on matters relating to serving LEP individuals.

ODOT’s Limited English Proficiency Plan was reissued with updated demographic data and other
clarifying edits in 2020 and can be accessed online here:
.             a                                :   ‘   Say   .      Pe   ee        Fey             2   desea   :   yee     ,oaye         soak      ae
Bay
  de de aes   Posen   oe
Ihre          Fea          oyeos ages
                                  ros     oN
                                      ey en    et
                                               sett i.
                                                       PR suetae
                                                            cree aePETES
                                                                     fet           ey
                                                                                   Fees sue   aves
                                                                                           ew meo   SETAE
                                                                                                    FR      AGT
                                                                                                        TRE AD     APP N     ee
                                                                                                                           of Rie   iy
                                                                                                                                     TP     AP
                                                                                                                                          ANY  aya
                                                                                                                                               exett
: Sey          PAAR   A    FOS BAST Paw         pa:     DAS      Ido  AA!     As    LAMAR       MS;   PRINSALD      Wi     La        MALLSATY AIA




REVIEW OF STATE TRANSPORTATION AUTHORITY DIRECTIVES
Under the administration of the ODOT Director and the Assistant Director of Social Equity, OECR
participates in policy development and review processes. Agency policies are submitted to the OECR
Manager, particularly when identified as potentially implicating for Title VI, the Americans with
Disabilities Act, or related authorities. The OECR Manager tasks relevant OECR Program Managers and
other staff to review the processes and conduct the necessary research for evaluation. Evaluated
policies are returned with comments to the Office of Equity and Civil Rights and the originating
department. The ODOT Office of the Director and the Oregon Department of Justice can be included for
assistance in reconciling any unresolved implications or related staff concerns regarding policy directives
and nondiscrimination issues, at the discretion of the Manager of the Office of Equity and Civil Rights or
higher ODOT authority.




                                                                                           23
COMPLIANCE AND ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES
ODOT directors, division administrators, and other managers ensure the meaningful implementation of
nondiscrimination protections under Title VI and related authorities in their respective program areas.
ODOT managers monitor their programs for nondiscrimination staff training needs, patterns of
discrimination, and accountability in ensuring compliance with Title VI and related authorities. The Title
VI Program Manager in 2024 will continue to position and promote OECR for visibility as the agency’s
resource for addressing these critical concerns. The manager of OECR will continue to foster Title VI
connectivity, accountability to agency leadership and management processes.

Additionally, regional Civil Rights Field Coordinators and Title VI SMEs provide guidance within their
program areas. They assist OECR managers with Title VI implementation obligations, functions, and goal
completion. Their assistance helps connect all individuals, including those with Limited English
Proficiency, to have access to participate in meaningful ways in ODOT programs, activities, and services.
ODOT regions and organizational sections’ use the information and methodologies detailed in this Title
VI Implementation Plan, as well as ODOT’s LEP Plan document and related resources, to reflect ODOT’s
overall commitment to full compliance with Title VI.

SUBRECIPIENT COMPLIANCE REQUIREMENTS
Any subrecipient or grantee who receives funding from ODOT or directly from a federal agency is
required to follow all nondiscrimination laws as listed on Assurances DOF Order No, 1950.24 (49 CFR
21.7 (a) (1)). In addition, the Assurances DOT Order No. 1050.2A need to be signed by the top
administrator in the agency, organization, or company. The Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration
(FMCSA) requires ALL subrecipients, regardless of size, to have a Title VI Plan.

Actions to consider for transparency and accessibility include ensuring easy to find and follow
information, make materials available in electronic and hard copy forms, distinguish between Title VI
and ADA on website and in documents, ask for public input (from all interested parties, including
historically underrepresented groups) and note how public input was used in decision making, establish
on-going relationships with the public, translate information into other languages other than English
based on current demographic information.

Minimum    Requirements:

    e   Designate a nondiscrimination coordinator.
    e   Publish a notice of nondiscrimination.
    e   Adopt grievance procedures that assure prompt and fair resolution of complaints alleging
        federal civil rights violations. All grievances must be submitted to ODOT.
    e   Collect, maintain, and provide data to ODOT or FHWA (or the federal agency that provided the
        funding) upon request to show compliance with civil rights obligations.
    e   Take reasonable steps to provide meaningful access to persons with limited English proficiency.
    e   Provide equal opportunity to persons with disabilities.
    e   Ensure nondiscrimination in public participation processes.




                                                     24
APPENDICES
APPENDIX 1: Signed Assurances
    The United States Department of Transportation (USDOT) Standard Title VI/Non-Discrimination
                                                  Assurances
                                            DOT Order No. 1050.2A


The Oregon Department of Transportation (herein referred to as the "Recipient"), HEREBY AGREES
THAT, as a condition to receiving any Federal financial assistance from the U.S. Department of
Transportation (DOT), through Federal Highway Administration, is subject to and will comply with the
following:

Statutory/Regulatory Authorities


    1.   Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. § 2000d et seq., 78 stat. 252), (prohibits
         discrimination on the basis of race, color, national origin);
    2.   A49C.F.R. Part 21 (entitled Non-discrimination In Federally-Assisted Programs Of The Department
         Of Transportation-Effectuation Of Title VI Of The Civil Rights Act Of 1964);
    3.   28C.F.R. section 50.3 (U.S. Department of Justice Guidelines for Enforcement of Title VI of the
         Civil Rights Act of 1964);

The preceding statutory and regulatory cites hereinafter are referred to as the "Acts" and "Regulations,"
respectively.


General Assurances


In accordance with the Acts, the Regulations, and other pertinent directives, circulars, policy,
memoranda, and/or guidance, the Recipient hereby gives assurance that it will promptly take any
measures necessary to ensure that:

         "No person in the United States shall, on the grounds of race, color, or national origin, be
         excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be otherwise subjected to
         discrimination under any program or activity, "for which the Recipient receives Federal
         financial assistance from DOT, including the Federal Highway Administration.

The Civil Rights Restoration Act of 1987 clarified the original intent of Congress, with respect to Title VI
and other Non-discrimination requirements (The Age Discrimination Act of 1975, and Section 504 of the
Rehabilitation Act of 1973), by restoring the broad, institutional-wide scope and coverage of these non-
discrimination statutes and requirements to include all programs and activities of the Recipient, so long
as any portion of the program is Federally assisted.

Specific Assurances


More specifically, and without limiting the above general Assurance, the Recipient agrees with and gives
the following Assurances with respect to its Federally assisted Transportation Program:

    1.   The Recipient agrees that each “activity,” "facility," or "program," as defined in §§ 21.23(b) and
         21.23(e) of 49 C.F.R. § 21 will be (with regard to an “activity") facilitated, or will be (with regard
to a "facility") operated, or will be (with regard to a "program") conducted in compliance with all
requirements imposed by, or pursuant to the Acts and the Regulations.

The Recipient will insert the following notification in all solicitations for bids, Requests For
Proposals for work, or material subject to the Acts and the Regulations made in connection with
all Federal Transportation Programs and, in adapted form, in all proposals for negotiated
agreements regardless of funding source:


         "The Oregon Department of Transportation in accordance with the provisions of
         Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (78 Stat. 252, 42 U.S.C. §§ 2000d to 2000d-
         4) and the Regulations, hereby notifies all bidders that it will affirmatively
         ensure that any contract entered into pursuant to this advertisement,
         disadvantaged business enterprises will be afforded full and fair opportunity to
         submit bids in response to this invitation and will not be discriminated against
         on the grounds of race, color, or national origin in consideration for an award."

The Recipient will insert the clauses of Appendix A and E of this Assurance in every contract or
agreement subject to the Acts and the Regulations.

The Recipient will insert the clauses of Appendix B of this Assurance, as a covenant running with
the land, in any deed from the United States effecting or recording a transfer of real property,
structures, use, or improvements thereon or interest therein to a Recipient.

That where the Recipient receives Federal financial assistance to construct a facility, or part of a
facility, the Assurance will extend to the entire facility and facilities operated in connection
therewith.


That where the Recipient receives Federal financial assistance in the form, or for the acquisition
of real property or an interest in real property, the Assurance will extend to rights to space on,
over, or under such property.

That the Recipient will include the clauses set forth in Appendix C and Appendix D of this
Assurance, as a covenant running with the land, in any future deeds, leases, licenses, permits, or
similar instruments entered into by the Recipient with other parties:

a.   forthe subsequent transfer of real property acquired or improved under the applicable
     activity, project, or program; and
b.   for the construction or use of, or access to, space on, over, or under real property acquired
     or improved under the applicable activity, project, or program.

That this Assurance obligates the Recipient for the period during which Federal financial
assistance is extended to the program, except where the Federal financial assistance is to
provide, or is in the form of, personal property, or real property, or interest therein, or
structures or improvements thereon, in which case the Assurance obligates the Recipient, or
any transferee for the longer of the following periods:
         a.   the period during which the property is used for a purpose for which the Federal financial
              assistance is extended, or for another purpose involving the provision of similar services or
              benefits; or
         b.   the period during which the Recipient retains ownership or possession of the property.

    9.   The Recipient will provide for such methods of administration for the program as are found by
         the Secretary of Transportation or the official to whom he/she delegates specific authority to
         give reasonable guarantee that it, other recipients, sub-recipients, sub-grantees, contractors,
         subcontractors, consultants, transferees, successors in interest, and other participants of
         Federal financial assistance under such program will comply with all requirements imposed or
         pursuant to the Acts, the Regulations, and this Assurance.

    10. The Recipient agrees that the United States has a right to seek judicial enforcement with regard
        to any matter arising under the Acts, the Regulations, and this Assurance.

By signing this ASSURANCE, Oregon Department of Transportation also agrees to comply (and require
any sub-recipients, sub-grantees, contractors, successors, transferees, and/or assignees to comply) with
all applicable provisions governing the Federal Highway Administration access to records, accounts,
documents, information, facilities, and staff. You also recognize that you must comply with any program
or compliance reviews, and/or complaint investigations conducted by the Federal Highway
Administration. You must keep records, reports, and submit the material for review upon request to
Federal Highway Administration or its designee in a timely, complete, and accurate way. Additionally,
you must comply with all other reporting, data collection, and evaluation requirements, as prescribed by
law or detailed in program guidance.

Oregon Department of Transportation gives this ASSURANCE in consideration of and for obtaining any
Federal grants, loans, contracts, agreements, property, and/or discounts, or other Federal-aid and
Federal financial assistance extended after the date hereof to the recipients by the U.S. Department of
Transportation under the Federal Highway Administration. This ASSURANCE         is binding on Oregon, other
recipients, sub-recipients, sub-grantees, contractors, subcontractors and their subcontractors’,
transferees, successors in interest, and any other participants in the Federal Transportation Program.
The person(s) signing below is authorized to sign this ASSURANCE on behalf of the Recipient.




                                   Oregon   Department   of Transportation
                                             (Name of Recipient)




                                        : Nit            ud FO
                                         Director Kristopher Strickler



                                        DATED    September 27, 2024
                                                 APPENDIX A

During the performance of this contract, the contractor, for itself, its assignees, and successors in
interest (hereinafter referred to as the "contractor") agrees as follows:

    1.   Compliance with Regulations: The contractor (hereinafter includes consultants) will comply
         with the Acts and the Regulations relative to Non-discrimination in Federally-assisted programs
         of the U.S. Department of Transportation, Federal Highway Administration, as they may be
         amended from time to time, which are herein incorporated by reference and made a part of this
         contract.

    2.   Non-discrimination: The contractor, with regard to the work performed by it during the
         contract, will not discriminate on the grounds of race, color, or national origin in the selection
         and retention of subcontractors, including procurements of materials and leases of equipment.
         The contractor will not participate directly or indirectly in the discrimination prohibited by the
         Acts and the Regulations, including employment practices when the contract covers any activity,
         project, or program set forth in Appendix B of 49 CFR Part 21.

    3.   Solicitations for Subcontracts, Including Procurements of Materials and Equipment: In all
         solicitations, either by competitive bidding, or negotiation made by the contractor for work to
         be performed under a subcontract, including procurements of materials, or leases of
         equipment, each potential subcontractor or supplier will be notified by the contractor of the
         contractor's obligations under this contract and the Acts and the Regulations relative to Non-
         discrimination on the grounds of race, color, or national origin.


    4.   Information and Reports: The contractor will provide all information and reports required by
         the Acts, the Regulations, and directives issued pursuant thereto and will permit access to its
         books, records, accounts, other sources of information, and its facilities as may be determined
         by the Recipient or the Federal Highway Administration to be pertinent to ascertain compliance
         with such Acts, Regulations, and instructions. Where any information required of a contractor is
         in the exclusive possession of another who fails or refuses to furnish the information, the
         contractor will so certify to the Recipient or the Federal Highway Administration, as appropriate,
         and will set forth what efforts it has made to obtain the information.

    5.   Sanctions for Noncompliance: In the event of a contractor's noncompliance with the Non-
         discrimination provisions of this contract, the Recipient will impose such contract sanctions as it
         or the Federal Highway Administration may determine to be appropriate, including, but not
         limited to:

         a.   withholding payments to the contractor under the contract until the contractor complies;
              and/or
         b.   cancelling, terminating, or suspending a contract, in whole or in part.


Incorporation of Provisions: The contractor will include the provisions of paragraphs one through six in
every subcontract, including procurements of materials and leases of equipment, unless exempt by the
Acts, the Regulations and directives issued pursuant thereto. The contractor will take action with respect
to any subcontract or procurement as the Recipient or the Federal Highway Administration may direct
as a means of enforcing such provisions including sanctions for noncompliance. Provided, that if the
contractor becomes involved in, or is threatened with litigation by a subcontractor, or supplier because
of such direction, the contractor may request the Recipient to enter into any litigation to protect the
interests of the Recipient. In addition, the contractor may request the United States to enter into the
litigation to protect the interests of the United States.




                                                                                                           vi
                                                 APPENDIX B

                     CLAUSES FOR DEEDS TRANSFERRING          UNITED STATES PROPERTY

The following clauses will be included in deeds effecting or recording the transfer of real property,
structures, or improvements thereon, or granting interest therein from the United States pursuant to
the provisions of Assurance 4:


NOW, THEREFORE, the U.S. Department of Transportation as authorized by law and upon the condition
that the (Title of Recipient) will accept title to the lands and maintain the project constructed thereon in
accordance with (Name of Appropriate Legislative Authority), the Regulations for the Administration of
(Name of Appropriate Program), and the policies and procedures prescribed by the (Title of Modal
Operating Administration) of the U.S. Department of Transportation in accordance and in compliance
with all requirements imposed by Title 49, Code of Federal Regulations, U.S. Department of
Transportation, Subtitle A, Office of the Secretary, Part 21, Non-discrimination in Federally-assisted
programs of the U.S Department of Transportation pertaining to and effectuating the provisions of Title
VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (78 Stat. 252; 42 U.S.C. § 2000d to 2000d-4), does hereby remise,
release, quitclaim and convey unto the (Title of Recipient) all the right, title and interest of the U.S.
Department of Transportation in and to said lands described in Exhibit A attached hereto and made a
part hereof.

                                            (HABENDUM CLAUSE)

TO HAVE AND TO HOLD said lands and interests therein unto (Title of Recipient) and its successors
forever, subject, however, to the covenants, conditions, restrictions and reservations herein contained
as follows, which will remain in effect for the period during which the real property or structures are
used for a purpose for which Federal financial assistance is extended or for another purpose involving
the provision of similar services or benefits and will be binding on the (Title of Recipient), its successors
and assigns.

The (Title of Recipient), in consideration of the conveyance of said lands and interests in lands, does
hereby covenant and agree as a covenant running with the land for itself, its successors and assigns, that
(1) no person will on the grounds of race, color, or national origin, be excluded from participation in, be
denied the benefits of, or be otherwise subjected to discrimination with regard to any facility located
wholly or in part on, over, or under such lands hereby conveyed [,] [and]* (2) that the (Title of Recipient)
will use the lands and interests in lands and interests in lands so conveyed, in compliance with all
requirements imposed by or pursuant to Title 49, Code of Federal Regulations, U.S. Department of
Transportation, Subtitle A, Office of the Secretary, Part 21, Non-discrimination in Federally-assisted
programs of the U.S. Department of Transportation, Effectuation of Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of
1964, and as said Regulations and Acts may be amended [, and (3) that in the event of breach of any of
the above-mentioned non-discrimination conditions, the Department will have a right to enter or re-
enter said lands and facilities on said land, and that above described land and facilities will thereon
revert to and vest in and become the absolute property of the U.S. Department of Transportation and its
assigns as such interest existed prior to this instruction].*


(*Reverter clause and related language to be used only when it is determined that such a clause is
necessary in order to make clear the purpose of Title VI.)




                                                                                                                vii
                                                 APPENDIX C

      CLAUSES FOR TRANSFER OF REAL PROPERTY ACQUIRED OR IMPROVED                   UNDER THE ACTIVITY,
                                    FACILITY, OR PROGRAM



The following clauses will be included in deeds, licenses, leases, permits, or similar instruments entered
into by the (Title of Recipient) pursuant to the provisions of Assurance 7(a):

A.   The (grantee, lessee, permittee, etc. as appropriate) for himself/herself, his/her heirs, personal
     representatives, successors in interest, and assigns, as a part of the consideration hereof, does
     hereby covenant and agree [in the case of deeds and leases add "as a covenant running with the
     land"] that:

     1.   Inthe event facilities are constructed, maintained, or otherwise operated on the property
          described in this (deed, license, lease, permit, etc.) for a purpose for which a U.S. Department of
          Transportation activity, facility, or program is extended or for another purpose involving the
          provision of similar services or benefits, the (grantee, licensee, lessee, permittee, etc.) will
          maintain and operate such facilities and services in compliance with all requirements imposed
          by the Acts and Regulations (as may be amended) such that no person on the grounds of race,
          color, or national origin, will be excluded from participation in, denied the benefits of, or be
          otherwise subjected to discrimination in the use of said facilities.


B.   With respect to licenses, leases, permits, etc., in the event of breach of any of the above Non-
     discrimination covenants, (Title of Recipient) will have the right to terminate the (lease, license,
     permit, etc.) and to enter, re-enter, and repossess said lands and facilities thereon, and hold the
     same as if the (lease, license, permit, etc.) had never been made or issued.*

C.   With respect to a deed, in the event of breach of any of the above Non-discrimination covenants,
     the (Title of Recipient) will have the right to enter or re-enter the lands and facilities thereon, and
     the above described lands and facilities will there upon revert to and vest in and become the
     absolute property of the (Title of Recipient) and its assigns.*

(*Reverter clause and related language to be used only when it is determined that such a clause is
necessary to make clear the purpose of Title VI.)




                                                                                                               vill
                                                 APPENDIX D

     CLAUSES FOR CONSTRUCTION/USE/ACCESS TO REAL PROPERTY ACQUIRED UNDER THE ACTIVITY,
                                    FACILITY OR PROGRAM



The following clauses will be included in deeds, licenses, permits, or similar instruments/agreements
entered into by Oregon Department of Transportation pursuant to the provisions of Assurance 7(b):

A.   The (grantee, licensee, permittee, etc., as appropriate) for himself/herself, his/her heirs, personal
      representatives, successors in interest, and assigns, as a part of the consideration hereof, does
      hereby covenant and agree (in the case of deeds and leases add, "as a covenant running with the
      land") that (1) no person on the ground of race, color, or national origin, will be excluded from
      participation in, denied the benefits of, or be otherwise subjected to discrimination in the use of
      said facilities, (2) that in the construction of any improvements on, over, or under such land, and the
      furnishing of services thereon, no person on the ground of race, color, or national origin, will be
      excluded from participation in, denied the benefits of, or otherwise be subjected to discrimination,
      (3) that the (grantee, licensee, lessee, permittee, etc.) will use the premises in compliance with all
      other requirements imposed by or pursuant to the Acts and Regulations, as amended, set forth in
      this Assurance.

B.    With respect to (licenses, leases, permits, etc.), in the event of breach of any of the above Non-
      discrimination covenants, Oregon Department of Transportation will have the right to terminate the
      (license, permit, etc., as appropriate) and to enter or re-enter and repossess said land and the
      facilities thereon, and hold the same as if said (license, permit, etc., as appropriate) had never been
      made or issued.*

C.    With respect to deeds, in the event of breach of any of the above Non-discrimination covenants,
      Oregon Department of Transportation will there upon revert to and vest in and become the
      absolute property of Oregon Department of Transportation and its assigns.*




(*Reverter clause and related language to be used only when it is determined that such a clause is
necessary to make clear the purpose of Title VI.)
                                                 APPENDIX E

During the performance of this contract, the contractor, for itself, its assignees, and successors in
interest (hereinafter referred to as the "contractor") agrees to comply with the following non-
discrimination statutes and authorities; including but not limited to:

Pertinent Non-Discrimination    Authorities:


        Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. § 2000d et seq., 78 stat. 252), (prohibits
        discrimination on the basis of race, color, national origin); and 49 CFR Part 21.
        The Uniform Relocation Assistance and Real Property Acquisition Policies Act of 1970, (42 U.S.C.
        § 4601), (prohibits unfair treatment of persons displaced or whose property has been acquired
        because of Federal or Federal-aid programs and projects);
        Federal-Aid Highway Act of 1973, (23 U.S.C. § 324 et seq.), (prohibits discrimination on the basis
        of sex);
        Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, (29 U.S.C. § 794 et seq.), as amended, (prohibits
        discrimination on the basis of disability); and 49 CFR Part 27;
        The Age Discrimination Act of 1975, as amended, (42 U.S.C. § 6101 et seq.), (prohibits
        discrimination on the basis of age);
        Airport and Airway Improvement Act of 1982, (49 USC § 471, Section 47123), as amended,
        (prohibits discrimination based on race, creed, color, national origin, or sex);
        The Civil Rights Restoration Act of 1987, (PL 100-209), (Broadened the scope, coverage and
        applicability of Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, The Age Discrimination Act of 1975 and
        Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, by expanding the definition of the terms
        "programs or activities" to include all of the programs or activities of the Federal-aid recipients,
        sub-recipients and contractors, whether such programs or activities are Federally funded or
        not);
        Titles Il and IIl of the Americans with Disabilities Act, which prohibit discrimination on the basis
        of disability in the operation of public entities, public and private transportation systems, places
        of public accommodation, and certain testing entities (42 U.S.C. §§ 12131-12189) as
        implemented by Department of Transportation regulations at 49 C.F.R. parts 37 and 38;
        The Federal Aviation Administration's Non-discrimination statute (49 U.S.C. § 47123) (prohibits
        discrimination on the basis of race, color, national origin, and sex);
        Executive Order 12898, Federal Actions to Address Environmental Justice in Minority
        Populations and Low-Income Populations, which ensures Non-discrimination against minority
        populations by discouraging programs, policies, and activities with disproportionately high and
        adverse human health or environmental effects on minority and low-income populations;
        Executive Order 13166, Improving Access to Services for Persons with Limited English
        Proficiency, and resulting agency guidance, national origin discrimination includes discrimination
        because of Limited English proficiency (LEP). To ensure compliance with Title VI, you must take
        reasonable steps to ensure that LEP persons have meaningful access to your programs (70 Fed.
        Reg. at 74087 to 74100);
        Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972, as amended, which prohibits you from
        discriminating because of sex in education programs or activities (20 U.S.C. 1681 et seq).
APPENDIX 2: Nondiscrimination        Posters
ENGLISH




                   Your Rights under
                   Title VI of the Civil
                   Rights Act and the
                   Americans with
                   Disabilities Act (ADA)
                   The Oregon Department of Transportation (ODOT) complies with the
                   Civil Rights Act of 1964, the Americans with Disabilities Act, and
                   other federal nondiscrimination authorities. These authorities prohibit
                   discrimination based on race, color, national origin, age, disability,
                   sex, income level, and Limited English Proficiency in ODOT’s programs,
                   activities, services, operations, delivery of benefits, and opportunities
                   to participate.

                   To ensure equitable access, ODOT provides accessibility aids,
                   translation, and interpretation services for all public events
                   and vital documents, free of charge, upon request. You can obtain
                   these services by providing reasonable advance notice.
                          Need   Title VI or ADA related assistance or information?
                          Need   translation of an ODOT publication?
                          Need   interpretation for an ODOT event or activity?
                          Need   an accessibility aid for an ODOT event or activity?
                          Need   to submit a discrimination or accessibility complaint?

                           Please contact the ODOT Office of Civil Rights
                   Title VI Officer                          ADA Program Manager
                   ODOT.TITLEVI@ODOT.Oregon.Gov              ODOT_ADA@ODOT.Oregon.Gov


                   Toll Free: (855) 540-6655
                   For an Interpreter: 711
                   Internet Relay:                      Oregon
                   http://www.sprintip.com              po    eda
                                                             ransportation
                   Fax: (503) 986-6382




  REVISED 3/2022




                                                                                               xi
SPANISH



                      Sus derechos conforme al Titulo
                      Vi de la Ley de derechos civiles
                      y la Ley de estadounidenses
                      con discapacidades (ADA)
                      El Departamento de Transporte de Oregon (Oregon Department of
                      Transportation, ODOT) cumple con la Ley de derechos civiles de 1964, la Ley
                      de estadounidenses con discapacidades (Americans with Disabilities Act, ADA)
                      y lo establecido por otras autoridades federales contra la discriminacién. Estas
                      autoridades prohiben la discriminaci6n por motivo de raza, color, origen
                      nacional, edad, discapacidad, sexo, nivel de ingresos y dominio limitado del
                      inglés en los programas, actividades, servicios, operaciones, entrega de
                      beneficios y oportunidades para participar que brinda el ODOT.


                      Para garantizar el acceso igualitario para todos, el ODOT brinda asistencia y
                      servicios de traduccion e interpretacion para todos los eventos publicos y los
                      documentos publicos, sin cargo, a peticion de los interesados. Puede obtener
                      estos servicios si lo solicita con anticipaci6n razonable.

                      e   ~Necesita asistencia o informacion relacionada con el Titulo VI o la ADA?
                      e   ¢Necesita una traduccion de una publicacién del ODOT?
                      e   Necesita servicios de interpretacion para un evento o actividad del ODOT?
                      e   ~Necesita asistencia con el acceso para un evento o actividad del ODOT?
                      e   <Necesita presentar una queja por discriminacion o por un problema
                          de accesibilidad?

                           Contacte a la Oficina de derechos civiles del ODOT

                      Director del Titulo VI                         Gerente del Programa ADA
                      ODOT.TITLEVI@ODOT.Oregon.Gov                   ODOT_ADA@ODOT.Oregon.Gov



                              Oregon
                              Deigertanace
                              of   Transportation


                      Linea gratuita: (855) 540-6655
                      Para un intérprete: 711
                      Servicio de retransmisi6n por Internet:              Escanear para ver la
                      http://www.sprintip.com                             informacion detallada
                      Fax: (503) 986-6382



 REVISADO EN 3/2022




                                                                                                         Xii
RUSSIAN


                          Balu        npaBa coraacHo paa~eny VI 3zaxona «O
                          rPa@kKAAHCKHX NpaBax HNO 3aKoHy «O06
                          aMepyvikKaHllax C OfPaHH4eCHHbIMH
                          BO3MO)KHOCTAMH» (ADA)
                          Aenaptament tpaHcnopta wrata Operon (ODOT) co6atoaaert 3aKoH «O
                          rpadkKAaHCKHX NpaBax» oT 1964 r., 3aKoH «O06 amepunkKaHuax C
                          OFPaAHHYeCHHbIMH BOSMOKHOCTAMH» H Apyrne deAepaAbHbie NOCTAHOBAeHHA,
                          3anpewarouwe AUCKPUMMHAUMWO. ITH NOCTAHOBAeHHA 3anpewaloT
                          AMCKPHMHHAaLIMIO Ha OCHOBE Pacbi, LBETA KODKM, HALL|MOHAAbHOCTH, BO3pactTa,
                          OrFpaHHYeHHA BOZSMOXKHOCTEH, NOAA, YPOBHA AOXOAAa MW OrpaHHy4eHHOrO
                          BAAACHUMA AHFAMMCKMM ASbIKOM NPH Y4ACTHH B Nporpammax, MeponpHATHAX
                          WAM ONepauiMAX AENapTamenHta ODOT u npu HCNOAbSOBAaHHH EFo ycryr,
                          NPeAOCCTABAAEMbIX HM AbrOT HAM BO3MO>KHOCTEH.

                          C weAbto OG6ecneYeHHA PABHONPABHO"O AOCTyNa AeENaptameHT ODOT
                          6ecnAaTHO NnpeAoctTaBAAeT NO TpeboBaHHld B pamKax BCeX OOWIECTBEHHbIX
                          MEPONPHATHH CpeACcTBa AOCTYNAa, YCAYTM NHCbMEHHbIX HW YCTHbIX
                          N€PeBOAYMKOB, a TaKKE AKTYAAbHbIe AOKYMEHTbI. BbI MOKETE NOAb3OBATbCA
                          TaKMMH ycAyramH, 3abAAarOBPEMEeHHO U3BECTHB O KEAATEABHOCTH UX
                          npeaocTaBAeHnA.

                             e   Hyxkgaetecb AM BbI B NOMOLIM HAM B HHOOpPMaUMH, NPeAOCCTABAReEMbIX
                                 COrAacHo pa3aeny VI HAM NO 3aKOHy ADA?
                             e   HykgaeTecb AM BbI     B NUCbMeHHOM NepeBose MaTepHnaAoB
                                 AenaptameHta ODOT?
                             e   HykAaeTecb AX BbI B YCTHOM NepeBose BO BPEMA MEPONPHATHA
                                 AenaptameuHta ODOT?
                             e   HykgaeTtecb AX BbI B CpeAcTBe AOCTyna K MeponpuaATHiO
                                 Aenaptameuta ODOT?
                             e   >KenaeTe AM BbI NOAAaTb KAAOby HA AMCKPHMHHAUMIO HAH Ha
                                 HenpeAocTaBAeHHe AOCTyNa?

                                      NoxKaayicta, oO6pawantecb B YnpaBAeHue no
                                      rpaKAaHCKMM NpaBam AenaptameHta ODOT
                          AOMKHOCTHOE AMMO, OTBETCTBEHHOe 3A)     = Me Heep nporpammbi
                          co6aropenue paszena VI                    co6atopeHua 3aKoHa ADA
                          ODOT.TITLEVI@ODOT.Oregon.Gov              ODOT_ADA@ODOT.Oregon.Gov


                          Tea. (GECNAaTHbIN BbI3OB):
                          (855) 540-6655
                          YcrHbin nepeBoa: 711                Oregon   -
                          CetesBan TpaHcAAuMA:                of Transportation
                          http://www.sprintip.com
                          axe: (503) 986-6382                                     seieniie: bien satiate

  NEPECMOTPEHO II1/2022




                                                                                                           xiii
VIETNAMESE




                   Quyén cua Quy vj theo Title
                   VI cua Dao luat Dan quyén
                   va Dao luat Nguoi My
                   Khuyét tat (ADA)
                   Sd& Giao théng Oregon (ODOT) tuan thi Dao luat Dan Quyén nam 1964, Dao
                   luat Nguoi MY Khuyét tat va cac co quan khéng phan biét déi xr khac cua
                   lién bang. Cac co quan nay nghiém cam hanh vi phan biét déi xt dya trén
                   ching t6c, mau da, quéc gia xuat xvr, tudi tac, tinh trang khuyét tat, gidi tinh,
                   mu thu nhap va Trinh 46 Théng thao Tiéng Anh Han ché trong cac chuong
                   trinh, hoat déng, dich vu, cung cap quyén Idi va co héi tham gia cla ODOT.
                   Dé dam bao tiép can céng bang, ODOT cung cp dich vu hé tr¢ tiép can, bién
                   dich va phién dich cho tat ca cac sy kién cong cong va cac tai liéu quan trong,
                   mién phi, theo yéu cau. Quy vj cé thé nhan duge cac dich vy nay bang cach
                   cung cap théng bao trudéc hgp ly.

                       e   Quy vi can dugc hé tr¢ hoadc xem thong tin lién quan dén Title VI
                           hoac ADA?
                       e   Quy vi can ban dich cla mét 4n pham ODOT?
                       e   Quy vi can théng dich cho mét sy kién hoadc hoat déng ODOT?
                       e   Quy vi can dich vu hé tro tiép can cho mét sy kién hoac hoat
                           déng ODOT?
                       e   Quy vi can gtri khiéu nai vé hanh vi phan biét déi xt hodc kha
                           nang tiép can?

                       Vui long lién hé voi Van phong Dan Quyén cla ODOT
                   Vién chive Title VI                          Quan ly Chuong trinh ADA
                   ODOT.TITLEVI@ODOT.Oregon.Gov                 ODOT_ADA@ODOT.Oregon.Gov


                   S6 Dién thoai Mién phi:
                   (855) 540-6655
                   Dé yéu cau mot thong dich
                      2          ‘       eon               Oregon
                   vién:: 7141 Dich vu Tiép am             Department
                                                           of    nsportation
                   Internet:
                   http://www.sprintip.com                                          Sean dé biét
                   Fax: (503) 986-6382                                           thong tin chi tiét

  SUA POI 3/2022




                                                                                                       XIV
CHINESE (Simplified)



                       (RATE (ROGER)                                                  7X
                       mA                  (FB RRAR)
                       (ADA) =A HtX Ail
                       BHI | 8388 (Oregon Department of Transportation, ODOT) @xF (1964
                           RAVER) (Civil Rights Act of 1964), (3eHRRAGKR) (Americans
                       with Disabilities Act) FIA HHEX FRIES MALIA AVAL TE ° HE LAALE ODOT
                       AINE - oh          RS    BE. BANRMASSMNSh
                       FEET      HR,      RE.   WRB.    FR        RR + ED         WAKE -
                       RiGKF ARH EM,
                       ARiRA FER           ODOT MEKRAMAAHSHEANSE
                                                            CHS Mie
                       RRA     AD. BFA PARA ° COLMAR
                                                 A BANS BARR
                       SB IXLe ARS.
                          ©   GESRAMR ADA BKHBHRER?
                              ZB ODOT WhR MHF           ?
                              fa Se ODOT Hae        aA OMA ?
                              EB ODOT HERR HaAy A hes HH ?
                              Fe BAR       ML    ABS HL ?

                              is KA ODOT RAW72& (Office of Civil Rights)
                       SKMLEAR                                    ADA IBA
                       ODOT.TITLEVI@ODOT.Oregon.Gov               ODOT_ADA@ODOT.Oregon.Gov
                       PBA       : (855) 540-6655
                       ROiF      AMS      : 7114
                       GDA            :                II    Somtoa   ent
                                                             ef     nsportation
                       http;//www.sprintip.com
                       {Bi : (503) 9866382                                           fata S RIF


  2022 4€ 3 Ait




                                                                                                  XV
