Oregon Housing and Community Services
 General Policy and Guideline Manual
                (GPGM)
                           Version    1.3

                        October 16, 2025




              Affordable Rental Housing Division

         725 NE Summer St NE Suite B Salem, OR 97301
          Phone   (503) 986-2000     | Fax (503) 986-2020
                     www.oregon.gov/ohcs




                                                            -            «
                                                            Se
                                                            a
                                                            OREGON HOUSING ond
                                                            COMMUNITY SERVICES
Table of contents
TABLE OF CONTENTS..........cccscccsscecccscccsscceseecceeccnsecessececssccnsecesesseeesceesscesssseeesceesscesssceeescessscessssecescesscnsesseessonssooesese 1

   OVERVIEW 000... ee eeeceeececceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaaaeaeeseeeeeeeeeeeaeeaeeeeeeeeeeeeesaaeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaeeaaaeesseeseeeeeeeeeaeeesseeeseeeeeaesaauenseeeeeeeeeeeaaaags 2
     1)    PURPOSE OF THE POLICY uu. ..eeeessccecseesseeeeeseeneeeeeeseneeeeeeeeaaeeeeeseaaaeeeeeeeaaaeeeeseaaaeeeseeaaaeeeeeseaaaeesseseaaaeeeesseaaaeeeeeas 2
     2)    APPROVAL AND EFFECTIVE DATE OF THE GENERAL POLICY AND GUIDELINE MANUAL .....cccesssseeeeeeeeneeeee 2
     3)    ADMINISTRATION AND INTERPRETATION OF THE GPGM .uuua.eeeecsscccceeensceeceeeneeeeeeeeaaeeseeteaaeeeeesseaaeeeeseeseaaaees 2
     4)    DEFINITION OF TERMS uu. eecsccccssessecceeeeeneceeeeeeneeeeeeeaaaeeeeeseaaaeeeeesaaaeeeesesaaaaeeceseaaaeeeeseaaaeesesseaaaeeeesseaaeeeeesensaaeeeg® 2
     5) — PUBLIC RECORDS 0 eeseecccsesssceceeenneceeeeenaaeeeeeseaaaeeeeeeaaaeeeeeseaaaeeeeeeaaaeeeeeseaaaeeeessaaaaeeeessaaaeesesseaaaeeeseseaaeeeeeeeneaaaees 5
     6)    WAIVERS i eeeeecceceeesceceeeseneeeeeeteaneeeeeeeaaeeeeeeeaaaeeeeeseaaeeeeeeeaaaeeeeeseaaaeeesesaaaaeeesseaaaeeeeeseaaaeeesesaaaeeseesegeaaaeeseeseaaaeeeetay 6
      7) — REMEDIES vs eeeeesceccccecsncceeeeeeneeeeeeseaneeeeeesaaeeeeeseaaaaeeeeeeaaaeeeeesaaaeeeeeseaaaaeeeesaaaeeeessaaaaeeeeseaaseeeesseaaaeaeeessseaaaeeeeseaaas 6
   GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 2... eesssseeeeeeceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaaaaeeeeeeeeeeeeeseaeaaeeseeeeeeeeeeseeaaeeseeeeseeeeeeeeaaeeseeseeseeeeeaeeeeeeeees 6
     1)    FAIR HOUSING & CIVIL RIGHTS COMPLIANCE ......ccsccccssesseseceseensceeeesenaeeeeceseaneeeeeseaaeeeeeseaaaeeeeeseaaaeeeeeeeaaeeeeeees 6
     2)    MINORITY, WOMEN, AND/OR EMERGING SMALL BUSINESS (MWESB) ENGAGEMENT .........::cccesceeesseeeeens 6
     3)    IDENTITY OF INTEREST uu teeeccceecessecccceeennceeeeeenneeeeeeeeaaeeeeeseaaaeeeeeeaaaeeeessaaaeeeeesaaaaeeeeseaaaeesesseaaaeeessseaaeeeeesenaaaeeen® 7
     4)    MISREPRESENTATION AND FRAUD ...0...csccccccesseccceeeeseeeeetenneeeeeeeeaaeeeeeseaaaeeeeeseaaaeeeceeaaaeeseeseaaaeeecssaaeasesesseaaaees 7
     5)    PROJECT CHANGES wuuaesseeeecssccceeeenneeeeeeeeaaeeeeeeeanaeeeeeeaaaeeeeeseaaaeeeeeseaaeeeesseaaaeeeessaaaaeeeeseaaaeesesseaaaeeeessaaeesessensaaaeees 7
     6)    FEASIBILITY    AND VIABILITY ANALYSIS ........cc:ccccscescceeeeeeseeeeesenneeeeeseeaaeeeeeseaaaeeeeeteaaaeeeeesaaeeseeseaaaeeeeeseaaaaaeeeeees 8
      7)   APPRAISAL REQUIREMENTS ......ccccsscccceeesseeeeeeeeaeeeeeteaneeeeeeseaaeeeeeseaaaeeeeesaaaeeeeesaaaeeeeeseaaaeeeeesegeaaaeeeseeeaaeeeeeseaaas 8
     8)    CONSTRUCTION CLOSING .ii...ceeecsecceceeesscceeeseneeeeeeeaaeeeeeseaaaeeeeesaaaeeeeeseaaaeeeeesaaaaeeeeseaaaeeseesesaaaeeeseseaaeeeeesenaaaees 9
     9)    PROGRAM AFFORDABILITY AGREEMENTS .....ccccccccsscceceseeseeeeeeeenneeeeesenaaeeeeeseaaaeeeeeeaaaeesesseaasesessseaaeeeeetenaaaeeees 9
     10)      MINIMUM AFFORDABILITY REQUIREMENTS uu. iccccccccccccesssesesseeeeeeeecneaesssseeeeseeeeesaeeeesseeeesasaansnseeeeseeeeaaaea 10
     11)      CORE-DEVELOPMENT MANUAL; ARCHITECTUAL GUIDANCE AND STANDARDS ......1::scccssceeeeeeeenseeeeeeeees 10
     12)      DEPARTMENT OF STATE LANDS (DSL) WETLANDS POLICY AND REVIEW ..uuie.eeessesscceeeeesnceeeeeeeeneeeeeeeeaes 10
     13)      BUREAU OF LABOR AND INDUSTRIES (BOLI) REQUIREMENTS .........c::cccccsessccceeseeneeeeeeeeneeeeesesaeeeeesennaeees 10
     14)      HISTORIC PRESERVATION ....ccccsssssseeseeeeeeeeeeneaeeeeseeeeeeeeeeeseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeasaeeeeseeeeeeeeaesaaaaeeseeesesesaausasseseseeeaaaaea 11
     15)      CONSISTENCY WITH STATE CONSOLIDATED PLAN. teccccccccsssssseesseeeeeeeeeeeaseeseseeeeeseeeeasaeessseeesessaaaaesseeeeees 11
     16)      ENVIRONMENTAL ASSURANCE ......ccccccccccccccessseeeseeeeeeeeeenseeeeeeseeeeeeeeeaaeeeeseeeeeeeeeeeaaaaeseeeeesesaeasaneeeeeeeaaaaea 11
   GENERAL UNDERWRITING... eeeceecceeceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaeaeseeeeeeeeeeseaeaeeseeeeseseeessaeeeeseeeeeeeeeessaeeaeeeeeseeeeesaeaaaeeeeees 12
     1)    PROGRAM LIMITS uieeeeeeecsecccceeenneeeeeeenneeeeeeseaaeeeeeeeaaeeeeeseaaaeeeeesaaaeeeeseaaaeeeeeseaaaeesesseaaaeeeeseaaeeeseseaaaeeesesensaaaaees 12
     2)    PROGRAM THRESHOLD REQUIREMENTS ......ccscccccsssssccecesenneeeeetenaneeeeeseaaaeeeeeseaaaeeeeseaaaeeeeeseaaaeeeeseeaaeeeeesenaaaas 15
     3)    DEVELOPMENT TEAM CAPACITY uuuu.seeeesseccceseennceeeeeennceeeeeeeaneeeeeseaaaeeeeesaaaeeeeesaaaeeeeeseaaaeeeeeseaaaeeeesenseaaeeeeeneaaas 19
     4)    OWNERSHIP INTEGRITY... .ccccccccceesccceeeeenceeeeeeaneeeeeeeaaeeeeeseaaaeeeessaaaeeeeeseaaaeeesesaaaeeeeseaaaeesesseaaaeeesseeaaeeeeesenaaaees 20
   ADMINISTRATIVE GUIDELINES...                  eee eee ecccceeeesssseeeeeeeceeeeeeeeeeeseeeceeeeeseseaaeeseeeeeeeeeessaeaesseeeesseeeeeseeueesseeesseseeeseeeaanneeees 21
     1)    CONDITIONAL COMMITMENT / COMMITMENT LETTERS......1:cccccscccceescccseneeseseeeseneeeseeaeseseaeeesseaeseseeeneeesaas 21
     2)    INAPPROPRIATE USE OF RESOURCES ..uui...ccsecsseccceeeeneceeeeeenneeeeeseaaeeeeeseaaaeeeeeseaaeeeeeseaaaeeeeeseaaaeeeeseeaaeeeeseeneaaas 21
     3)    LEASEHOLD INTERESTS... .eccccccesesseccceseesceeeeeenneeeeeeeaaeeeeeseaaaeeeeesaaeeeeeeeaaaeeesesaaaaeeeeseaaaeesesseaaeeeesseeaaeeseesenaaaees 21
     4)    USE OF OHCS LEGAL DOCUMENTS ......ccscccccscesscccceeeenceeeeeeeaeeeeeseaaaeeeeeseaaaeeeessaaaeeeeeeaaaeeeseseaaaeeeeseeaaaaeeseeseaaas 21
     5)    PROGRAM CHARGES ......eccesecceceeesneeecesenneeeeeseaaeeeeeseaaaeeeeesaaaaeecseaaaeeeeeseaaaeeeeesaaaaeeesseaaaeeeeeseaaaeeeeseeaaeeeeesenaaeas 21
     6)    PROJECT DISQUALIFICATION / CANCELLATION. .uu..cscsscccsesesceesneecseneeesenaeeeseneeeseaaeeeseaeeessaaeeeeseaaeeeseneeeseaaeeenaas 24
      7)   PROJECT APPLICATION DENIAL uu uieececescccsesssccennceeseneeesenneecseneeecsaaeeesenaeecsaaeseseaaeessaaeeeseaaeeesaeeeseaaaeeeseaasessaaene 24
     8)     OHCS SOLE DISCRETION uuu eeecesseeeccseeneceeeeeenneeeeeeeaaeeeeeseaaaeeeeesaaeeeeeseaaaeeeeesaaaeeeeeseaaaeesesseaaaeeessesaaeeeeesenaaaees 25
     9)    NO REPRESENTATION OR WARRANTY uui..cccscsscccceeeencceeeeeenneeeeeteaaeeeeeseaaaeeeeeeaaaeeeeeeaaaeeeeeseaaaeeeeseeaaeeeeeeeseaaas 25
     10)      DECISIONS AND REVIEWS uu. ..ccccssssssessseeeeeeeeeneeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeeeeeeeeeeeeaeeaaeeeeeeeeeeeeeeesaaaeeeseeseesaaaassseeeeeesaaaaea 25




                                                                                                                                                                       OREGON   HOUSING       w!
                                                                                                                                                                       COMMUNITY   SERVICES
OVERVIEW

The Affordable Rental Housing Division (ARH) of Oregon Housing and Community Services (OHCS) is
responsible for allocating state and federal resources for the development and preservation of affordable
multi-family housing (Projects) in Oregon. OHCS provides resources to partners through an application
process allowing the agency to evaluate each proposal based on standards, benchmarks, and criteria as
put forward by ARH. State and federal resources generally have specific requirements tied to the
individual resource and are governed by rules, manuals and guidelines consolidated into an OHCS
funding program (Program). ARH allows developers to apply for funding for these resources through the
Oregon Centralized Application (ORCA) process and provides this General Policy and Guideline Manual
(GPGM or Manual) to share relevant uniform policies and guidelines with respect to the allocation of
these resources.


1) PURPOSE OF THE POLICY
When submitting an application for OHCS resources for a Project, the Applicant must satisfy the
requirements of this Manual, the requirements of any Program from which funding is assigned or
requested, the requirements of the ORCA, and any other applicable funding requirements, whether in
statute, administrative rule, regulation, or otherwise (collectively, the Project Requirements).


2) APPROVAL AND EFFECTIVE DATE OF THE GENERAL POLICY AND GUIDELINE
   MANUAL
This Manual shall be effective upon its approval and shall remain in effect indefinitely or until modified
or terminated. Upon adoption the Manual requirements will apply to all Projects with applications dated
April 1, 2024, or later.


3) ADMINISTRATION            AND    INTERPRETATION OF THE GPGM
OHCS staff is authorized to interpret and administer the GPGM. In addition, staff has the authority to
interpret and administer any specific Program regulation, policy, related administrative rule, or other
Project requirement subject to the limitations of law.

OHCS regularly sends out information including but not limited to funding offering information,
regulatory changes, trainings, etc., to interested parties in the form of email communications referenced
as Affordable Rental Housing Division/Technical Advisories. To receive Technical Advisories, click “News
and Updates”, then “E-news Sign Up” on OHCS’s website at:
https://www.oregon.gov/ohcs/pages/index.aspx.

4) DEFINITION OF TERMS
Accessible - Units that include construction and or constructed elements enhancing further mobility of
persons with disability and the ability to reach or access areas of the unit by any disabled tenant.

Affordability Agreements - These are documents that contain the long-term affordability restrictions
which Applicants agree to when receiving funding from affordable housing Programs. They are not
exclusive of other required Project documents.

Application or Request - This means all the required Exhibits and Forms, if any, submitted by an
Applicant for a Project.
                                                                                                             >           «
                                                                                                             tt
                                                                                                             yt
                                                                                                             OREGON HOUSING
                                                                                                             COMMUNITY SERVICES
Applicant — Any sponsor or developer or other entity related to a Project applying for funding from OHCS
through the ORCA process or otherwise on behalf of that Project.

Capital Needs Assessment (CNA) - also known as a Physical Needs Assessment, is a property inspection
report that estimates the future costs of property maintenance and determines the cost to repair any
parts of a property that must be fixed urgently.

Co-Developer or Developer - An organization with a controlling interest in the proposed or funded
Project and that is or will be compensated for that controlling interest.


Construction Closing - Typically, this is the stage in the funding process when all conditions of the
Reservation Letter are satisfied, and the Project is ready to commence construction.

Contingency - A set aside of funds to be used for construction or development but may not be certain to
occur, and if used must not exceed OHCS combined maximums with any Application submission.

Development Team - This means the Applicant, the developer, the co-developer, the project
management consultant, the general contractor, and all persons or organizations materially involved in
the acquisition, construction, rehabilitation, development, or improvement of the Project.

Federally Subsidized Building - A building is federally subsidized if it is financed by federal tax-exempt
bonds or federal funds.

GPGM or Manual - The General Policy and Guideline Manual (this document).

Geographic Regions - These are the three (3) areas of the state (Metro, Eastern Oregon, Western
Oregon) that are grouped for the purpose of identifying needs and setting aside resources through the
ORCA process.


Identity of Interest - Identity of Interest means a financial, familial, or business relationship that permits
less than arm’s length transactions. For example: Related Entities/Persons; persons, entities, or
organizations affiliated with or controlled by or in control of another; existence of a ement program or
exchange of funds; common financial interests; common officers, directors, stockholders, or managers;
or family relationships between officers, directors, or stockholders.


LIHTC - Low Income Housing Tax Credits (also referred to as LIHC or Tax Credits).

Median Family Income - Refers to the applicable published program income limits, also known as Area
Median Income (AMI). HUD establishes the median income for families in metropolitan and non-
metropolitan areas for the current year and adjusts that amount for different family sizes.

Noncompliance - Noncompliance means a failure to meet any covenant, condition, or term of any
agreement between the Applicant or Project owner (including their officers, employees, agents, and
assignees) and OHCS, a failure to meet the requirements of Section 42 of the Code, or a failure to meet
any other requirements of a Program from which a Project received funding.



                                                                                                             >            «
                                                                                                             tt
                                                                                                             yt
                                                                                                             OREGON HOUSING
                                                                                                             COMMUNITY SERVICES
OHCS Affordable Rental Housing (ARH) - The section of Oregon Housing and Community Services that is
responsible for the funding and administration of the LIHTC, HOME, and related affordable rental
housing Programs.

ORCA - The Oregon Centralized Application (ORCA) is a uniform set of requirements for Sponsors to
apply for funding from OHCS through any and all of its Programs through a consolidated funding process.

Oregon Administrative Rules - The Oregon Administrative Rules (OARs) are the principles by which OHCS
administers affordable housing Programs that are approved from time to time through the State
administrative rule process.

Placed-In-Service - This is the date for a new or existing building on which the building is ready for
occupancy and available for its specifically assigned function. This is usually the date the first unit in the
building is certified as being suitable for occupancy under state or local law. Substantial rehabilitation
expenditures are treated as Placed-In-Service at the close of any twenty-four (24) month period over
which the expenditures are aggregated, or a shorter timeline when appropriate.

Preservation - Projects where at least twenty-five percent (25%) of the units have federal Project-based
rent subsidies, and HUD Housing Choice Voucher Program (Section 8) contracts are expiring; or the USDA
Rural Development loans are maturing within 7 years; or the USDA Rural Development restrictive use
covenants have expired; or the OHCS funding source restrictions are expiring within 7 years of the date
of initial application; or the Project needs recapitalization, per capital needs assessment, for issues
arising from physical conditions such as health and safety repair needs, the need for substantial critical
rehabilitation, and building condition as documented in a Capital Needs Assessment; or Projects with
public housing units undergoing a preservation transaction involving a comprehensive recapitalization.

Principal(s) - This means: (1) with respect to a Project owned by a partnership, the partners; (2) with
respect to a Project owned by a limited liability company, the members and managers; and (3) with
respect to a Project owned by a closely held corporation, the shareholders.

Program Funds - The amount of grant funds, loan funds, or tax credit allocation identified in a specific
Program to finance a Project or Projects.

Program Limits - These are the financial limits set by regulation and OHCS on the amount of debt
service, LIHTCs, loan amounts, construction contingency, developer fee, contractor’s profit and overhead
that apply in general to all Programs; and to the per Project basis boost allowed in the LIHTC Program.


Program(s) - A Program is a specific source of state or federal funds subject to a set of required codes or
statutes that provide a methodology to award funds to the public for the development of affordable
housing Projects.


Program Requirements - All terms, conditions, covenants, or other obligations of an Applicant or Owner
(including through their officers, employees, contractors, agents, and assignees) with respect to a
Program from which funding is sought or provided with respect to a Project, including as contained in
relevant statutes, regulations, administrative rules, manuals, codes, OHCS directives, policies, applicable
documents, or otherwise.



                                                                                                             >           «
                                                                                                             tt
                                                                                                             yt
                                                                                                             OREGON HOUSING
                                                                                                             COMMUNITY SERVICES
Project - A low-income multifamily housing development for which funding, in whole or in part, is sought
from or obtained from OHCS.

Qualified Nonprofit Organization - This is an organization described in IRC Section 501(c)(3) or 501(c)(4)
who are exempt from federal income tax under IRC Section 501(a), OHCS determines is not affiliated
with or controlled by a for profit organization and a stated purpose of such organization includes
fostering low-income housing.


Related Entity/Person - These include, but are not limited to; (1) members of a family; (2) a
fiduciary and either a grantor or a beneficiary of a trust; (3) a party and a federally tax-exempt
organization that the party, or members of the party's family, controls; (4) a party and either a
corporation or a partnership in which the party has more than a fifty percent (50%) ownership interest;
(5) two business entities, either corporations or partnerships, where a party has more than a fifty
percent (50%) interest in each; (6) two corporations that are members of the same controlled group; and
(7) two parties engaged in trades or businesses under common      control.

Sponsor —This is an individual, group, or organization that provides resources, support, and leadership
to the Project team and generally “owns” the affordable housing development Project.

Standards Based Evaluation Criteria - These are the standards, benchmarks, and criteria by which OHCS
will evaluate projects in the ORCA process to determine if they meet the requirements for funding.

Visitable - This means that a Project is able to be approached, entered and used by individuals with
mobility impairments including, but not limited to, individuals using wheelchairs.


5) PUBLIC RECORDS
Materials and information submitted to OHCS are subject to public disclosure unless otherwise exempt
from disclosure under ORS 192.355(24) or any other provision of the Oregon Public Records Law.

As of the date of this Manual, ORS 192.355(24) exempts OHCS from releasing to the public the following
records, communications, and information submitted to OHCS by Applicants and recipients of loans,
grants, LIHTCs, or other financial assistance:
    e   Personal and corporate financial statements and information, including tax returns,
    e   Credit reports,
    e   Project appraisals, excluding appraisals obtained in the course of transactions involving an
        interest in real estate that is acquired, leased, rented, exchanged, transferred, or otherwise
        disposed of as part of the project, but only after the transactions have closed and are concluded,
    e   Market studies and analyses,
    e   Articles of incorporation, partnership agreements and operating agreements,
    e   Commitment        letters,
    e   Project Pro Forma and Project operating statements,
    e   Project cost certifications and cost data,
    e   Audits,
    e   Project tenant correspondence (unless confidentiality is waived),
    e   Personal information about a tenant, and
    e   Housing assistance payments.

                                                                                                          >            «
                                                                                                          tt
                                                                                                          yt
                                                                                                          OREGON HOUSING
                                                                                                          COMMUNITY SERVICES
OHCS provides no assurance that any materials provided to OHCS can be protected from public release.


6) WAIVERS
If OHCS acts contrary to or fails to take action in accordance with the GPGM or any other Project
Requirement, such act or omission does not constitute a waiver by OHCS of an obligation of a Project,
person, or other entity to comply with the provisions of the GPGM, other Project Requirements, or
formal commitments made, or establish a precedent for any other Project, person or entity. No waiver,
modification, or change of the GPGM, any OHCS Program Manual, or any other Project Requirement will
be binding upon OHCS unless it is in writing, signed by an authorized agent of OHCS, and consistent with
law.


7) REMEDIES


OHCS may exercise any remedy provided in the GPGM,        in any Program, or in any Project requirement
(including, but not limited to, any associated legal document), or any remedy otherwise available under
law with respect to any violation of applicable Project or Application requirements. OHCS remedies may
include, but are not limited to, rejection of an application, denial of an application, or termination of the
processing of an application.



GENERAL REQUIREMENTS

Owners must satisfy these general requirements in order to obtain a conditional commitment of
resources and for the subsequent resource commitment and disbursement of OHCS resources. For any
third-party reports that are required by OHCS, the date the report was conducted must be less than one
year old at the time of financial closing.


1)   FAIR HOUSING         & CIVIL RIGHTS COMPLIANCE
OHCS requires all Applicants and Recipients of OHCS resources to:
     e   Comply with all applicable state and federal nondiscrimination laws,
     e   Act affirmatively (including the use of appropriate outreach) to ensure those who may be, or are
         at risk of being, underserved are provided with OHCS resources and appropriate accessibility,
     e   Comply with Equal Opportunity Employment standards in hiring and retaining personnel, and
     e   Satisfy any population specific or services standards as required in Program Requirements or as
         set forth in Project agreements.


2) MINORITY, WOMEN, AND/OR EMERGING SMALL BUSINESS (MWESB)
   ENGAGEMENT
Minority, Women,    and / or Emerging Small Businesses (MWESB)      enterprises are those registered with
the State of Oregon as such through the COBID process, or self-identifying as such, certified through the
OHCS approved forms and processes. All Applicants must identify approaches and/or targets for
contracting with MWESB contractors/subcontractors in the construction and operation of the proposed
Project. Recipients must submit a report to OHCS demonstrating outcomes of efforts to contract with
MWESB    contractors/subcontractors.




                                                                                                            OREGON HOUSING
                                                                                                            COMMUNITY SERVICES
3)   IDENTITY OF INTEREST
Applicants must disclose and describe to OHCS all Identities of Interest that exist with respect to the
Applicant. Such disclosures shall be made when the Application is submitted or at any point in the
process where an Identity of Interest may be created if the relationship arises after the Application has
been submitted.


Identities of Interest that are not disclosed may result in disqualification, a cancellation of funding, a
breach of contract or other appropriate measure as determined by OHCS.



4)   MISREPRESENTATION AND                FRAUD
OHCS may disqualify an Applicant or Project, or cancel funding, if the Applicant,     a Co-Applicant, a
Principal, or any representative of these entities makes a material misstatement, omission, or
misrepresentation to OHCS, is currently under investigation by a public body for, has a pending claim,
indictment, suit, action, or other proceeding against them for, or has been convicted of or been
determined by an administrative or judicial (whether criminal or civil) order or judgment to have
committed fraud, misrepresentation, theft, embezzlement, or any other act of moral turpitude
(including, but not limited to any felony or malicious behavior) within the previous ten years. OHCS, in its
sole discretion, may also exercise any and all other remedies available, or otherwise available by law.




5)   PROJECT CHANGES
Applicants must notify OHCS in writing of, and obtain its written consent to, any material change ina
Project. Applicants must notify OHCS promptly when a material change is first identified. OHCS may give
or withhold its consent, or condition its consent, in its reasonable discretion.

For the purposes of applicable funding requirements under grant or loan agreements, or within the
framework of an OHCS funding offering, material change means a change in or relating to the business,
operations or use of capital provided by OHCS that taken as a whole would reasonably be expected to
have a significant effect on the Project budget, housing type and population served, and includes a
decision to implement such a change made by the principal or board of directors of the Applicant,
Project sponsor, or owner.

A “material change” includes, but is not limited to, the following:
     e   Expanding the scope of the Project, which includes, but is not limited to, adding or subtracting
         buildings, units, and design elements that impact the budget and livability of tenants,
     e   Changing Project type,
     e   Switching to a different intended tenant population,
     e   Replacing sponsor and Project ownership that has a financial impact on the Project or on any co-
         developers,
     e   Adding or removing a financing source,
     e   Showing a funding gap, after funding approval and prior to closing and construction start, of
         more than ten percent (10%) of OHCS investment (exclusive of Tax Credits) or changing the
         number of units by ten percent (10%) or more is a substantial material change. In the case of a

                                                                                                             >            «
                                                                                                             tt
                                                                                                             yt
                                                                                                             OREGON HOUSING
                                                                                                             COMMUNITY SERVICES
         funding gap, Applicant must either locate additional funding to reduce the gap or forfeit the
         funding reservation.

OHCS will determine whether a change in a Project is material and that determination is final. If OHCS
determines that a change in a Project is material, the Project will no longer be in compliance with any
conditional commitments made by the Applicant, and the Applicant must repeat the Application process.


6)   FEASIBILITY AND VIABILITY ANALYSIS
OHCS will only allocate such Program resources to a Project as it determines are necessary for the
financial feasibility and viability of the Project. OHCS will evaluate each proposed Project based on
relevant factors, including but not limited to the following items:
     e   Project cost, including the reasonableness of cost per unit, developer fees and overhead,
         consultant fees, builder profit and overhead, and syndication costs.
     e   Sources and uses of funds and the total financing planned for the Project, including the ability of
         the Project to service debt.
     e   The proceeds or receipts expected to be generated by reason of tax benefits.
     e   The use of federal funds and other assistance.
     e   Other factors that may be relevant to the economic feasibility of the Project such as the area
         economy or the housing market.

Feasibility limits may be used in the determination of the amount of funding OHCS reserves for each
project. If Projects fall outside the limits, OHCS may request Projects be brought in line with OHCS
maximums and other limits prior to moving forward with consideration of an award. They may include
but are not limited to the following:
    e   AMl and/or Rent levels per funding source requirements including the number of units needed
         and unit mix per funding source required.
     e   Verification and reasonableness of other income projected in income projections.
     e   Replacement Reserves of $450 per unit.
     e   Maximum    per unit expenses are reasonable and supported by historical, third party, or industry
         standard analysis.
     e   If using OAHTC, the Project demonstrates the ability to meet annual passthrough requirements
         where Project is not exempt.
     e   If applicable, tenant relocation plan and tenant survey must be submitted for approval and
         included in the Project budget and Uses of Funds.


Based on this evaluation, OHCS will determine which Program resources are to be reserved for the
Project and estimate the amount of each resource assigned. Projects exceeding the maximums may be
underwritten to these standards for determination of resources awarded.


7) APPRAISAL REQUIREMENTS
OHCS requires an appraisal for every Project as part of the required documentation for an Application,
either in combination with a Market Study or as a stand-alone appraisal prepared in conformance with
Oregon Statutes, FIRREA standards, and OHCS policy.
     e   FIRREA standards require that appraisals must be ordered by the lender or other financial
         institution. The bank or financial institution must engage the appraiser, who cannot have an
         identity of interest to the lender, borrower, seller or buyer. The bank or financial institution must

                                                                                                           >            «
                                                                                                           tt
                                                                                                           yt
                                                                                                           OREGON HOUSING
                                                                                                           COMMUNITY SERVICES
        define the purpose of the appraisal and provide guidance to the appraiser as to the bank or
        financial institution requirements.
            o    For Projects who currently have restricted rents, the appraisal must include an “As is”
                 Restricted Rent Value.
    e   For Projects currently receiving or will receive at time of sale a project-based subsidy, the
        appraisal must include an “as is” restricted rent value taking into consideration the subsidy is
        generally marked to market.
    e   For Projects who do not currently have restricted rents, the appraisal must include an “as is”
        Market Rent Value.
    e = Inall appraisals an “as is” Market Value for land must be included, which reflects all restrictions
        on the land.
    e   OHCS must be named as an intended user of the appraisal and OHCS must be provided an
        opportunity to discuss the report with its preparer.
    e   OHCS does not waive requirements for appraisals.


Applicant must obtain OHCS approval of the scope of work in the letter of engagement before the
appraiser is engaged.

Deadlines for delivery of appraisal to OHCS:
    e   Standard ORCA process — Acceptable appraisal must be received at or before Financial Eligibility
        step to receive approval to move past that step.
    e   9% LIHTC programs — Acceptable appraisal must be received within ninety (90) days of award.
    e   4% LIHTC program — Acceptable appraisal must be received as soon as available, but not later
        than thirty (30) days prior to construction close.

8) CONSTRUCTION CLOSING
For standard ORCA applications, the Applicant must provide OHCS a completed and signed Closing Date
Commitment Letter formally scheduling their Construction Closing, a final development budget, final
sources of funds, and documents to substantiate the final budget in order to receive a Reservation Letter
and begin the closing process.

For 9% LIHTC transactions, Applicant(s) must give OHCS at least 90 days written notice of the scheduled
Construction Closing. At least 30 days prior to the Construction Closing, but after the general contractor
bids have been received, the Applicant must submit to OHCS the Project’s final development budget,
final sources of funds, and documentation to substantiate the final budget.

For 4% LIHTC transactions, the Applicant must submit to OHCS the Project’s final development budget,
final sources of funds, and documentation to substantiate the final budget items at least 30 days prior to
OHCS staff submission to OHCS Finance Committee for approval.

9) PROGRAM AFFORDABILITY AGREEMENTS
Any Program funding is subject to the execution and, as appropriate, recording of legal documents
satisfactory to OHCS. Certain documents (such as Operating Agreements and Declarations of Restrictive
Covenants) include long-term affordability requirements. Failure to execute, record, or adhere to these
Affordability Agreements and other legal documents, including but not limited to their restrictive
covenants or resultant equitable servitudes will result in the termination of Application processing, loss
of funding, and recoupment of disbursed funding.
                                                                                                           aa

                                                                                                           OREGON HOUSING
                                                                                                           COMMUNITY SERVICES
10)       MINIMUM        AFFORDABILITY REQUIREMENTS
Each OHCS funding source will have income and/or rent restrictions. Program Requirements will specify
the applicable restrictions. When multiple funding sources are used, the most restrictive income and/or
rent requirement applicable to the Project units in question applies.

For a Project that includes unrestricted units, OHCS has several standards that must be adhered to in
order to be eligible for and receive funding.
      e   Project must have affordability restrictions placed on a minimum     of 10 units or 10% of total
          units, whichever is greater.
      e   Funding may not be used for the acquisition, construction, or rehabilitation of, or for any other
          costs relating to unrestricted units.
      e   Shared costs including, but not limited to, roof, parking, or infrastructure costs, may be financed
          in part using OHCS resources in the manner described in OAR 813.380
      e   The allocable cost of tenant facilities, such as swimming pools, other recreational facilities, and
          parking areas may be included provided there is no separate fee for the use of the facilities, and
          they are made available on a comparable basis to all tenants in the project.


11)      CORE-DEVELOPMENT MANUAL; ARCHITECTUAL GUIDANCE AND
      STANDARDS
OHCS has established design and construction standards in the Core-Development Manual located at:
https://www.oregon.gov/ohcs/development/pages/core-develooment-manual.aspx.

These standards include accessibility requirements, climate resilience recommendations, energy
efficiency guidelines and other architectural instructions supporting affordable housing development.


12)       DEPARTMENT         OF STATE LANDS (DSL) WETLANDS                   POLICY AND        REVIEW
Applicants must provide tax lot numbers of every parcel for submission to DSL. If a Project has its Impact
Assessment application approved and receives a Comfort Letter and Conditional Hold of resources, OHCS
will conduct an initial review for wetlands. If OHCS believes that there are wetlands present on site, it
will send the information to DSL to verify the presence of regulated wetlands. If DSL determines
wetlands are present or likely to be present, the Applicants must hire a qualified wetland consultant to
conduct a wetlands compliance verification and boundary delineation for submission to DSL. DSL may
require additional site and/or design requirements for the Project.


13)       BUREAU      OF LABOR AND          INDUSTRIES (BOLI) REQUIREMENTS
Applicants must contact BOLI for a determination of whether prevailing wage laws apply to the proposed
Project. A BOLI determination letter is required for every Project as part of the required documentation
for an application to be approved at the Financial Eligibility step of an Application.

Although BOLI is the only body that can make a determination regarding the applicability of prevailing
wage requirements, as a general matter the Project may be subject to state prevailing requirements if
the Applicant receives $750,000 or more in public funds and does not meet the following criteria:
      e   Sixty percent (60%) or more of the occupants have incomes less than or equal to 60% of area
          median income (AMI);

                                                                                                             >               «
                                                                                                                tt
                                                                                                                yt
                                                                                                                OREGON HOUSING
                                                                                                                COMMUNITY SERVICES
      e   The Project is not more than 4 stories in height; or
      e   No portion of the Project, even if not constructed or contracted for construction by the
          Applicant, constitutes public works.

At any time during development, any change in the Project could cause the BOLI determination to be
void. Applicant should request updated determinations from BOLI if there are changes to the Project
after receiving a determination letter.

This notice does not constitute legal advice. OHCS is not responsible for the determination of prevailing
wages status on projects. OHCS will not increase funding to fill gaps resulting from the Applicant’s failure
to budget for prevailing wage requirements and may instead rescind such reservation or recoup
allocated resources.


14)       HISTORIC PRESERVATION
Buildings 50 years old or older may have historical significance. If the Project involves a building 50 years
old or older, the Applicant must contact the State Historic Preservation Office (SHPO) to determine if the
development will impact a building of historical significance and to understand SHPO requirements.
State Historic Preservation Office information can be found here:
https://www.oregon.gov/oprd/oh/pages/default.aspx

15)       CONSISTENCY WITH STATE CONSOLIDATED                        PLAN
OHCS is required to develop a comprehensive state plan for low-income Oregonians (OAR 456.572).
OHCS has adopted the state and local Consolidated Plans as its comprehensive state plan. All Projects
must be consistent with the state and local Consolidated Plans at the time the Impact Assessment
application is submitted.



16)       ENVIRONMENTAL ASSURANCE
OHCS expects that Projects will be developed and operated in an environmentally safe and sound
manner. Applicants and owners of Projects must comply with all applicable environmental laws. They
must obtain appropriate environmental studies with respect to Project development and show they are
mitigating any negative conditions found through those studies to OHCS’ satisfaction. They also must
design, develop, and operate the Project to ensure it provides safe, sanitary, and otherwise habitable
housing for tenants; adequately protects the value of any security interest of OHCS in the Project; and
will function as intended for any applicable affordability period.




                                                                                                           >             «
                                                                                                           tt
                                                                                                             a
                                                                                                           OREGON   HOUSING
                                                                                                           COMMUNITY   SERVICES
 GENERAL UNDERWRITING

 1) PROGRAM           LIMITS
 OHCS has established the following program limits (Program Limits) for evaluating Projects. The
 Application should demonstrate compliance with all Program Limits. OHCS may reduce a Project’s
 budget and funding amounts to reflect the Program Limits listed below. Applicants must explain and
 provide evidence of mitigating factors for any variations. Using one funding source to pay for an
 ineligible item with another funding source is not allowed.


 Operating Expenses
 Operating expenses will be reviewed for reasonableness and OHCS may require Applicants to submit
 documentation to support the long-term Operating Budget. OHCS will require a minimum and a
 maximum that are supported by historical, third-party, and industry standard analysis. Projects that
 exceed OHCS maximum expenses per unit may be either rejected or have funding restricted by feasibility
 limits. Projects below the OHCS minimum may be required to resubmit with adequate amounts reflected
 in their budget to meet minimum standards, or similarly be rejected.



 Minimum       Debt Coverage Ratio
 Pro forma must model a minimum debt service coverage ratio of 1.15 to 1.30 (depending on funding) on
 all “must-pay” primary debt. OHCS may reduce Program Resources for any Project with a debt coverage
 ratio that exceeds 1.30:1. OHCS reserve the right to provide exceptions consistent with the requirements
 of other funders.

 The project maintains a positive cash flow through the 30-year proforma period, unless paired with 4%
 LIHTC. If paired with 4% LIHTC, positive cash flow through a minimum of 20 years is required.

 If a Project does not have any permanent debt, the Project must meet a 30-year positive cash flow
 requirement.


 Maximum       Construction Contingencies
 The maximum construction contingency is 10% for rehabilitation Projects and 5% for new construction
 Projects. The percentages apply to hard costs, site work, and contractor profit and overhead. The
 contingency maximum is evaluated using all construction contingencies combined, i.e. owner, contractor,
 other.



 Maximum       Developer Fees
 OHCS allowable developer fees are specified in the table below; calculated as:
 (developer fee plus consultant fees) divided by (total Project cost minus acquisition cost, developer fee,
 consultant fees, and capitalized reserves).

 Non-LIHTC Projects
                      New                                                             LIFT Acquisition
Project Size                                    Acquisition/ Rehab                           q
                  Construction                                                              Only

                                                                                                          -           ‘fs
                                                                                                          tt
                                                                                                            a
                                                                                                          OREGON   HOUSING       w!
                                                                                                          COMMUNITY   SERVICES
 <31 Units                   16%                               16%                            5%

                                                + $4,000/unit OR + $5,500/unit for
                                                           Preservation

31-75 Units                  14%                               14%                            5%

                                                + $4,000/unit OR + $5,500/unit for
                                                           Preservation

   76-100                    12%                               12%                            5%
      Units
                                                + $4,000/unit OR + $5,500/unit for
                                                           Preservation

100+ Units                   10%                               10%                            5%

                                                + $4,000/unit OR + $5,500/unit for
                                                           Preservation




  Projects using LIHTC
               9% LIHTC
Project          New                    9% LIHTC                     4% LIHTC            4% LIHTC
 Size                    .         Acquisition/ Rehab          New Construction      Acquisition/Rehab
              Construction

                                          20%                                               22%
 <31                                               ‘
 Un               18%               + 94,000/unit OR                   20%           + $4,000/unit OR
   nits                             + $5,500/unit for                                + $5,500/unit for
                                      Preservation                                      Preservation

                                          18%                                               20%
31-75                                              .
 Unit             16%               + 94,000/unit OR                   18%           + $4,000/unit OR
   nits                             + $5,500/unit for                                + §5,500/unit for
                                       Preservation                                     Preservation

                                          16%                                               18%
76-100                                             ‘
 on               14%               + $4,000/unit OR                   16%           + $4,000/unit OR
   nits                             + $5,500/unit for                                + $5,500/unit for
                                      Preservation                                      Preservation

 100+                                                                                       16%
    .             12%                     14%                          14%
 Units
                                                                                     + $4,000/unit OR


                                                                                                         -              «
                                                                                                         tt
                                                                                                           a
                                                                                                         OREGON HOUSING     wo!
                                                                                                         COMMUNITY SERVICES
                               + $4,000/unit OR                                       + §5,500/unit for
                               + $5,500/unit for                                         Preservation
                                  Preservation




Deferred Developer Fees
Proforma must demonstrate deferred developer fee repayment by year 15, if applicable.

Maximum Contractor Profit and Overhead
When the general contractor is a Principal, Related Entity/Person or otherwise has an Identity of Interest
with the Applicant or Project owner, the general contractor’s maximum combined profit, general
conditions and overhead is limited to 10% of total rehabilitation/construction costs plus site work costs.
All other contractors will be limited to 14% of total rehabilitation/construction costs plus site work costs.


Close Out/ Final Application Requirement
OHCS requires submission of a final close out application, these details will vary from Project to Project
and are shared with the Sponsor as the Project moves toward lease up.

Retainage Policy
Ten percent (10%) of the largest OHCS-funded capital resource in a housing Project is held as retainage
on all OHCS funded multifamily Projects until all the conditions for release listed below are met to OHCS’
satisfaction (unless there is HOME and/or HTF funding in the Project).


When HOME or HTF is a resource in a Project, the retainage will apply to, and be based on the larger of
either the HOME or HTF amount in the Project even when it is not the largest capital resource in the
Project.



Conditions for Release of Retainage
Projects     with   LIHTC as a Resource:

For Projects that have federal tax credits (LIHTC), the retainage can be released at Certificate of
Occupancy (CO) or, if agreed to by OHCS, Temporary Certificate of Occupancy (TCO). In order to release
retainage at CO/TCO for project with LIHTC resources, the following requirements must be met:

    e      The Sponsor must provide the CO for all sites and buildings or Certificate of Substantial
           Completion. TCO may be acceptable at OHCS’ discretion.
    e      Monthly reporting must be up to date.
    e      OHCS must have received an updated Application.

OHCS retains the right to release holdbacks on construction closing if these funds are needed as a cash
collateral account for a public bond offering.



Projects     using State   HOME    or HTF:


                                                                                                           -              «
                                                                                                             al
                                                                                                               a
                                                                                                             OREGON HOUSING     w
                                                                                                             COMMUNITY SERVICES
For projects using HOME and HTF resources the following steps are necessary in order to release
retainage:

    e    The Sponsor must provide the CO for all sites and buildings or Certificate of Substantial
           Completion. TCO may be acceptable at OHCS’ discretion.
    e      =The final construction inspection must have occurred, and any identified outstanding items
           satisfactorily resolved.
    e      HOME and HTF units must be occupied and final tenant income, rent, and demographic
           information must be reported to OHCS.

The criteria listed above is not applicable to HUD related sources offered through other participating
jurisdictions.




Projects     using State-funded       resources   without   any OHCS   federal   resources:

For Projects without LIHTC, additional documentation is required and Projects must be further in the
completion process before retainage can be released. For these Projects, the following items must be
met prior to release of retainage.

    e    All close-out materials and items listed in the Reservation and Conditions letter (RCL) have been
           received and are satisfactory to OHCS.
    e      Core-Development Manual (CDM) forms A-AS, A-AF, and A-CR and all associated documentation
           have been received and are satisfactory to OHCS.
    e    All construction draws have been processed.
    e    The CO has been received.




Cost Savings Clause
Any cost savings clause included in the final, executed owner-contractor agreement must include the
OHCS Production Analyst assigned to the Project in the distribution list for the submission of all
contractor draw requests and change orders as submitted to the lender throughout the Project. Any cost
savings may result in a reduction of Program Resources.



2) PROGRAM THRESHOLD REQUIREMENTS
The Applicant must demonstrate it is in compliance with all applicable Minimum Threshold
Requirements. Failure to do so will disqualify the Applicant from receiving any Program Resources.



Asset Management Compliance
Applicant’s current portfolio of Projects monitored by OHCS must comply with required Program and
OHCS regulations. OHCS will evaluate each Applicant using a standardized internal process reviewing
asset management and compliance categories, including the following:
    e      Most recent rating received for management       reviews.
    e      Physical inspections.
    e    Tenant file reviews.                                                                                     :

                                                                                                         tt
                                                                                                           a
                                                                                                         OREGON   HOUSING        w!
                                                                                                         COMMUNITY    SERVICES
    e   Real Estate Assessment Center (REAC) scores.
    e   Submission of required reporting including financial audits and certifications of continuing
        program compliance (CCPC’s).
    e   Owner and management cooperation with reporting and communication.
    e   Need or outcome for a community evaluation within the last year.



Readiness to Proceed
Site Control: The Applicant must have and submit evidence verifying control of the land and other real
property necessary for the Project by the Request deadline.

Acceptable evidence of site control is a document evidencing legal site control with a complete and
accurate legal description of the property. The documentation must be valid. The following are examples
of acceptable evidence for these purposes:
    e   recorded deed or conveyance showing the Applicant has ownership,
    e   purchase and sale agreement,
    e   option to purchase, or
    e   option for a long-term lease with a duration satisfactory to OHCS

OHCS may accept other evidence at its sole discretion.

Applicants must either ensure the name on the evidence of site control and the name on the Application
are exactly the same or, when purchasing or leasing through a nominee, clearly explain and document
how the Applicant controls the entity that controls the site.

The site control document also must identify the exact same area as the Project site listed in the
Application and the exact same cost for the land and/or existing buildings for the Project referenced in
the Application’s development budget. If either is not exactly the same, the Applicant must provide a
narrative description and supporting documentation adequately explaining the variation.

If your Project will be phased, the tax lots must already be parceled by submission of the Impact
Assessment application of the ORCA.

Zoning: The Project Request must include the Certification of Zoning executed by the appropriate zoning
authority indicating the real estate is properly zoned for the type of intended Project.




Additional Federal Project Resources Status
Requests must provide evidence that an application for any federal resources identified (rental or capital)
has been submitted and remains active.




Adequacy of Development Schedule
Request must include a development schedule clearly demonstrating that the Project will meet all
required ORCA time frames.


                                                                                                           >             «
                                                                                                           tt
                                                                                                             a
                                                                                                           OREGON   HOUSING       w!
                                                                                                           COMMUNITY   SERVICES
Adequacy of the Environmental Checklist
The Applicant must submit      a completed Environmental Checklist. The Environmental Checklist must
include all of the following information:

    e   the suitability of the site,
    e   the distances to services,
    e   transportation and schools,
    e   the nature of existing structures,
    e   soil suitability,
    e   environmental hazards,
    e   safety concerns,
    e   noise problems,
    e   air quality issues,
    e   historic preservation,
    e   flood plain and wetlands issues, and
    e   solid waste, wastewater and storm water concerns.

The Applicant must provide a satisfactory mitigation plan for any material adverse information revealed
in the Environmental Checklist.




Project Feasibility and Viability
OHCS evaluates all Projects for financial feasibility and viability, adequacy of construction, developer
capacity and ownership integrity. The following Guidelines provide guidance for OHCS staff and
Applicants in preparing and reviewing relevant information.



Financial Feasibility
Sources and Uses Statement


The Applicant must submit the Sources and Uses statement and a completed proforma with its Request
or as otherwise required by OHCS. The Sources and Uses statement must describe all sources to be used
to pay for all uses. The statement must identify each separate source and use and the estimated timing
of final approval for each. The sources and uses must balance fully and no source may be unknown.
OHCS may remove a request if any sources or uses are identified as unknown at the time of review.

There are several critical factors and standards that all Projects’ sources and uses must adhere to. Failure
to adhere to these factors and standards may result in removal of the Project from consideration for
funding until the deficiency can be further addressed or a waiver is provided by OHCS staff, at its
discretion. These factors and standards requirements are listed below in Table A.



Table A: Sources and Uses Requirements




                                                                                                           -             «
                                                                                                           tt
                                                                                                             a
                                                                                                           OREGON   HOUSING       w!
                                                                                                           COMMUNITY   SERVICES
Construction Inflation Factor / Cost   The percentage of total construction cost not to exceed the
Escalator (applies to separate line    Consumer Price Index as calculated by the Department of
item above and beyond construction     Administrative Services for the year in which the Financial
bid)                                   Eligibility application proforma is submitted.
Soft Costs Inflation Factor/
                                       5%   Soft Cost Contingency
Cost Escalator

 Contractor Profit, General
Conditions, and Overhead —             14% of total construction cost or less
Non-Identity of Interest

 Contractor Profit, General
Conditions, and Overhead —             10% of total construction cost or less
Identity of Interest

Soft Costs                             30% of Total Project Cost or less

                                       Minimum of 3 months and maximum of 12 months of operating
Operating Reserve
                                       expenses + debt service


Lease Up Reserve                       Submit cash flow analysis utilized to determine the amount


Reserve for Replacement                Submit evidence of the partner lenders and/or investors to
(Capitalized)                          document requirement


                                       Submit a copy of each consultant contract that itemizes the
Consultant Contract                    services to be performed by each consultant and the amount of
                                       the consultant fee for each service or group of services.


Operating Pro Forma
The Applicant must submit an operating pro forma for the Project satisfactory to OHCS at each step of
the ORCA (Impact Assessment, Financial Eligibility, and Commitment). Each pro forma must demonstrate
the financial feasibility and viability of the Project for a typical thirty (30) year permanent loan period,
with more rigor and strictures placed on each pro forma received, with the pro forma submitted at the
Commitment step of the ORCA being the final pro forma on which resources will be awarded.


Different Programs may have different compliance periods and OHCS may require that the operating pro
forma address relevant compliance periods as resources are recommended          after initial Impact
Assessment Application. In addition, the Applicant must demonstrate that the Project will continue to be
economically feasible and have adequate replacement reserves for at least the first thirty years or as
approved by OHCS.


Absent a long-term commitment (in excess of 10 years), Projects with rental assistance must
demonstrate financial feasibility excluding the rent subsidy.




                                                                                                          OREGON HOUSING
                                                                                                          COMMUNITY SERVICES
If the Project includes commercial and/or other non-residential space, Applicant(s) must submit the
following additional information and supporting documentation with both their Financial Eligibility pro
forma and their pro forma submitted at the Commitment step in addition to the residential pro forma
requested above:

    e       A breakdown of the total residential and commercial Project costs,
    e   A     list of the financing sources for the commercial areas,
    e       Ownership entity and management agent of the commercial areas,
    e       A 30-year operating pro forma for both the residential and commercial areas
    e       A breakdown of total unrestricted/market rate units and rent restricted units in compliance with
            OAR 813.380 and OHCS minimum        restricted unit requirement, and
    e       Such other information as OHCS may require.




Every pro forma for each step in the ORCA process also must reflect the following:

    e       Either a vacancy ratio of not less than 5% - 7% or an explanation in the Financial Description for a
            different assumption.
    e       Annual growth assumptions for income of 2%.
    e       Annual growth assumptions for expenses of 3%.
    e       Anexpense     ratio and expenses per units properly scaled to the size and scope of the
            improvements, the cost of local utilities and taxes and the makeup of tenant population served.
    e       Capitalize replacement reserves with an amount that is either justified by a 30-year replacement
            reserve analysis, or approved by OHCS.
    e       Replacement reserves of $450 per unit per year.
    e       Operating Reserves of six (6) months or less of operating expenses + debt service and/or lender’s
            conditions.
    e       By the Financial Eligibility step in the ORCA process, construction costs must be supported with
            contractor prepared report aligned with Uniformat standards i.e. Construction Cost Estimate.




Debt Underwriting
Many Projects require hard amortizing debt as one of the sources of funds. If there is hard amortizing
debt, the proposed debt service coverage and breakeven ratios must be in conformance with OHCS
limits and industry norms noted previously. If there is no hard amortizing debt, then the pro forma must
demonstrate a stable positive cash flow over 30 years.


3) DEVELOPMENT TEAM CAPACITY


Confirmation of the Development Team and Entity
Co-Developers identified in the Application must be confirmed in all references to the Development
Team at every step of the ORCA process, including in the proformas.



                                                                                                             >               «
                                                                                                               tt
                                                                                                                 a
                                                                                                               OREGON   HOUSING       w!
                                                                                                               COMMUNITY   SERVICES
Previous Experience
    e   The Applicant must demonstrate that the persons or organizations materially involved in the
        acquisition, construction, rehabilitation, development, or improvement of the Project have:
    e   Successfully completed a multi-family housing project of a comparable number of housing units,
        of similar complexity, and for a similar target population as the proposed Project;
    e   The necessary level of staffing and financial capacity to successfully manage development and
        operation of its current project portfolio including all current and pending projects and
        Applications;
    e   Successfully completed previous Projects with a similar Program allocation.
    e   If using a development consultant to show this capacity, the Applicant must also submit a copy
        of the executed contract detailing terms, conditions, and responsibilities, and
    e   Completed and met minimum expectations in the Development Team Capacity standards based
        evaluation criteria in the ORCA, as well as Prequalification standards around experience prior to
        applying.


Property Management Capacity
The Request must include a document detailing the experience level of the proposed property
management firm that demonstrates it has successfully managed:
    e   A multi-family housing project of   acomparable number of housing units and/or of a similar
        complexity as the proposed Project; and
    e   Anassisted or subsidized multi-family housing project with local, state, and/or federal operating
        requirements comparable to those of the requested Program.


An owner must submit a proposed new agent plan and qualifications to OHCS Asset Management &
Compliance at least 60 days prior to any change. OHCS will approve, conditionally approve, or
disapprove the proposed agent.

Management agents and/or Owners responsible for LIHTC compliance must attend LIHTC training and
receive a certification from a nationally recognized LIHTC compliance trainer.


Financial Capacity
Applicant’s financial condition must not contain any adverse conditions that might materially impair its
ability to perform its financial obligations as sponsor.



4) OWNERSHIP INTEGRITY


In order to qualify for funding, neither Applicant nor any member or principal within the Project
ownership or management groups may meet any of the following criteria:
    e   Is currently under investigation for, indicted for or have been convicted of fraud or moral
        turpitude within the previous ten years;
    e   ls or has been involved in a bankruptcy proceeding within the previous five years;
    e   Has been debarred or otherwise sanctioned by Agency or any other federal program, or
    e   Has outstanding charges owed to OHCS from previous applications or Projects.


                                                                                                        >             «
                                                                                                           tt
                                                                                                           yt
                                                                                                         OREGON HOUSING
                                                                                                         COMMUNITY SERVICES
Applicants must attest to compliance with this requirement through the Prequalification process to be
eligible to apply for the ORCA.



ADMINISTRATIVE GUIDELINES

1)     CONDITIONAL COMMITMENT                / COMMITMENT            LETTERS
Failure to satisfy any conditions in the Comfort Letter, OHCS Letter of Intent, or Reservation and
Conditions Letter may result in the revocation of the Funding commitment and the exercise of other
available remedies.



2) INAPPROPRIATE USE OF RESOURCES
Utilization of resources outside of approved parameters may result in funding recapture, breach of
contract and or any and all other remedies as available to OHCS.



3)     LEASEHOLD      INTERESTS
If the Applicant proposes a lease instead of fee ownership for any part of the Project, then the Owner of
the land and holders of any liens or encumbrances must subordinate their interests to the Affordability
Agreements.


4) USE OF OHCS LEGAL DOCUMENTS
Applicant must execute and (if requested) record all documents required by OHCS.

OHCS will not accept changes to the template language or side letters unless OHCS is satisfied that it is
necessary for the Project to move forward and receives approval from the Department of Justice (DOJ).
Applicants must allow adequate time for OHCS and DO) to review. No entity or their representatives
(borrowers, partners, or attorneys) should contact DOJ directly. Applicant is responsible for all legal and
administrative costs to complete and negotiate required documents.



5) PROGRAM            CHARGES

General Charges (assessed during ORCA and underwriting steps)


Type                    Amount                Description/Comments


General Application     {$2,500               Charged for submission of a complete impact assessment
                                              application.

Reservation-Grant       [1% of reservation    Not applicable when paired with 9% LIHTC.
                        amount




                                                                                                          >              «
                                                                                                            tt
                                                                                                            yt
                                                                                                            OREGON HOUSING
                                                                                                            COMMUNITY SERVICES
Reservation - Loan      1.5% of reservation     Not applicable when paired with 9% LIHTC.
                        amount

Document                S750 per recorded
Preparation and         document
Recording

Packet Review           S300 per review         Applies to Management Agent Packet reviews only outside
                                                of initial project financing.

Recipient Charge        <$300k = $1,000         After a funding reservation is issued, invoiced at closing.
                                                Applies to all capital resources.
                        >$300k = $2,000

                        >S$300k with LIHTC =
                        $2,500

Scattered Site Charge   $1,500 per additional
                        site

9% LIHTC

Type                    Amount                  Description/Comments

9% Application          $1,000                  In addition to the General Application charge.

9%   Reservation        9.5% of annual          Charged at closing.
                        allocation

9% Late Carryover       $1,000 plus $200 per lf carryover application is received after December 1“.
                        business day.
                        S$100/hour for re-
                        evaluation

LIHTC Late Submittal    $1,000 plus $100 per More than 120 days after placed in service.
Final Application       month. $100 per
                        hour for re-
                        evaluation



A% LIHTC

Type                    Amount                  Description/Comments

A% Application          $2,500                  In addition to the General Application charge.

4%   Reservation        12% of annual           Charged at closing.
                        allocation



                                                                                                              >             «
                                                                                                              tt
                                                                                                                a
                                                                                                              OREGON   HOUSING
                                                                                                              COMMUNITY   SERVICES
Average Income          Either $450/unit one LIFT is not eligible for Average Income.
                        time charge at
                        closing OR $15 per
                        unit per year
                        monitoring during
                        compliance period

LIHTC Late Submittal    $1,000 plus $100 per More than 120 days after placed in service.
Final Application       month. $100 per
                        hour for   re-
                        evaluation




Tax-Exempt Conduit Bonds

Type                    Amount                Description/Comments

Conduit Bond            $1,500                In addition to the ORCA Application charge.
Application

Issuance Charge         1.5%                  Charged up front on the full tax-exempt portion of the
                                              bond.




Annual Charge on        0.25%                 Charged annually on the remaining outstanding balance of
Balance                                       the full bond (tax-exempt and taxable if there is a taxable
                                              tail).




Type                    Amount                Description/Comments

Agricultural            S200                  For on-farm developments
Workforce Housing
Tax Credit (AWHTC)

Predevelopment          $500

Land Acquisition        S500

Portfolio Stabilization [S500
Investment (PSI)

Monitoring Charges

Type                    Amount                Description/Comments


                                                                                                            >             «
                                                                                                            tt
                                                                                                              a
                                                                                                            OREGON   HOUSING       w!
                                                                                                            COMMUNITY   SERVICES
Non-LIHTC               S25/unit/year              Monitoring charges are not stacked. If unit is funded by
Monitoring                                         more than one source, the largest eligible monitoring charge
                                                   will be used.




LIHTC Monitoring        S40/unit/year for thelFor 4% and 9% projects.
                        first 15 years,
                        S30/unit/year after
                        15 years.

Conduit Bond            S10/unit/year              For conduit bonds if there is no other OHCS funding source.
Monitoring

Utility Consumption     [$100 plus $3/unit         Applies to Utility Consumption   Modeling used when
Monitoring                                         standard models are not adopted.




*This is not an exhaustive list of OHCS charges. Please check Program Manuals for any additional
program-specific charges, and more details on the charges.

6)   PROJECT DISQUALIFICATION / CANCELLATION
In addition to other available remedies, OHCS may disqualify a Project and Application, cancel any
conditional commitment or allocation of resources, and recoup any allocated or otherwise disbursed
resources if the Applicant or Owner, or any of their agents, fails to meet any of the following criteria:

Comply with the requirements and policies of OHCS, including those outlined in this Manual,
Comply with the terms, conditions, obligations, and restrictions in the ORCA, the Application, the
Reservation Letter, or other legal documents for the Project, or
Timely satisfy any or all Project or ORCA requirements.

7)   PROJECT /APPLICATION                 DENIAL
OHCS may reject a Request where the Applicant, Owner, Principal, or other Participant with respect to
the proposed Project, previously has:


     e   Failed to complete projects in accordance with requests or certified plans presented to OHCS or
         other public or private allocating agencies.
     e   Failed to complete a project within the time schedule required or budget indicated in the
         request.
     e   Failed to effectively utilize previously allocated program funds and notified of such failure to
         meet appropriate utilization in advance of ORCA application submittal.
     e   Been found to be in non-compliance with program rules as evidenced by OHCS or other public or
         private allocating agency project monitoring and missed the cure time deadline given in writing.
     e   Been debarred by OHCS or other state, federal or local governmental agency.



                                                                                                              >            «
                                                                                                              tt
                                                                                                              yt
                                                                                                              OREGON HOUSING
                                                                                                              COMMUNITY SERVICES
      e   Is currently under investigation or has been convicted within the last ten (10) years of criminal
          fraud, misrepresentation, misuse of funds, or moral turpitude or currently is indicted for such an
          offense.
      e   Been subject to a bankruptcy proceeding within the last five (5) years.
      e   Otherwise displayed an unwillingness or inability to comply with OHCS requirements.


OHCS may disapprove any Application if, in its judgment, the proposed Project is not consistent with the
goals of providing decent, safe and sanitary housing for low-income persons. OHCS may impose
additional conditions on Project sponsors for any Project as part of the Application, review, evaluation, or
allocation processes.


8)    OHCS SOLE DISCRETION
OHCS may determine, in its sole discretion, whether the third-party letters of interest or intent, award,
conditional commitment letters, or commitment letters are satisfactory, and whether a lender or
investor possesses the financial or other capacity to make a specific loan or investment. A change in the
Project’s financing structure or financing terms after conditional commitment of OHCS funds must be
brought to the attention of OHCS. OHCS may in its sole discretion re-underwrite the Project, which may
result in all or a part of OHCS resources being reduced by or returned to OHCS.


9)    NO REPRESENTATION            OR WARRANTY
Issuance of an OHCS funding resource conditional commitment shall not constitute or be construed as a
representation or warranty as to the feasibility or viability of the Project, or the Project's ongoing
capacity for success, or any conclusions with respect to any matter of federal or state law. All OHCS
resources are subject to various state and federal regulations governing the specific program from which
they are obtained, and Applicants are responsible for the determination of their Project’s eligibility and
compliance consistent with all Project Requirements.

10)       DECISIONS AND REVIEWS
Conditional commitments, commitments, allocations, or awards (collectively, Determinations) subject to
State Housing Stability Council review under ORS 456.561 are contingent, among other things, upon
Council approval of those Determinations or supporting funding and OHCS receipt of funding from
funding partners (including State and federal sources). The Council may approve, reject, modify, or
further condition funding awards submitted for its review, thereby directly or indirectly impacting OHCS
Determinations.




                                                                                                              >            «
                                                                                                              tt
                                                                                                              yt
                                                                                                              OREGON HOUSING
                                                                                                              COMMUNITY SERVICES
