Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Main Page Main Page Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikimedia Foundation MediaWiki Meta-Wiki Wikimedia Outreach Multilingual Wikisource Wikispecies Wikibooks Wikidata Wikifunctions Wikimania Wikinews Wikiquote Wikisource Wikiversity Wikivoyage Wiktionary Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Welcome to Wikipedia , the free encyclopedia that anyone can edit . 279,128 active editors 7,114,368 articles in English From today's featured article Paper describing Tarrare's medical history Tarrare was a French showman, soldier and spy noted for his unusual appetite and eating habits. Able to eat vast amounts of meat, he was constantly hungry; his parents could not provide for him and he was turned out of the family home as a teenager. Tarrare travelled around France in the company of a band of prostitutes and thieves before becoming the warm-up act for a travelling charlatan . In this act, he swallowed corks , stones , live animals , and a whole basketful of apples. He then took this act to Paris , where he worked as a street performer . At the start of the War of the First Coalition , Tarrare joined the French Revolutionary Army , where even quadrupling the standard military ration was unable to satisfy his large appetite. He ate any available food from gutters and rubbish heaps but his condition still deteriorated through hunger. He was hospitalised due to exhaustion and became the subject of a series of medical experiments to test his eating capacity. ( Full article... ) Recently featured: William Anderson (RAAF officer) Hearst Tower (Manhattan) Moltke -class battlecruiser Archive By email More featured articles About Did you know ... Two aircraft landing simultaneously ... that one procedure for simultaneous approach (example pictured) allows aircraft to land on runways as close as 750 feet (230 m) apart? ... that a doctor reattached a farmer's severed hand in a remote Swedish hospital in 1964? ... that 12-year-old Knowa De Baraso gained attention in the United States when he challenged Mike Lindell 's claims about the 2020 presidential election? ... that drones were deployed as part of rescue efforts after Cyclone Montha ? ... that boxer Chan Wa-yen had to lose more than 4 kilograms (8.8 lb) in 13 days for the 1968 Summer Olympics? ... that " Despre tine " by Moldovan group O-Zone replaced the band's own " Dragostea din tei " as the number-one single in Norway? ... that Farzana Kochai completed twelve years of education in seven after schools reopened following the ousting of the Taliban? ... that Woody Allen was disgusted by having to sleep next to Milt Rosen ? ... that there is "noooooooooooooo smoking" in the Metrodome ? Archive Start a new article Nominate an article In the news Brigitte Bardot French actress and animal rights activist Brigitte Bardot (pictured) dies at the age of 91 . Israel becomes the first country to officially recognise Somaliland as an independent state. Nasry Asfura is elected president of Honduras , after one month of controversy surrounding the vote counting process. A jet crash near Ankara , Turkey, kills all eight people on board, including Libyan Army chief of staff Mohammed al-Haddad . A mass stabbing in Taipei , Taiwan, leaves four people dead, including the perpetrator. Ongoing : Gaza war timeline genocide Russo-Ukrainian war timeline Sudanese civil war timeline Recent deaths : Justus Zeyen Katie Allen Perry Bamonte Kiriko Nananan Fanil Sarvarov Ken White More current events Nominate an article On this day December 31 : Saint Sylvester's Day (Western Christianity) Roberto Clemente 1759 – Arthur Guinness signed a 9,000-year lease at £45 per annum to the St. James's Gate Brewery in Dublin and began brewing Guinness . 1775 – American Revolutionary War : At the Battle of Quebec , British forces repulsed an attempt by the Continental Army to capture Quebec City and enlist French Canadian support. 1950 – Korean War : North Korean troops attacked United Nations forces in the first of two battles at Wonju . 1965 – Central African military officers led by Jean-Bédel Bokassa began a coup d'état against the government of President David Dacko . 1972 – Puerto Rican baseball player Roberto Clemente (pictured) died in a plane crash en route to deliver aid to victims of that year's Nicaragua earthquake . Carlo Gimach ( d. 1730) C. D. Howe ( d. 1960) Richie McCaw ( b. 1980) Gabby Douglas ( b. 1995) More anniversaries: December 30 December 31 January 1 Archive By email List of days of the year About Today's featured picture The Iberian lynx ( Lynx pardinus ) is one of the four extant species of lynx , wild cats in the family Felidae . The Iberian lynx is endemic to the Iberian Peninsula, in which it was once widespread, but it is now restricted to a small number of regions in Spain and Portugal, and is listed as vulnerable on the IUCN Red List . Fossils suggest that the species has been present in Iberia since the end of the Early Pleistocene , around one million years ago. The Iberian lynx has a short bright yellowish to tawny coloured spotted fur. Its body is short with long legs and a short tail, and its head is small with tufted ears and a ruff (hairs under the neck). It preys foremost on the European rabbit for the bulk of its diet, supplemented by red-legged partridge , rodents , and to a smaller degree also on wild ungulates . The Iberian lynx marks its territory with its urine, scratch marks on the barks of trees, and scat. The home ranges of adults are stable over many years and both males and females reach sexual maturity at one year old, although they rarely start breeding until a territory becomes vacant. This wild female Iberian lynx was photographed in Almuradiel , in the province of Ciudad Real , Spain. Photograph credit: Diego Delso Recently featured: Soprano saxophone Red-tailed laughingthrush Regeneration Archive More featured pictures Other areas of Wikipedia Community portal – The central hub for editors, with resources, links, tasks, and announcements. Village pump – Forum for discussions about Wikipedia itself, including policies and technical issues. Site news – Sources of news about Wikipedia and the broader Wikimedia movement. Teahouse – Ask basic questions about using or editing Wikipedia. Help desk – Ask questions about using or editing Wikipedia. Reference desk – Ask research questions about encyclopedic topics. Content portals – A unique way to navigate the encyclopedia. Wikipedia's sister projects Wikipedia is written by volunteer editors and hosted by the Wikimedia Foundation , a non-profit organization that also hosts a range of other volunteer projects : Commons Free media repository MediaWiki Wiki software development Meta-Wiki Wikimedia project coordination Wikibooks Free textbooks and manuals Wikidata Free knowledge base Wikinews Free-content news Wikiquote Collection of quotations Wikisource Free-content library Wikispecies Directory of species Wikiversity Free learning tools Wikivoyage Free travel guide Wiktionary Dictionary and thesaurus Wikipedia languages This Wikipedia is written in English . Many other Wikipedias are available ; some of the largest are listed below. 1,000,000+ articles العربية Deutsch Español فارسی ‎ Français Italiano Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Svenska Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 250,000+ articles Bahasa Indonesia Bahasa Melayu Bân-lâm-gú Български Català Čeština Dansk Eesti Ελληνικά Esperanto Euskara עברית Հայերեն 한국어 Magyar Norsk bokmål Română Simple English Slovenčina Srpski Srpskohrvatski Suomi Türkçe Oʻzbekcha 50,000+ articles Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা Bosanski کوردی Frysk Gaeilge Galego Hrvatski ქართული Kurdî Latviešu Lietuvių മലയാളം Македонски မြန်မာဘာသာ Norsk nynorsk ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Shqip Slovenščina ไทย తెలుగు اردو Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Main_Page&oldid=1325821473 " 343 languages Acèh Адыгэбзэ Адыгабзэ Afrikaans Alemannisch Алтай тил አማርኛ Anarâškielâ अंगिका Ænglisc Аԥсшәа العربية Aragonés ܐܪܡܝܐ Արեւմտահայերէն Armãneashti Arpetan অসমীয়া Asturianu Atikamekw अवधी Avañe'ẽ Авар Aymar aru Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Basa Bali Bamanankan বাংলা Banjar 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Basa Banyumasan Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) भोजपुरी Bikol Central Bislama Български Boarisch བོད་ཡིག Bosanski Brezhoneg Буряад Català Чӑвашла Cebuano Čeština Chamoru Chavacano de Zamboanga Chi-Chewa ChiShona ChiTumbuka Corsu Cymraeg Dagbanli Dansk الدارجة Davvisámegiella Deitsch Deutsch ދިވެހިބަސް Diné bizaad Dolnoserbski डोटेली ཇོང་ཁ Eesti Ελληνικά Emiliàn e rumagnòl Эрзянь Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara Eʋegbe Farefare فارسی Fiji Hindi Føroyskt Français Frysk Fulfulde Furlan Gaeilge Gaelg Gagauz Gàidhlig Galego ГӀалгӀай 贛語 Gĩkũyũ گیلکی ગુજરાતી 𐌲𐌿𐍄𐌹𐍃𐌺 गोंयची कोंकणी / Gõychi Konknni Gungbe 客家語 / Hak-kâ-ngî Хальмг 한국어 Hausa Hawaiʻi Հայերեն हिन्दी Hornjoserbsce Hrvatski Bahasa Hulontalo Ido Igbo Ilokano বিষ্ণুপ্রিয়া মণিপুরী Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Interlingue ᐃᓄᒃᑎᑐᑦ / inuktitut Iñupiatun Ирон IsiXhosa IsiZulu Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa Kabɩyɛ Kalaallisut ಕನ್ನಡ Kapampangan Къарачай-малкъар ქართული کٲشُر Kaszëbsczi Қазақша Kernowek Ikinyarwanda Ikirundi Kiswahili Коми Kongo Kotava Kreyòl ayisyen Kriyòl gwiyannen Kurdî Кыргызча Кырык мары Ladin Ladino Лакку ລາວ Latgaļu Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Лезги Lietuvių Li Niha Ligure Limburgs Lingála Lingua Franca Nova Livvinkarjala La .lojban. Luganda Lombard Magyar Madhurâ मैथिली Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം Malti Māori मराठी მარგალური مصرى ဘာသာမန် مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu ꯃꯤꯇꯩ ꯂꯣꯟ Mfantse Minangkabau 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ Mirandés Мокшень Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nāhuatl Naijá Na Vosa Vakaviti Nederlands Nedersaksies Nēhiyawēwin / ᓀᐦᐃᔭᐍᐏᐣ नेपाली नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Napulitano ߒߞߏ Нохчийн Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Nouormand Novial Occitan Олык марий ଓଡ଼ିଆ Oromoo Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ पालि Pälzisch Pangasinan Pangcah پنجابی ပအိုဝ်ႏဘာႏသာႏ Papiamentu پښتو Patois Перем коми ភាសាខ្មែរ Picard Piemontèis Pinayuanan Tok Pisin Plattdüütsch Polski Ποντιακά Português Qaraqalpaqsha Qırımtatarca Reo tahiti Ripoarisch Română Romani čhib Rumantsch Runa Simi Русиньскый Русский Саха тыла Sakizaya Gagana Samoa संस्कृतम् Sängö ᱥᱟᱱᱛᱟᱲᱤ سرائیکی Sardu Scots Seediq Seeltersk Sesotho Sesotho sa Leboa Setswana Shqip Sicilianu සිංහල Simple English سنڌي SiSwati Slovenčina Slovenščina Словѣньскъ / ⰔⰎⰑⰂⰡⰐⰠⰔⰍⰟ Ślůnski Soomaaliga کوردی Sranantongo Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Taclḥit Taqbaylit Tarandíne Татарча / tatarça တႆး Tayal తెలుగు Tetun ไทย Thuɔŋjäŋ ትግርኛ Тоҷикӣ Lea faka-Tonga ᏣᎳᎩ Tsetsêhestâhese Tshivenda ತುಳು Türkçe Türkmençe Twi Tyap Тыва дыл Удмурт Basa Ugi Українська اردو ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche Vahcuengh Vèneto Vepsän kel’ Tiếng Việt Volapük Võro Walon Wayuunaiki 文言 West-Vlams Winaray Wolof 吴语 Xitsonga ייִדיש Yorùbá 粵語 Zazaki Zeêuws Žemaitėška 中文 Obolo Batak Toba Bajau Sama Betawi Batak Mandailing Dagaare Kadazandusun Fɔ̀ngbè Ghanaian Pidgin Jaku Iban Igala Kumoring Yerwa Kanuri Kʋsaal Moore IsiNdebele seSewula Nupe ရခိုင် Руски ꠍꠤꠟꠐꠤ ᥖᥭᥰ ᥖᥬᥲ ᥑᥨᥒᥰ ትግሬ Tolışi Toki pona ⵜⴰⵎⴰⵣⵉⵖⵜ ⵜⴰⵏⴰⵡⴰⵢⵜ Edit links This page was last edited on 5 December 2025, at 10:53 (UTC) . Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Legal & safety contacts Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Main Page 343 languages Add topic