                                  82nd Oregon Legislative Assembly — 2023 Regular Session


HB 2281 A          STAFF MEASURE SUMMARY                                                          Carrier: Rep. Nguyen H
House Committee         On Education


      Action Date:      03/29/23
            Action:     Do pass with amendments. (Printed A-Eng.)
              Vote:     4-3-0-0
                Yeas:   4- Hudson, Neron, Nguyen       H, Valderrama
              Nays:     3- Cramer, Mcintire, Wright
             Fiscal:    Fiscal impact issued
          Revenue:      No revenue impact
      Prepared By:      Ellen O'Brien, LPRO Analyst
    Meeting Dates:      1/23, 3/29

WHAT THE MEASURE DOES:
Requires district school board to designate one or more civil rights coordinators for district. Requires civil rights
coordinator to monitor, coordinate, and oversee district compliance with state and federal antidiscrimination
laws, oversee investigations of complaints alleging discrimination, provide guidance and respond to questions on
civil rights issues, and satisfy requirements prescribed by State Board of Education. Imposes sanctions, established
by the State Board of Education, on public elementary or secondary schools found to be in noncompliance.

ISSUES DISCUSSED:
e   = Increase in discrimination complaint appeals to Oregon Department of Education
e    Need for support and coordination from Oregon Department of Education

EFFECT OF AMENDMENT:
Modifies requirement that district school board designate civil rights coordinator for district and modifies duties
of civil rights coordinator.

BACKGROUND:
This bill was introduced at the request of the Oregon Department of Education. School districts must comply with
federal civil rights laws that prohibit discrimination on the basis of race, color, and national origin (Title VI), sex
(Title IX), and disability (ADA/Section 504), and all Oregon districts have a coordinator or coordinators designated
for that purpose. House Bill 2281 A further requires the designation of a civil rights coordinator that is responsible
for enforcing state nondiscrimination laws and coordinating investigations. ORS 659.850 defines discrimination
prohibited in education as "any act that unreasonably differentiates treatment, intended or unintended, or any
act that is fair in form but discriminatory in operation, either of which is based on race, color, religion, sex, sexual
orientation, gender identity, national origin, marital status, age or disability." The mandatory civil rights
coordinator position proposed in HB 2281 A       is similar to one that exists in Washington administrative rule (WAC
392-190-060).

House Bill 2281 A requires public school districts to designate one or more civil rights coordinators to coordinate
and oversee anti-discrimination compliance and investigations.




This summary has not been adopted or officially endorsed by action of the committee.                                  1of1
