                                                                                     COPY
                 IN THE COURT OF APPEALS OF THE STATE OF OREGON




JAN VINSONHALER and HEATHER
VINSONHALER
                                                           CA A116054
                          Plaintiffs —- Appellants,
                                                           Trial Court No. 00-08-07735
        ¥,


QUANTUM RESIDENTIAL

                      Defendant — Respondent

and



 EDWARD RAMEY

                           Defendant.




                 Plaintiffs’ Appeal from the Circuit Court for the State of Oregon

                  (Multnomah County) Pro Tem Judge Thomas Christ, Presiding



                      REPLY BRIEF FOR PLAINTIFFS-APPELLANTS




KENNETH RICARDO PERRY, OSB #95108                      DARLEEN DARNALL, OSB #92274
Attomey and Counselor at Law                           DAVIS WRIGHT TREMAINE LLP
The Board of Trade Building                            1300 8.W. Fifth Avenue, Suite 2300
310 8. W, Fourth Avenue, Suite 438                     Portland, Oregon 97201
Portland, Oregon 97204                                 (503) 241-2300
(503) 248-9882                                         Of Attorneys for Defendant-Respondent
Attormey for Plaintiffs
                                        TABLE              OF CONTENTS




Summary of Reply Argument .........csccecssssessseees seseeageseeaesacsncsnees setesenseese L7




Standard of Review .....ssscssessscsesrscssseseeesons satasseares sessataveeaens setssseneceseasesvesseee DOG



Legal Argument ............... sesenseees seateceassasasaceossasecsaeeess le ateseeecenseneaseonsaes sesaeeeeenes 3-12




Plaintiffs-Appellants’ Rebuttal Arguments .............sssseee sesseateenecsasansanes essen 412                                          ||




Conclusion .......cssesssssseseeeees scseeneaeeens sessaseesseeneseansensoees saateseenes sessetasseeeseasseans wel



Certificate
     of Service                      ............ baceassenes laceececsecssevsstatecsacsennesscseacaces laseeseaneass leseeese veeeel3
                                       TABLE           OF AUTHORITIES




Federal Cases

Burlington Industries, Inc. v. Ellerth, 524 U.S. 742, 118 S. Ct. 2257 (1998)

Faragher v. City of Boca Raton, 524 U.S. 775, 118 S. Ct. 2275 (1998)

Ellison v. Brady, 924 F.2d 872, 883 (9" Cir, 1991)

Oregon Cases

Double Eagle Golf, Inc. v. City of Portland, 322 Or 604, 606, 910 P.2d 1104

(1996),..essessssssssesssessssessssrssesscesecscacesussusensosssseenesssesssassasessassacsessessesnnavsssensenveavseonsasenses 3

Finney v. Bransom, 326 Or 472, 481 (n.8), 953 P.2d 377 (1998)

Heidi/Parker v. T.C.L, Inc., 264 Or $35, 540, 506 P.2d 486 (1973)

Louisiana Pacific v. Lumber and Sawmill Workers, 296 Or 537, 545, 679 P.2d 289




Cavilee & Cavilee, 21 Or. App. 506, 508, 535 P.2d 774 (1975)

Hannon v. Good Samaritan Hospital, 4 Or. App. 178, 187, 471 P.2d 831 (1970)

Harris v. Pameco Corp., 170 Or App 164, 172-173, 12 P.3d 524 (2000)

In re: Farrell, 58 Or. App. 258, 262 (1982)

Marvin Wood Products v. Callow, 171 Or. App. 175, 14 P.3d 686 (2000)

Robinson v. Groh, 138 Or. App. 506, 909 P.2d 1240 (1996)
              REPLY BRIEF OF PLAINTIFES-APPELLANTS
                  JAN AND HEATHER VINSONHALER




      Respondent Quantum Residential’s Brief in this case contains a series of

questionable assertions. Furthermore, Respondent’s Brief is composed primary of

flawed reasoning and inconsistent legal arguments (Respondent’s Brief conveniently

and consistently side-steps disputed factual issues to dogmatically declare, in every

instance, that the Pro Tem judge made the right decisions based on allegedly

undisputed facts. Also, Respondent repeatedly contradicts its own factual and legal

assertions. As aresult, Respondent Quantum Residential has not effectively rebutted

the fundamental contentions of Appellants in this appeal:

       7     The circuit court gravely erred in granting Quantum Residential summary

             judgment against Plaintiffs-Appellants on virtually all of their claims;

      2.     In granting Quantum Residential summary judgment, the circuit court

             repeatedly and erroneously invaded the fact finding province of the jury;

      3.      Thecircuit court erroneously interpreted federal and state law prohibiting

             sexual harassment in the workplace;

                                           l
             The circuit court issued a series of erroneous evidentiary and procedural

             rulings, that were uniquely one-sided, also the circuit court completely

             ignored Plaintiffs-Appellants’ Cross-Motion for Surmmary Judgment in

             this case until the Pro Tem Judge simply signed a ORCP 67B judgment

             order containing verbiage that Plaintiffs-Appellants’ Cross-Motion for

             Partial Summary Judgment is denied.



      The issues presented in the instant appeal are subject to the De Novo standard

of review. See Louisiana Pacific vy, Lumber and Sawmill Workers, 296 Or 537, 545,

679 P.2d 289 (1984); In re: Farrell, 98 Or. App. 258, 262 (1982) (Where the review

is “de neve” there is no “preservation” factor and this Court applies its own fact

finding and legal analysis regarding the issues raised); Cayilee & Cavilee,     21 Or, App.

506, 508, 535 P.2d 774 (1975); Hannon v. Good Samaritan Hospital, 4 Or. App. 178,

187, 471 P.2d 831 (1970) (The de weve review standard requires that this Court

provide Plaintiffs- Appellants a “trial anew” of the issues presented “in the fullest sense

with the trial court being given no weight except on disputed questions of fact where

the credibility of witnesses is at issue."}; Marvin Wood Products v. Callow, 171 Or.

App, 175, 14 Pad 686 (2000) (“Tf review is de neve the reviewing court has license

to re-weigh the facts and reassess the persuasive force of the evidence,       . .7} 1d.
      Finally, when reviewing the record, this Court must view the entire record in the

light most favorable to Plaintiffs-Appellants Jan & Heather Vinsonhaler.     Double Eagle

Golf Inc. v. City of Portland, 322 Or 604, 606, 910 P.2d 1104 (1996).

                                LEGAL ARGUMENT

      In Respondent     Quantum     Residential   Corporations’   brief in this mater

(hereinafter “Respondent's Brief”) Respondent essentially maintains that the circuit

court Pro Tem judge’s summary judgment and evidentiary rulings were proper in this

matter because:

             Plaintiffs-Appellants failed to produce “any evidence” from which ajury

             could infer that     defaulted defendant Edward Ramey was “at least

             partially motivated by a purpose to serve Quantum Residential and was

             “acting within the scope of his employment when he sexually harassed

             Plaintiffs-Appellants. As a result, Jan & Heather Vinsonhaler’s assault,

             battery, and intentional infliction of emotional distress claims had to fail

             “as a matter of law.” (See Respondent's Brief at 2, 9-13);

             The trial court was correct in granting Respondent summary judgment on

             Jan & Heather Vinsonhaler’s federal and state sexual harassment claims

             because Respondent proved that there were no material issues of fact

             regarding its federally mandated “affirmative defense” and there was
             legally and factually no evidence that Respondent knew or should have

             known that defaulted defendant Ramey was a harasser before Jan &

             Heather Vinsonhaler reported it.    (See Respondent’s Brief at 13-27);

             There is no evidence   of trial court bias by the Pro Tem judge in this

             case.   Furthermore, even if there is such evidence, {via the numerous

             erroneous and one-sided rulings of the trial court) Plaintiffs-Appellants

             have not properly assigned the issue and rulings as error.

           PLAINTIFES-APPELLANTS’ REBUTTAL ARGUMENTS

      As set forth in summary above, Respondent’s factual assertions, legal analysis,

and conclusions in this case are fatally flawed, Furthermore, at times, Respondent’s

arguments contradict themselves and are baffling at best.

      a.    Every case before the Court is traditionally resolved based on its unique

facts (and not some set of cookie-cutter facts or quotes extracted from specific case

law). See Heidi/Parker v. T.C.L, Inc., 264 Or 535, 540, 506 P.2d 486 (1973). In this

case, Plaintiffs-Appellants Jan & Heather Vinsonhaler clearly provided evidence that

(1) Respondent Quantum Residential required them to work in a limited and isolated

area in an apartment that doubled as both an office and defendant Ramey’s living

space; (2) Defaulted defendant Ramey routinely sexually harassed both women

physically and verbally (as set forth in their Complaint); (3) The sexual harassment

                                          4
occurred almost exclusively at work; (4) The sexual harassment occurred almost

exclusively during work hours; and (5) The harassment occurred while the women

were working with and under the supervision of defaulted defendant Ramey.

      Since Respondent conceded that Jan & Heather Vinsonhaler were sexually

harassed by Ramey as alleged (See Respondent’s Supplemental Excerpt of Record

[“SER”] at 37 (lines 20-23)); and since the women were harassed at work, during work

hours, while working exclusively with Ramey, a jury could readily infer that at some

point (during a 6, 7, or 8 hour work day) defaulted defendant Ramey          actually did

some work for Quantum Residential,        Furthermore, given the limited and isolated

apartment workplace that Quantum provided the parties, Ramey’s ability to stand over

an individual plaintiff, sit next to her, stand behind her, or otherwise routinely invade

their “personal space” was a “necessary precursor” to the sexual harassment alleged.

Additionally, a jury could readily infer that the sexual harassment of each plaintiff was

an “outgrowth”     of the complete and unfettered access to the women           given by

Respondent to Ramey.

       Based on the facts of this case, and the extensive discussion of when vicarious

liability attaches in Harris v. Pameco Corp., 170 Or App 164, 172-173, 12 P.3d 524

(2000), the trial court gravely erred by invading the fact finding province of the jury

and granting summary judgment against Jan & Heather Vinsonhaler on their assault,

                                            5
battery, and intentional infliction of emotional distress claiens.

       b.    As set forth above and in the Opening Brief, the circuit court seriously

erred in pranting summary judgment against Plaintiffs-A ppellants on their federal and

state sexual harassment claims. Furthermore, to grant Respondent summary judgment,

the Pro Tem judge repeatedly invaded the province of the jury by unilaterally deciding

disputed material facts in favor of Respondent, Ata minimum there were disputed

material factual issues regarding each element of Respondent's Burlington Industries,

Inc. v. Ellerth, $24 U.S. 742, 118 S. Ct. 2257 (1998)/Farapher v. City of Boca Raton,

524 US. 775, 118 8. Ct. 2275 (1998) affirmative defense.

       Regarding the “prevention” prong of Respondent’s affirmative defense,

Plaintiffs-Appellants asserted that they did not receive any training, discussion, or

notice of any anti-sexual harassment policy and/or procedures from Respondent during

their employment. Jan & Heather Vinsonhaler stated that defendant Ramey was their

sole peint of contact when they were hired. Also, the women contended that when they

were hired, defaulted defendant Ramey quickly had them sign a series of papers

(including a receipt for handbook that they never actually received) by telling them that

the needed to sign the papers to secure the job when the papers were presented,

        As an initial matter, Respondent pretends that the assertions of Plaintiffs-

Appellants have no significance at all because Quantum officers testified that (1) it

                                             6
was the business practice of Quantum Residential to issue employee handbooks and

secure receipts for the handbooks and (2) it was the business practice of Quantum

Residential to post sexual harassment and other employment notices at its various work

sites. Interestingly, and without any reasonable explanation, Quantum concludes that

the assertions of    the Quantum officers (regarding Quantum’s alleged business

practices) voided the first hand factual assertions of Jan & Heather Vinsonhaler and

provided ample evidence for the Pro Tem judge to conclude that Respondent clearly

proved the first prong of its affirmative defense.   (See Respondent’s Brief at 16-17).

         Here, Respondent’s arguments and reasoning are flawed for several reasons.

First, no officer of Quantum Residential swore or affirmed that they personally

witnessed postings at Plaintiffs-Appellants’ work site before they complained of

harassment. Second, no officer of Quantum Residential swore or affirmed that they

personally witnessed either or both plaintiffs being issued an employee handbook.

Third,      Respondent    does   not dispute   that defaulted   defendant   Ramey    was

Respondent’s     sole site manager and contact for plaintiffs during both their hiring

and day to day work lives. Curiously, Respondent argued to the trial court, and this

Court essentially that: Respondent had company rules, and although they don’t have

any direct knowledge      as to whether or not those rules were followed      by its site

manager and supervisor (Edward Ramey) in this case, Quantum Residential has no
reason whatsoever to reasonably believe that defaulted defendant Ramey did not follow

Respondent’s rules.

         Interestingly, after setting the stage for the above-referenced position,

Respondent swears that it fired defaulted defendant Ramey for not following its rules,

See SER 37 (lines 20-23}. Reasonably, if Ramey violated one of Respondent’s

major rules, then it is logical that he may have violated others like failing to post

notices, issue an employee handbook, or follow other reasonable and efficient office

procedures. In any event, the above present questions to be resolved by a jury.

         The “correction” prong      of     Respondent’s   affirmative defense is also

problematic for a number of reasons. First, notwithstanding Respondent’s arguments

that Ms. Angela          .previous report to Quantum of sexual harassment {by Ramey

against Heather Vinsonhaler) is hearsay, the undisputed        fact of the matter is that

Angela            actually made a sexual     harassment complaint to Quantum      against

Ramey long        before Jan & Heather Vinsonhaler         complained.     Furthermore,

Respondent amazingly follows its depiction of Ms.                    notice to Quantum

Residential as hearsay with aclear example of why her statements to Quantum could

not possibly be hearsay on the issue of notice. See Respondent’s Brief at 35-36 (For

example, if the BOLI       investigator’s   recitation of what Ms.       . told Quantum

Residential was being offered by Jan & Heather Vinsonhaler to prove that what Ms.

                                              8
      said was true (i.e. that a plaintiff was being harassed by Ramey in a certain way),

then this would clearly be hearsay, requiring a recognized exception for admission.

However, because the statement      was   not offered to prove the truth of the matter

asserted (that Ramey actually sexually harassed a plaintiff as alleged) but only to prove

that Respondent received a prior “compliant” by someone other than plaintiffs, it was

NOT    HEARSAY.        Thus Respondent (not withstanding its seemingly perjurious

testimony to the contrary: See SER 37; lines 14-15) actually received prior notice of

problems with Ramey.

      Second, Respondents “correction” prong argument that it immediately fired

Ramey and did “everything legally possible” to remove him from the premises is

unavailing and untrue. This Court can take judicial notice that injunctive relief is a

legal possibility or option where someone like Ramey has refused to leave premises

and has threatened (arguably imminent) physical harm to employees and/or occupants

of the premises.     Notwithstanding,     Respondents     repeated    theme that it did

“everything legally possible” to remove Ramey from the premises (See Respondent

Brief at 17-19), Respondent never sought any type of injunctive relief to preclude the

threat of irreparable harm from Ramey’s threatened actions.
                                                                                            pel




      Third, the law of the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals (i.e. this federal circuit) is

that “the mere presence of an employee [former employee] who has engaged in
particularly severe or pervasive harassment can create a hostile work environment.”

Ellison v. Brady, 924 F.2d 872, 883 (9° Cir. 1991) (emphasis added). Accordingly,

the testimony of Plaintiffs-Appellants that they were told to return to the apartment

office, and that an employee dispatch by Quanturn Residential gave Ramey ready

access to the apartment office and plaintiff         Jan Vinsonhaler seemingly destroys

Respondent’s     “correction”   arguments    under    any   reasonable   analysis.     Even

Respondent’s alleged non-employee “ratification” analysis. (See Respondent's Brief

at 19-20).     At a minimum, the “correction”         prong of the Burlineton/Faragher

affirmative defense presents a jury question.

        Regarding the issue of whether or not plaintiffs unreasonably failed to complain

about the harassment against thern sooner, Respondent's arguments fail miserably.

First, Respondent relies on the incredible reasoning of the Pro Tem judge that if the

plaintiffs signed a receipt for a handbook that they in fact did not receive then they

acted    unreasonably    under a Burlington or Faragher analysis.         As stated in the

Opening Brief, this is simply NOT THE LAW. The unreasonable failure to report

prong is predicated on actual knowledge ofa company’s anti-harassment policies and

procedures and a knowing        reluctance   or failure to take advantage       of   express

remedial measures.      See Burlington.
       In this case, Plaintiffs-Appellants specifically and repeatedly denied any

knowledge of any policies and procedures of Respondent prohibiting harassment.

In fact, the women testified at their deposition that they had to “look up Quantum

Residential’s      office   in the phone book to obtain a way to make their faxed

complaints”      after Ramey   threatened   to kill Heather Vinsonhaler.    In any event,

while Plaintiffs-Appellants may have acted unreasonably in blindly signing
                                                                       a receipt

for an item that they never received, the unreasonable signing of a handbook receipt

is not a recognized affirmative defense to a sexual harassment action. Furthermore,

the 9" Circuit Court of Appeals has never held that an employer’s direct threat to

retaliate against a victim (if she reports misconduct) “does not excuse” a victim’s

failure to report (or the victim’s late report).       Accordingly, the cases cited by

Respondent from other federal circuits are unavailing and not on point.               The

unreasonable failure to report issue presents jury questions.

       c.       The Pro Tem judge’s   erroneous    and bizarre rulings, coupled with the

“deaf ear” that the Pro Tem judge turned to virtually all of Plaintiffs-Appellants’

arguments (including plaintiffs’ detailed         Cross-Motion    for   Partial Summary

Judgment) appear to support a prima facie case of judicial bias.        Furthermore, the

detailed description of the trial court errors (under the “bias” label) appropriately

assigned error to the offensive rulings (such as the evidentiary rulings) for this Court’s

                                             1]
review,

          Addressing the issue of assignments of error, this Court has stated that all that

is necessary      to challenge a summary        judgment    ruling was a “presentation in

general,” See Robinson v. Groh, 138 Or. App. 506, 909 P.2d 1240 (1996); See also,

Finney v. Bransom, 326 Or 472, 481 (n.8), 953 P.2d 377 (1998)(maintaining that

assignments of error or arguments to the court must merely be presented in a

recognizable form). Id.



                                      CONCLUSION

          For all of the above reasons, Jan & Heather Vinsonhaler respectfully requests that

this Courtreverse the judgment of the Circuit Court (via Pro Tem Judge Thomas Christ).



                                                RESPECTFULLY SUBMITTED                  U->




                               —                 Kenifeth R. Pefry, OSB
                                                                      #95 108
                                                  Attorney for Jan & Heather Vinsonha}er


DATED: October 25, 2002
                          CERTIFICATE OF SERVICE



      [hereby certify that I served a true and correct copy of the foregoing Reply Brief

on counsel for defendant Quantum Residential! by regular mail with postage paid on

October 25, 2002 at the following address:



           Darleen Darnall, Esquire
           DAVIS WRIGHT TREMAINE, LLP
           1300 S.W. 5% Avenue, Suite 2300
           Portland, Oregon 97201




                                   Kenneth   Ricarado Po O96 195108 | |
                                         mey for J      Heatker Vinsonhaler
