    %
    +2   Fair Housing 2021: What Counselors Need to Know
    *e   November 16-17, 2021
    ~




                                                                ~<




Rights for Persons with Disabilities
Wednesday, November 17*", 2021                             | 12:00 PM — 1:00 PM
Questions?
                                                    v                        Chat

¢ Participants are in listen only mode                                                                   Welcome to Q&A
                                                                                           Questions you ask will show up here. Only host and
                                                                                                panelists will be able to see all questions.


¢ Chat
   ¢ Submit any technical issues via the
     Zoom Chat box
         ¢ Send the message to the Host

Q&A                                                                                 Type your question here...




   ¢ Submit any content related questions
     via the Zoom Q&A box
         e Send to Host, Presenter and Panelists
                                                   To:   Hosts and panelists v

                                                   Type message here...
Polling

¢ There will be polling and knowledge checks supported by Mentimeter
  throughout this presentation. When prompted by the icon to the right,
  please respond to questions at www.menti.com using your computer or
  smart phone.
                                                                    2             Time for
                                                                                Mentimeter!
                            www.menti.com|




                @                    @                              ©
          Grab your phone    Go to www.menti.com   Enter the code   and vote!
Agenda

¢ Definitions, Protections and Basic Accessibility Requirements
¢ Reasonable Accommodations     & Reasonable Modifications
¢ Enforcement
“Q&A
Speakers

¢ Michele Hutchins, Equal Opportunity Specialist, HUD Office of Fair
  Housing and Equal Opportunity
¢ Karen Hoskins, Lead Community Development Consultant, ICF
Disability Definition in Housing
¢ The Fair Housing Act (FHA), Title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, as
  amended in 1988 prohibits discrimination against persons with
  disabilities.

¢ The Act defines persons with a disability to mean those individuals with
  mental or physical impairments that substantially limit one or more
  major life activities.

¢ The term major life activity may include seeing, hearing, walking,
  breathing, performing manual tasks, caring for oneself, learning,
  speaking, or working
 Differences Between the Three Acts


1.   Fair Housing Act (FHA) prohibits discrimination in private and federally assisted
     housing and housing-related transactions because of disability.
2.   Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) prohibits discrimination on the basis
     of disability in programs, services, and activities of state and local governments,
     and protects people with disabilities in places of public accommodation, including
     employment and transportation and some housing.
3.   Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act prohibits discrimination on the basis of
     disability in any federally-assisted programs or activities, including housing. It also
     covers standards for housing programs themselves are operated in a manner that
     is accessible to and usable by persons with disabilities accessible units as well
     designed, including:
     ¢ New construction housing - a minimum of 5% of the units in the project (but not less than one
       unit) must be accessible to individuals with mobility impairments, and an additional 2%, at a
       minimum, of the units (but not less than one unit) must be accessible to individuals with sensory
       impairments.
     ¢ Rehabilitation housing — for 15+ units, the 5% and 2% covered above apply
FHA Disability Protections — 42 U.S.C. 3604(f)(1)}

¢ To discriminate inthe sale orrental     . Example: Housing authority
¢ Otherwise make unavailable, deny,         director refused to lease to a
  or refuse to negotiate                    tenant with a disability because
¢ Because of buyer’s or renter’s           she was   “concerned”   for his
  disability, disability of a household    Safety.
  member, or any person associated
  with them
FHA Disability Protections — 42 U.S. 3604(f)(2)

¢ Discrimination in the terms,           ¢ Example: A renter with a
  conditions, or privileges of sale or     disability is unable to enter
  rental                                   the leasing office because
¢ Provision of services                    the doors are too heavy to
                                           open, and the automatic
¢ Provision of facilities                  door opener is broken. The
¢ Refusal to provide necessary             leasing office ignores the
  reasonable accommodation                 requirement to fix the doors.
FHA Disability Protections — 42 U.S.C. 3604(f)(3)(A)}

¢ Refusal to grant a request for    ¢ Example: A tenant with a
  reasonable modification where       disability is unable to enter his
  such a modification may be          unit because there is a two-inch
  necessary to afford a person an     step at the doorway. The tenant
  equal opportunity to use and        could request permission to make
  enjoy the dwelling                  a reasonable modification by
                                      constructing a small ramp. If the
                                      landlord refuses, he violates the
                                     Act.
Prohibited Acts — 42 U.S.C. 3604(f)(3)(C)

¢ Failure to Design & Construct an accessible
 property
¢ Applies to all multi-family properties designed       ®
  and constructed on or after March 13, 1991
¢ Includes 7 Basic Requirements
   ¢ To help builders comply with these requirements,
    HUD issued in 1991 its Fair Housing Act
    Accessibility Guidelines.
Seven Basic Accessible Design Requirements

     . Accessible entrances and accessible routes
PB


     . Accessible and usable public     & common   use areas
Wn




       Usable doors
     . Accessible route into and through the covered unit
nF




      Light switches, outlets, thermostats,    & other environmental controls
      are in accessible locations
     . Reinforced walls for grab bars
oO)




7.     Usable kitchens and bathrooms
Reasonable
Accommodations &
Reasonable Modifications
What is Considered a Reasonable Accommodation                  under the
Fair Housing Act?

A change, exception, or adjustment to a rule, policy, practice or
service,which may be necessary to afford an individual with a disability
an opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling unit, including public and
common use spaces.




                                   ©
Examples of Accommodations

¢ Aid in filling out housing related documents or permitting an applicant
  to submit a housing application via a different means
¢ Assistance animals allowed at property with No Pets Policy or that
  exceed animal weight restrictions or that are on a restricted breed list
¢ Transferring a tenant from 3" floor to 1° floor
¢ Allowing a tenant to pay rent when their SSDI check arrives instead of
  on the 1° of the month
Reasonable Accommodations


Common    reasonable accommodation requests:
¢ Accessible parking space for a person with a mobility impairment
¢ Assistance Animals


                   RESERVED
                    PARKING

                    UNAUTHORIZED PARKING
                   PUNS       BY SXXX FINE
                       SUBJECT TO TOWING
Parking Spaces

Parking spaces may be requested as a reasonable accommodation to
assist:
¢ Persons with mobility impairments or other disabilities that may affect
  the distance a person may walk
¢ Requires access aisle and curb cuts to be accessible
¢ Accessible spaces require signage that space is for persons with
  disabilities only
Assistance Animals
Assistance Animals are Not Pets.
“Assistance Animal” includes:
¢ Service Animals
¢ Emotional Support Animals
¢ Under certain circumstances, can include all animals, not just
  dogs
A No Pet Policy is permissible but must clearly state that the policy
does not apply to assistance animals. Weight, breed, number, or
size limitations also cannot be applied to assistance animals.
Reasonable Accommodation Example



Can a landlord charge an extra fee or require an additional deposit or
insurance from applicants or tenants with a disability as a condition of
granting a reasonable accommodation?
Reasonable Accommodation Example



No. Landlords may not require persons with disabilities to pay extra fees
or deposits or to obtain additional insurance as a condition of receiving a
reasonable accommodation.
What is a Reasonable Modification under the Fair Housing
Act?

A reasonable modification is a structural change made to existing
premises, occupied or to be occupied by a person with a disability, in
order to afford such person full enjoyment of the premises.
Reasonable Modification Examples

  ¢ Widening doorways to make rooms more accessible for persons in
    whee chairs
  ¢ Instal ing grab bars in bathrooms
  ¢ Lowering kitchen cabinets to a height suitable for persons in
    wheelchairs
  ¢ Adding a ramp to make a primary entrance accessible for persons in
    wheelchairs
  ¢ Altering a walkway to provide access to a public or common use area
Who Pays for a Reasonable Modification?

The person making the request pays.


Exception:
Recipients of federal funds, including housing authorities, must pay for
reasonable modifications.
Reasonable Modification

lf a person with a disability has made reasonable modifications to the interior
of the dwelling, must they restore all of them when they moves out?
¢ The tenant is obligated to restore those portions of the interior of the
  dwelling to their previous condition only where “it is reasonable to do so” and
  where the housing provider has requested the restoration.
¢ The tenant is not responsible for expenses associated with reasonable    wear
  and tear.
¢ In general, if the modifications do not affect the housing provider’s or
  subsequent tenant's use or enjoyment of the premises, the tenant cannot be
  required to restore the modifications to their prior state.
How to Assess Accommodation and Modification Requests?

¢ Reasonable accommodation and modification requests may be in
  writing or oral

¢ Landlord’s form may be used but not required

¢ Some documentation may be requested
Assessing Accommodation and Modification Requests

1.   Does the person seeking the
     accommodation or modification have a
     disability that substantially limits one or
     more major life activities?

2.   Is the accommodation or modification
     necessary to afford persons with disabilities
     an equal opportunity to use and enjoy a
     dwelling?
Assessing Accommodation and Modification Requests




What types of questions are landlords allowed to ask applicants/tenants
regarding their disabilities?
Assessing Accommodation and Modification Requests

¢ Landlords MAY ask for:
    ¢ Verification of disability if the disability is not obvious or otherwise known
      to the landlord
¢ Landlords MAY NOT:
    ¢ Ask for a specific diagnosis
    ¢ Ask about the nature or severity of disabilities
    ¢ Require use of a form to submit request or verify disability or need
Assessing Accommodation and Modification Requests

¢ If the disability is obvious and the need for the requested
  accommodation is readily apparent, additional information can NOT be
  requested.
¢ Example: A resident who uses a walker requests a parking space near
  the building entrance. Both the disability and the need are known.
Assessing Accommodation and Modification Requests

lf the disability is not obvious, disability related information can be requested
that:


1.   Verifies that the person meets the definition of disability under the Fair
     Housing Act.

2.   Describes the needed accommodation.

3.   Shows the relationship between the person’s disability and the requested
     accommodation.
Assessing Accommodation and Modification Requests

A disability can be verified by:


¢ Proof that the person receives Social Security Disability Benefits or other
  disability-based government benefits.

¢ A letter from a healthcare provider, such as a doctor, nurse, therapist,
  social worker or other reliable 3 party.


It is up to the requestor which type of proof they choose to submit.
Assessing Accommodation and Modification Requests



Once a landlord has documentation that the accommodation or
modification is needed because of the disability, the request must be
granted, unless one of the 3 grounds for denial applies.
Assessing Accommodation and Modification Requests

Factors for Denial:
       1. Undue Financial and Administrative Burden (determination
           made on a case-by-base basis)

     2.   Fundamental Alteration of the Nature of Provider’s Operation

     3.   Direct Threat to Health and Safety (determination made ona
          case-by-base basis)
Enforcement

¢ HUD FHEO investigates claims of discrimination against persons with
  disabilities.

¢ If you or a client believes their disability-related rights have been
  violated, you may contact FHEO to file a complaint.
OO————O——O—O—O—O—O—O—O—O—O—O—O—OO—O—OEOOOOO——OEOOEOEO—O—O—O—O———O—O—O—O—O—OEOEOO—OEOEOEOOO—OEOEOOEOEOOOOOEOEOOOOEOOEOEOOOOOEOOOEOEOOO—O—O—OEOOOOOEOEOOOEOOOOOEOOOOEO—O—OOEOEOE—OEeEerererereerere
nO



            Filing a Fair Housing Complaint

            ¢ Online. You can file a complaint with FHEO online in English or Spanish.

            ¢    Email. You can download this form (also available
                in Arabic, Cambodian, Chinese, Korean, Russian, Somali, Spanish,
                and Vietnamese) and email it to your local FHEO office at the email address
                on      this list.

            ¢ Phone. You can speak with an FHEO intake specialist by calling 1-800-669-
              9777 or 1-800-877-8339. You can also call your regional FHEO office at the
              phone numbers on this list.                                                                                                                                Time for
                                                                                                                                                                     Mentimeter!
            ¢ Mail. You can print out this form (also available
                in Arabic, Cambodian, Chinese, Korean, Russian, Somali, Spanish,
                and Vietnamese) and mail it to your regional FHEO office at the address
                on this list.
Relevant Resources

¢ HUD FHEO’s Disability Webpage
¢ Fair Housing Act
¢ Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973
¢ Americans with Disabilities Act
¢ Joint Statement of HUD and DOJ on Reasonable Accommodations
¢ Joint Statement of HUD and DOJ on Reasonable Modifications
¢ Notice FHEO-2020-01: Assessing a Person’s Request to Have an Animal
  as a Reasonable Accommodation Under the Fair Housing Act
Office of Housing Counseling & Fair Housing Equal Opportunity

                    ¢ Event Webpage:
                    httos://www.hudexchange.info/programs/housin
                    9-counseling/fair-housing-conference-2021/


                    ¢ Find us at:
                      www.hudexchange.info/counseling


                    ¢ Email us at:
                      Housing.counseling@hud.gov
Continue the Conversation on Whova!

 Explore the professional profiles of event speakers and attendees
 Send in-app messages and exchange contact info
 Network and find attendees with common affiliations, educations,
 shared networks, and social profiles
 Receive update notifications from organizers
 Access the event agenda

Web App Link:
  ,
  +2   Fair Housing 2021: What Counselors Need to Know
  *e   November 16-17, 2021
  ss




Thank You for Attending!
