            DEPARTMENT           OF HOUSING AND URBAN                                DEVELOPMENT
                           Office of Public and Indian Housing

             Operational Performance                  Evaluation and Risk Assessments

                                              SUMMARY OF RESOURCES
                                                   (Dollars in Thousands)

                          Enacted/                               Supplemental/     Total              _.
                                               Carry over               _.,                       Obligations       | Net Outlays
                          Requested                                Rescission    Resources

2023 Appropriation                        -                 -                -                -                 -                   -
2024 Annualized      CR                   -                 -                -                -                 -                   -
2025 President's Budget          50,000                     -                -       50,000            50,000              20,000
Change from 2024                 50,000                     -                -       50,000            50,000              20,000



                                      PROGRAM                    PURPOSE

The Operational Performance Evaluation and Risk Assessments (OPERA) account would support
residents of HUD housing by funding financial, physical, operational and other risk-based
assessments across Public Housing, Multifamily Housing, FHA-insured Residential Health Care
Facilities, and other HUD rental housing portfolios covered by the National Standards for the
Physical Inspection of Real Estate (NSPIRE). In limited circumstances, OPERA would fund
inspections in Housing Choice Voucher (HCV) rental housing as well. OPERA would support
activities to optimize assessments and property performance, including enhanced risk management
through more robust data analytics, inspector training, and financial analyses.


                                      BUDGET                    OVERVIEW

The 2025 President's Budget requests $50 million for the Operational Performance Evaluation and
Risk Assessments (OPERA) Fund.

The Budget request supports an extensive array of critical activities integral to enhancing housing
programs. These activities encompass a diverse range of tasks, including performing, analyzing,
scoring, and evaluating up to 20,000 inspections under the NSPIRE program for Public Housing and
Multifamily programs. Additionally, it involves scoring financial assessments for approximately
7,000 Public Housing properties and 30,000 Multifamily properties. A pivotal aspect of this
allocation supports program-related travel and technical training for inspectors and auditors that
will ensure more consistent and higher-quality physical assessments. Complementing these efforts
are quality assurance measures and risk-based follow-up reviews of all assessments.

Funding for these programs under the current system comes from a direct set-aside within the
Public Housing Fund as well as funds from PBRA, Housing for the Elderly, Housing for Persons with
Disabilities, Federal Housing Administration contract funds, and the Housing for the Elderly and
Disabled Liquidating account. The administrative complexities of combining disparate sources of
funding leads to delays and increased costs when procuring and executing critical evaluation and
assessment services. The current funding structure is inconsistent with the alignment of inspection
standards across HUD rental housing assistance programs through NSPIRE, the already existing
and long-time alignment of annual financial statement charts of accounts and submissions across
HUD’s rental housing assistance programs, and the REAC office’s long-standing history of inspecting
and assessing properties and units across multiple housing portfolios and accounts.

                                                            9-1
OPERATIONAL PERFORMANCE          EVALUATION AND RISK ASSESSMENTS      (OPERA)

The new OPERA set-up, first proposed in the 2024 President's Budget, would replace all these
sources with a single source of funding for all inspections. This account would streamline funding
and operations for inspections, break down silos, and improve HUD’s data collection and analytics.
OPERA would help the Department better understand and address assessment results and trends,
which is critical to keeping residents safe.

This program aligns with HUD 2022-2026 Strategic Objectives 2B: Improve rental assistance to
address the need for affordable housing and 4B: Strengthen Environmental Justice.


                                            JUSTIFICATION

The requested $50 million will enable HUD to conduct up to 20,000 inspections under the NSPIRE
program and complete financial assessments for 7,000 Public Housing properties and
30,000 Multifamily properties.

Moreover, OPERA would expand upon the traditional physical and financial inspection model by
including analytics for all assessment types, deriving new insights to determine, predict, and
proactively tackle risks across HUD housing programs. The data analytics initiative would evaluate
data not previously available to Real Estate Assessment Center (REAC), such as resident
engagement in the inspection process, expanded stakeholder surveys, third-party data sets, and new
data linkages — financial, physical, neighborhood, and environment. Collectively, the analytics would
shape a comprehensive risk assessment to better assess resident health and safety, as well as the
long-term viability of the housing portfolio.

Lastly, attention is directed towards improving REAC Operations and Assessment Support Activities
to effectively handle the increased scale and complexity of data involved in these critical operations.

In addition to funding NSPIRE inspections in 2025, these funds would enable HUD to conduct better
oversight for the HCV and Project-Based Voucher (PBV) programs and any follow-up needed for
Public and Multifamily housing. Under the NSPIRE rule, HUD now requires that Public Housing
Agencies (PHAs) provide results of their self-inspections to the Department in certain high-risk
circumstances, and analysis of these reports requires additional HUD resources. Additionally, when
self-inspections provide evidence that units’ physical conditions may jeopardize residents’ health and
safety, the Department must also conduct its own inspections of voucher-leased units.

Key Assumptions

HUD       included the following assumptions in its estimate for the Budget:

      e    Funding for up to 20,000 physical inspections and the necessary support contracts for Public
           Housing and Multifamily properties in 2025. (Note: REAC must purchase inspections 3 to 6
           months ahead of time, so it is normal to procure inspections in advance of the first half of the
           subsequent fiscal year to avoid a backlog.)

      e    Increased re-inspections in the first three years (2024-2027) of using the NSPIRE    standards,
           evaluating new items and achieving quality assurance goals.

      e    Increased inspection time due to increased unit sampling under NSPIRE.

      e    Inspection costs increase due to inspector shortages, inflation, and increased program
           requirements (e.g., additional training, professional conduct requirements).

      e    Additional expertise in more complex physical standards and conditions (e.g., mold and
           moisture assessment, pest infestation).



                                                      9-2
OPERATIONAL PERFORMANCE         EVALUATION AND RISK ASSESSMENTS     (OPERA)

       e   This level of funding only supports administrative costs necessary to enable assessments.

           o   This does not include salaries and expenses (S&E); the PIH 2025 S&E Budget highlights
               the S&E funding estimates required to support the REAC reorganization and execution
               of OPERA.

           o   This does not include major Information Technology (IT) system funding.

Performance       Indicators, and Other Evidence

The Budget proposes that OPERA develop new performance measures aligned to program outcomes
that will be reported in 2026. These measures are currently under consideration and may include:

       e   Improved identification of underperforming and at-risk properties;
       e   Unit-level physical, financial, and operational performance and risks, particularly for health
           and safety issues, determined through data analytics; and
       e   Timely procurement of inspections and reduction in the number of properties not successfully
           procured for inspection.

Stakeholders

REAC has been using human-centered design and customer experience principles for the design and
improvement of its products and services to deliver digital experiences and interactions. Outreach
includes listening and workshop sessions with residents and external housing providers. REAC will
continue incorporating resident input into the policy-making process for assessments and to better
ensure residents’ perspectives are considered. To update NSPIRE Standards, REAC will continue to
engage public health experts, code development organizations, manufacturing and industry
representatives, environmental advocacy groups, and rental industry professionals among other
external professionals. The next update to NSPIRE standards will be developed in 2025, consistent
with the regulatory commitment to update those standards at least every three years. REAC will
also cultivate partnerships with other Federal Agencies and external organizations (e.g., State and
local governments) to stay abreast of technology improvements and data exchange opportunities to
improve the health and safety of HUD housing.

Operational Improvements

REAC’s assessments of housing properties and programs help HUD to ensure that affordable
housing is safe, healthy, and financially sound; this cumulative impact helps further environmental
justice.

       e   Improve Customer Experience: REAC will continue to include regular feedback from
           housing providers, industry groups, public health advocates, residents, and other customers
           to align the organization around data-driven insights. The resident engagement and
           feedback results will help inform property oversight.

   e       Strengthen Information Technology: IT investments will continue to modernize PIH’s IT
           systems and infrastructure that began in 2021 (the 2021-23 PIH IT Performance Plans and
           associated funding), thereby strengthening information technology, cybersecurity, and data
           management. These IT solutions include enhancing the NSPIRE IT solution, modernizing
           IMS-PIC to the Housing Information Portal (HIP) and aligning systems with statutory and
           regulatory changes. HIP is slated to come online and be rolled out to more than 4,000 PHAs
           in 2024. OCIO and PIH began work in late 2023 on the new PIH Data Warehouse, which will
           enable REAC, PIH, and other stakeholders (e.g., Policy Development & Research) to do
           better data analysis of housing financial and management conditions to better predict and
           manage risk. Lastly, thanks to IT appropriations in 2023, OCIO and PIH have begun efforts
           to modernize the Enterprise Income Verification (EIV) system which will help HUD become

                                                     9-3
OPERATIONAL PERFORMANCE                       EVALUATION AND RISK ASSESSMENTS                             (OPERA)

              compliant with the Payments Integrity Information Act (PITA) and improve the customer
              experience for prospective and existing residents of HUD-assisted rental housing.

                                                  SUMMARY OF RESOURCES BY PROGRAM
                                                                      (Dollars in Thousands)

                                                               2022                                           2024           2023                      2025
                            .                 2023 Budget                    2023 Total         2023                                   2024 Total
                Budget Activ ity                       .    Carry ov er                         |.         Annualized   | Carry over                Presidents
                                               Authority                     Resources    | Obligations                                Resources
                                                            Into 2023                                         CR           Into 2024                  Budget

Operational Performance Evaluation and Risk
Assessments                                                                                                                                              50,000

Total                                                                                                                                                    50,000


                  LEGISLATIVE                    PROPOSALS AND GENERAL                                                  PROVISIONS

Legislative Proposals

The 2025 Budget supports the following legislative proposal and will seek changes through the
authorization process:

Prioritization of Federal Inspection Certification: In the absence of a national standard, HUD
requests authorization to preempt State or local licensing requirements that might impede Federal
employee inspectors in the performance of their duties. This would cover the ability of Federal
personnel to collect or assess information on risks related to environmental, health, or other hazards
impacting the built environment or residential use of such structures. REAC will promote healthy
housing and environmental justice by developing, testing, and operationalizing inspection protocols
for lead-based paint, mold and moisture, pest infestation, and radon. If authorized by a legislative
provision, HUD will publish national standards for these environmental hazards in federally
assisted housing and conduct assessments nationally, without the barrier of differing State or local
licensing requirements.

General Provisions

The 2025 President's Budget re-proposes the following general provision:

Physical Conditions Requirements: This general provision enhances HUD’s ability to exercise
oversight within the PBRA program, allowing HUD to mandate corrective action, contract transfers,
or change in management due to failure to meet physical condition standards. It has been updated to
allow it to continue to function when HUD implements the new NSPIRE standards. (Sec. 214)


                                              APPROPRIATIONS                               LANGUAGE

The 2025 President's Budget includes the appropriations language listed below.

For the Department's inspection and assessment programs, including travel, training, and program
support contracts, $50,000,000, to remain available until September 30, 2028: Provided, That
unobligated balances, including recaptures and carryover, remaining from funds appropriated under
the heading "Public Housing Fund" tin prior Acts to support ongoing public housing financial and
physical assessment activities shall be available for the purposes authorized under this heading in
addition to the purposes for which such funds originally were appropriated.

Note.--A full-year 2024 appropriation for this account was not enacted at the time the Budget was
prepared; therefore, the Budget assumes this account is operating under the Continuing

                                                                               9-4
OPERATIONAL PERFORMANCE     EVALUATION AND RISK ASSESSMENTS    (OPERA)

Appropriations Act, 2024 and Other Extensions Act (Division A of Public Law 118-15, as amended).
The amounts included for 2024 reflect the annualized level provided by the continuing resolution.




                                                9-5
