Eviction Prevention Guidance for Legal
       and Mediation Service Providers
                                                                                                       February 2024




-             &
                                                       Program Guidance
OREGON HOUSING and
COMMUNITY SERVICES




                                                                                                                                       CONTACT
                                                                                     Oregon Housing and Community Services
                                                                                                   Housing Retention Section
                                                                                                              (503) 986-2000




         Oregon Housing and Community Services | 725   Summer St. NE Suite B, Salem, OR 97301-1266   | (503)986-2000   | FAX (503) 986-2020

                                                                   Page 1 of 44
                                                         Change Log
2.20.2024 Updated gift card policy and direct payment policy. Updated equity and racial justice
policy. Updated Key performance measures to plain language.




        Oregon Housing and Community Services   | 725 Summer St. NE Suite B, Salem, OR 97301-1266   | (503)986-2000   | FAX (503) 986-2020

                                                                   Page 2 of 44
                                                                   Table of Contents

PMCPOGUCTION 20                        cece cece c ee ceeerenc nae cee cee eeeeeeeeeeeeeesaaaaaaaaeaeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeseeaaaaaaaaaeaeeceeeeeeeesesensnesaaaaaaaaaaeaeeseseeeeees 6
   PrOgraM INTENK ...... eee eeecceeseeeeceeeneeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaaaeeeeeaaa
                                                 eee eee aaa eeeeee aaa eeeeee aaa eeecaaaaeeeesaaaeeseeaaaeeeseeaaaeeeesaaaeeeeeea 6

   PFORLTAM SUMIMALSY 2.1... cceccceeeeeeccceeeeeceeeeeeeeeaeeeeeecaaaeeeeeaaaneeeeeaaaeeeeee
                                                               aaa eeeeeeaaaeeecaaaaeeeesaaaeeseeaeaeeeeeeaaaeeeeeeaaaeeeeea 6

   MeCiatiOn ...eeeeccccceceeceeeeseeeeeeeeaaaeaeeceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeesesaaaaaaeaeeeeeeeeeeeseseneeeseaaaaaaaeaeeceeeeeeeesesenseessaaaaaaaaaeaeeeeeeeeeees 6
   Legal SCrViCeS ........ccccccccseceeceeeeeceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaeeaaeaae
                                       eee seeeeeesGeGEeEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEESEES;E;;;;;A;;A;;A;;A;;AG;; GA; GGA GGG EAG EGG AEREEEEEEEES 7

Culturally Specific and Culturally Responsive Definitions ...............ccccccccccccccecsessssssesssnnsneaeeceeeeeseeeeseeeeseeeeees 7
Prioritizing Equity and Racial Justice in Programming ...............ccccccccccccccsccsscessessessessessseesseeeseeseeceeceeeeeeeeeees 8

General Program REquireMents ..............ccccccccccccccceceeeeeeeeeeeaeeaneeaeeaeseeeeseseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeceeeeeseeceaeeaaaaaaaaaaaea 8

   Key Performance MCaSUIES .......ccccscsccccccceceeccssesseseesenaeaeeeeeeeeceeceseeeeeseeseasaaeaeeeeeeeesesceseseceseuucseasaaeaeeneeeeeeens 8

   Staff Training .........ccccccssssssesceceeceececeeeeseeseeseeeeeeaaeaeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeee
                                                             eee aaeaeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeeseeeaeeasaaeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeeseeeuees 9
   Privacy Notification ............cccccsesssscseceeceeeeceeceseseseeseseeaaeaeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeeeeeseasaaeaeeeeeeeesessesenseesueaeasaaeaeeeeeeeeeesens 9
   CONFIGENTIALItY 00... sccccccceceeceeceseesesseeeesenaaeaeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeeeGaGGGeGeeGeeeeeseeees
                                                                                 cess see sasaaeaeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeenees 10
   Domestic Violence Shelter Confidentiality ProviSion .............ccccccsssssesesnennsneaeeceeceecescesesseesesseasaaaaeaeeeeeeeess 11
   Service Termination or Denial Of ASSIStANCE .........ceccccceessssneceeceeeeeeeceeceeeeseaeaeeceeeeseaaaeececeseesaeaeeeeeenenanaeees 11

   GriQVANCES ANC APPeals .........:ccsseseesesssessesseseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeeeaae
                                                                   GGG eae eee sea ssGEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEESEESEESSEGESEEEG® 11

   NONAISCrIMINATION...........                cece eceeeesseecceceececeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaaaaaaeaeeeeeeeeeeeeeseneeeseaaaaaaaeaeeeeeeeeeeeeesensnesaaaaaaaaeaeeeeeeeeenes 12
   Limited English Profici@ncy ........ccccccccccccccccceccssessesessenssneaeeceeeeeseeceseseeeseseesaaeaeeeeeeeeceseeseseeesusuuauaaaasaeeneeeeens 13
   Conflict OF INtCreSt ......                 ees seseseceeesseseneceeceeeeseeaeeeeeeeeesaaeeeeeeesessaaeeeeeeeeesaaeceeeeeeeaaeaeeceeenseaaaeecenenseeaaaeeees 13
   Organizational Conflict Of INterest ..........ccccccscsccccccceceecesceseeseeeesseeaeeseeeeeeeeeeeeeseeseeeeseasaaeaeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeesenees 14
   Individual Conflict Of INt@reSt 0.0... cccccceesessneceeeeeseseeceeceeeeseeaeeceeeeseeaaeeeeeeesessaaeeeeeeseesaaeaeseeeeseeaaaeeeeeeses 14
Program Eligibility 0.0.0.0... ccccccceensesneeseeseeseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeaaeaae
                                                                          eae eee eee ese seeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeceeeeeeeneeas 15

   HOUSING Status .......ccceeececcccceceeesseeeeeeee
                            eee eeeeeeeeeee eae eeeeeeeeeee eae e sense eeeOGA GAA AAAEEEEEE;SE AA; EAEEEEEEES;S;;; GEE AEEEEESCCes EGE EEE ES 15

   Category 1: Literally HOMELESS ......ccccccccccccccccseceeeeeceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee
                                                          eee aae aaa aaa aaa eae eeGeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeaaas 16

   Category 2: Imminent risk Of HOMELESSNESS ....... ccc cccccccceceeeeesenennennaaeaeeeeeeeeeeecessssseseeeeaaaaaaeeeeeeeeeeeseeeeseeees 16

   Category 3: Homeless under a federal Statute .........ccccccccccceceseensnnsneceeceeeeeceeceseesseseeseansneaeaeeeeeeeeeeesessesenes 16
   Category 4: Fleeing/ attempting to flee DOMESTIC VIOIENCE.......cccccsccceeessssecessseceesenseesessssseeeusnaeeeeseaaeeeess 17
   Category 5: Unstably HOUSE ......ccccccccccccccsseseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee
                                                     eee eee aae aaa aaa aaa eae GGGHGGsEGeEEEEEEEEEEEEESEESeESeeseeeaaa® 17

   INCOME oc eeeeeeeeceecee cena ee eeeeeeee nana ee eeeeeeeeeaaa aaa eeeeeeeeeaaa aaa ee eeEAAAAAA GAG EEEEESAAAAA GAGA OA EEE SeAGaA GGG AAEEEESSAaaa GG OAAEEESeSGaaaaa EEE ES 17

   CitIZENSHIP ANd IMMIgration Status .............cccccsceecceceeceeceeceeeeeeeeeeeeeeaaeeaeeaseaeseeeesseeeeeeeseeeeeeeeeceeceeeeeeeeeeeeeas 19

   PriOritiZatiON GUIGANCE 0... eee ceeeeenceceeceeceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaaaaaaeaeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeteseaaaaaaaeaeeceeeeeeeeee
                                                                                                  es enneaaaaaaaaaeaeeeeeeeees 19
   Oregon RESICGENCY ......ccccccccccennesneenseeseeeesseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeseeeeeGeeGaG
                                                                     eae eas eeG sess EEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEESEESEESSEEE;E 20


               Oregon Housing and Community Services         | 725 Summer St. NE Suite B, Salem, OR 97301-1266          | (503)986-2000      | FAX (503) 986-2020

                                                                                   Page 3 of 44
   Eligibility DOCUMENTATION .........ccccccccceententeeneenseeseseeeeeeeseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeseeseeseeaeeaeeaaeaeeesaesseeeeeeeeeees 20

   Remote Application and DOCUMENTATION...........c:cceseesesssesseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeceeeeeceeceeseeseeaeeaaeaaaeaaaeaseaeeaeeeenes 20

   Order Of Preference ......eccesseccecceessseaeeeeeeeeeeeaeeeeeeeeeeaaeeeeeeeeesesaaeeeeeeeesaaeeeeeeeeesaaeaeeeeeeeeaaaeeeeeeneeaaeeeenens 21
Allowable Expenses. .................ccccccccceceecceceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaaeaae
                                             eee eee eee eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeceeaeeaaeaaaaaaaaaeaaeganes 2

   Case ManageMent Service ........cccccssssssceecceceeesesseeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeeeeeeeeee
                                                          eee eeeeeeeecee eee seeeeeeeeeceeaaeaaaeeseeceeaaeaaaeeeeees 24

   Gift Cards... ccccesessneceeceeeeeeeneeeeeeeeseeaeeeeeeeseeaaeeeeeeeeeeaaeeeeeeeeeesaaeeeeeeeeesaaeeeeeeeeeeaeaeeeeeeeseaeaeeceeeeeeaaeeeeeens 25
   Direct Payment ASSISTANCE 20.0...                         eccccccnnseeeeeeeecee cee eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaeaeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaeeeeeseaaaaaeeeessaaaeeeeessaaseaeeeeasageeees 26

   Capacity Building (5% maximum of full AWAIC) ..........ecccceeesessentceceeceeeeeceeceseeseeseeeasaasaseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeeees 27
   Transportation / Travel ........cccccccsessccesssssecesesssecesssseeeecesaeesesssseeceeesaeeseseseseecnsaseeseeaseesesesaseeceeaeeeecesaaesenseas 28

   Safety In Street OUTFEACH 00... cccccccccecsssessenenneneaeeeeeeeeeceeeeseeeeeeeeaeaeaeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeueeeeeeasaaeaeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseenees 29
   Duplication Of BENePItS...........ccccccscccececcceceececeseeeseeseeaaeaeeeeeeeeceeeeseeeeeeeseeseasaaeeseeeeeseeeeseeeseesuceeasaasaeeeeeeeeeens 29
Records REQUIrFEMeNS .............ccccccccccceneeenteeseeseeseeseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaeeaaeaae
                                                                                       aaa eaaeaaeeasesssssseeeeeeeeeeeeeees 3

   Case FIl@S.....          eee      eeeeseseeceeceeceeeeeeeeeeeee nea aaeaeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaaaaaaaaaeaeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeeesaaaaaaaaeaeeceeeeeeeeeeseseneenegaaaaas 30
   RECOrS ACCESS ........ccceeeeeeeeeeeeenencaceaeaeeceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaaaaaaeaeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeesaaaaaaaeaeeeeeceeeeeeesenensssauaaaaeaeeaeseeeeeenes 30
   RECOrdS RETENTION ............eeceeeeseennneceeceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeesesaaaaaaeaeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeaaaaaaeaeeceeeeeeeeeeseneeeesaaaaaaeaeeaeeeeeeeeees 30
OUTCOMES. ............cccccce ccc eeeeeeeeeeee eee nae eee eeeeeeeeeaaa aaa eeeeeAAAAAAA AAA EEEEEEAAAAAA GAO EEEEEEAAAAAA OOO EE EEE SAAAGA OOOO EEE SeAAGA GOO EEE SeAAEA OOS 3

Datta Entry oo...                       ce ceeceeccenneee ceca ee eee cea eee eee aaa eee eee aaaeeeeee aaa eeeeea aaa eeecaaaeeeeeaaaeeeeeeaaaeeeeesaaaeeecaaaaseeeaaaaeeeeeaaaees 3

   HMIS.......eceecscnccceeceseeaeeceeeeseseaeeeeeeeeeeaaeeeeeeeeeaaeeeeeeeeeeaeaeeeeeeesesaaeeeeeeesesaaeeceeeeeeeaaaeceeeeseeaaaececeeenseeaeaeeeeeeeaaas 31
   Data TiMelin@Ss ............ceeeeeeeeeesesnncececceceeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeaaaaaaeaeececeeeeeeeeeeseessaaaaaaaaeaeeceeceeeeeeeseneeesauaaaaeaeeceeeeeeeenes 31
REPOPting 2.0.0...                 ecccceccecee cee eeeeeeeeeeee eae eeeeeeeee eee aaa eeeeeeeeeee GGG eeeeee eee eee GGG sEEEEE;;;;;AG;GAEEEEEE;E;A;;EG EERE SEEGEEGEG EAE EEEEEEEES 3

   QUarterly REPOFtS.......ccccccccsscsneenseeseeeesseeeeeseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeaGeeGae
                                                                         Gee Gee eeGesGssGEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEESEEESESEEEAS 35

   ANNUal REPOFt .........ccceecessesseseseseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaeeae
                                                aaa eae eee ssGEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEESEECEESEEACEGEAsAesaAaaeaa aaa gee 35

   Housing Retention Section Annual Report required RESPONSES ........cccccccceceeseenesssseeeseeeeeeseeeeseananssssesees 35

MOMITOFINg ........ cece ccccce cece ee eseeeeeeeeee nee eeeeeeeeeeee aaa eeeeeeeeeee eae eeeeeeeeeee GGG ssEeeEGeeGAAGGGHEEEES;E;;;GEG AAG EEEESEGEEGEE EAE EEEEEE EES 3

   SUDgrantee MONItTOSING.............cccccceesssceeeeececeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaeeaaeaae
                                                      eee ee eee eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeececeeseeseeaeeaaeaaaaaaaaes 36

Financial Manageme nt................cccccccccsscsscesseeseeseeseeseseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeaeeaaeaaeeas
                                                                                           eae eeaeaessesseeseeeeeeseeeeenees 3

   Mandatory USe Of OPUS..........ccccsssscscececcceceecesseesesssnaneaeeeeeeeeseeeeseeeseeeeeseaeaaeeseeeeeseeeesseeseeseeseasaaeaeeseeeeeeens 37
   Request for FUnding DOCUMENTATION ..............cccceesessnsseceeceeeeeceeceseseeeseeensaaeaeeeeeeeeceseeseeseeaeasaaeaseneeeeesesens 37

   Budget Change Requests and AM@NAMEeMs..............cccccseeseseesceeceeceeceeececeeeeeeeeceeaeesaeaaeaessaaeasegseeseseeseeeeeees 38
   Request for FUNAS .........cccccccsesssnssneeeeceeeeceeceessesseseeseseaaeaeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeasaaeaeeseeeeeseseeseesseeusasasaasaeeseeeeeseeens 38
   OHCS Spend Down and Reallocation Policy ........ccccccccccccccccceceeceeaneeessssssessesssseeeeeeeeeeeeeceeseeceeeeeseeeseeseeneeaas 38

   SPENAING Targets .......ccccssssssesesssesssseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaeeae
                                                     eee eee eee eseseEEEEEEEEEEEEEEESEEEEEEESEESECCCECeCseA see aaeaaeaaaaea 38

   OHCS and Grantee Collaboration .......... cece sscsceccecceceeeeeeeeeeeneeeaeaaeaeeceeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeeaaaaeaeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeneenenags 38


               Oregon Housing and Community Services          | 725 Summer St. NE Suite B, Salem, OR 97301-1266            | (503)986-2000      | FAX (503) 986-2020

                                                                                    Page 4 of 44
   General Fund Grant AllOCations ...........ceeeeecssssccceceeceeceeeeeeeeeeeeeaaaaaaaeaeeceeeeeeeeeesenseesaaaaaaaaeaeeaeeeeeeeeeeseneneenees
   Late Term ROllOVErs ............ccccessssssccceceececeeeeeeeeeeseeeesaaaaeaeeceeeeeeeeeesenseeseaaaaaaaeaeeceeeeeeeeeeenenesaaaaaaaaeaeeeeeeeeeees
   COMMItE? FUNS 20.                     eecee cee eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaaaeaeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaaaaaaaaeaeeceeeeeeeeeesenseeaaaaaaaaaeaeeaeeeeeeeeeeeeneeneees
   ACMINiStration ...........eeeeeceeeensnenceceececeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeenaaaaaaeaeeceeeeeeeeeeeeneeesaaaaaaaaaaeeaeeceeeeeeeeeeeenaaaaaaaaaeaeeeeeesenees
   Applicable Rules and Regulations .........cccccccccccccccsccennesneensessesseeseesseeeseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeceeeeeceeceeeeeaseaaaasaageaaes

Program Definitions .................cccccssscsccccccecceceeceseessesessenaaeaeeeeeeeeeeeeessesseeessasaaeaeeeeeeeesescesseseesusaaasaasaeeseeeeeeess




              Oregon Housing and Community Services   | 725 Summer St. NE Suite B, Salem, OR 97301-1266    | (503)986-2000    | FAX (503) 986-2020

                                                                         Page 5 of 44
Introduction

Guidance for OHCS Housing Retention Section

For our legal services and mediation providers


The guidelines provided in this Program Guidance are intended to be consistent with Oregon Housing and
Community Services (OHCS) program regulations and applicable laws, Executive Orders, and state and
federal regulations. Guidelines should not be construed to supersede, rescind, or otherwise amend such
laws, Executive Orders, or regulations. Grantees are responsible for ensuring compliance with the
requirements of the program regulations, the grant agreement, and other applicable laws and regulations.


Program Intent

In the 2023       regular session, Senate              Bill 5511 appropriated                 monies from the General               Fund to OHCS for
2023-25 biennial expenses. Outlined in the overall appropriation of $55 million for Eviction Prevention
efforts to be funded, OHCS may contract with legal services and mediation service providers to fund
housing stabilization and eviction prevention and diversion activities benefitting Oregonians statewide.

Program Summary

Oregon continues to have serious opportunity and systemic gaps that threaten the ability for individuals
and diverse communities to shape their own futures and succeed. The eviction prevention legal system is
complex, and our most vulnerable populations continue to face housing insecurity, which often leads
them to eviction proceedings, with specific overrepresentation amongst our BIPOC neighbors.


Access   to     legal   services,      mediation         aid,    legal   advice,        and     representation        creates       opportunities   for
communities         in Oregon to realize housing stability while experiencing often complex challenges and
barriers to attaining and             maintaining safe, stable housing.                       From   OHCS’     successful       work with our legal
services and mediation partners in the 2021-23 biennium, OHCS learned that in the scarcity of specific
funding, and limited capacity across the state with current staff size, legal services and mediation services
are not sufficiently available in Oregon to meet the full need. This leads to service prioritization. OHCS
prioritizes households at imminent risk of experiencing eviction — including those with notices to vacate
their housing or pending eviction notices and hearings.


With a focus on supporting these vulnerable populations, Housing Retention guidance to our legal services
and mediation partners allows our partners to pivot and adapt to community needs with a focus on
outcomes and closely documented successes delivered, barriers identified, and demographics served.


Mediation


Eviction Prevention Mediation seeks to increase housing stability and prevent homelessness by increasing
access to justice through inclusive and accessible mediation services that are working in concert with
other community      support  programs. Community-based    mediation                                             services provide vulnerable
community members tools to stabilize their housing and craft durable                                            agreements that can improve
relationships and reduce homelessness.


              Oregon Housing and Community Services   | 725 Summer St. NE Suite B, Salem, OR 97301-1266   | (503)986-2000   | FAX (503) 986-2020

                                                                         Page 6 of 44
Mediation efforts provide eviction prevention and housing stability services to both tenants and landlords.
Efforts include rehousing programs that partner with local renter assistance programs, with the
community agency network across Oregon, and in alignment with the court system. Mediation resolution
can provide referrals to services provided by other agencies, conflict coaching, and mediation to help
stabilize housing for both the renter and the housing provider. Conflict coaching helps both parties to
anticipate problems, test options, and strategize solutions. Parties are assisted by a mediator to reach a
mutually acceptable resolution to a dispute and provide educational programs that increase the
community’s capacity to resolve their own conflicts without resulting in costly litigation.

Legal Services

Legal services provide referrals, legal advice, legal representation, and other services to households facing
eviction that match geographic and subject-matter requirements. Providers meet clients where they are
in an accessible way by providing virtual legal advice and remote services for clients that are unstably
housed and facing eviction. In the 2021-23 biennium, OHCS funded a virtual legal advice clinic that allowed
low-income Oregonians to receive attorneys’ answers to civil legal questions related to housing,
employment, and benefits. Legal services partners provide balanced legal information for tenants and
landlords, which includes generating and publishing materials in plain language that are translated into
accessible languages and circulating materials to relevant agencies in the field. Legal providers operate on
a sliding-scale, pro bono, or reduced rate model for providing services. OHCS encourages innovative
modeling for bringing legal services to those Oregonians who need them most.

Recognizing that wrap around models for households work to provide direct and adjacent services to best
stabilize households in need, we support legal services interventions in the landlord-tenant law and family
law spaces.



Culturally Specific and Culturally Responsive Definitions

There is an expectation for all our Housing Retention grantees to be culturally responsive organizations.

As used in ORS chapters 456 and 458:

“Culturally Specific Organization (CSO)” means an entity that provides services to a cultural community and the
entity has the following characteristics:

    a)   Majority of members and/or clients are from a particular community of color;

    b)   Organizational environment is culturally focused, and the community being served recognizes it as a
         culturally specific entity that provides culturally and linguistically responsive services;

    c)   Majority of staff are from the community being served, and the majority of the leadership (defined to
         collectively include board members and management positions) are from the community being served;

    d)   The   entity    has   a track      record      of successful        community         engagement          and     involvement          with   the
         community being served; and



           Oregon Housing and Community Services   | 725 Summer St. NE Suite B, Salem, OR 97301-1266   | (503)986-2000   | FAX (503) 986-2020

                                                                      Page 7 of 44
    e)    The community being served recognizes the entity as advancing the best interests of the community
          and engaging in policy advocacy on behalf of the community being served.

“Culturally responsive organization (CRO)” means an entity that, as determined by OHCS:

    a)    Comprehensively addresses power relationships throughout the organization by methods that include
          addressing conflicts and dynamics of inclusion and exclusion;


    b)    Has relationships with and is responsive to communities that the organization serves, including
          communities of color;


    c)    Hires, promotes, trains and supports staff who are culturally and linguistically diverse in ways that
          reflect the communities that the organization serves, including communities of color;


    d)    Provides culturally responsive service; and

          With respect to paragraphs (a) to (d) of this subsection, has adopted governance structures, policies,
          and cultural norms to hold its leadership and staff accountable and to continue improvements.


Prioritizing Equity and Racial Justice in Programming

All grantees must prioritize equity and racial justice in their grant programs. This means that grantees
must take proactive steps to ensure that their grant programs                                   are designed        and     implemented           for the
communities        in which      they     serve      with      racial      justice     at the     forefront       of their         service       delivery:

    a)    Grantees must proactively ensure that their grant programs are accessible to all eligible
          individuals regardless of race, color, national origin, religion, sex, familial status, or disability.
    b)    Grantees must take proactive steps to reach out to and engage with communities that have been
          historically underserved or marginalized.
    Cc)   Grantees must ensure that their grant programs are designed and implemented in a way that
          promotes equity and racial justice. This may include, but is not limited to:
              e     Providing targeted             outreach       and      support      to   historically     underserved            or marginalized
                    communities.
              e     Ensuring that application review and selection processes are fair and unbiased.
              e   Providing technical assistance and support to help subgrantees build their capacity to
                  promote equity and racial justice.
    d)    Grantees must comply with all applicable fair housing laws and the equal protection clause of the
          14th amendment to the US constitution. Please consult your legal counsel for advice in program
          design and determining criteria for client eligibility.


General Program Requirements

Key Performance Measures

Our Housing       Retention     contracts outline the number                     of individuals or households to be served                         by our
grantees in the 23-25 biennium with allocated funding. For the designated number of households served,
the following is the key performance measure for success in our eviction prevention programming:


           Oregon Housing and Community Services   | 725 Summer St. NE Suite B, Salem, OR 97301-1266   | (503)986-2000    | FAX (503) 986-2020

                                                                        Page 8 of 44
Grantees must, and must cause and require their subgrantee(s), to administer the program in a manner
consistent with the OHCS program requirements designed to achieve the following performance goal:

Increased housing security for households facing imminent eviction or homelessness will be determined
by the proportion of households stably housed at the end of the program. This is gauged by the percentage
of all program participants residing in permanent housing upon completion of the program or project that
was supported by these funds.This key performance measure uses HMIS as the primary data source.


Staff Training

Grantees and subgrantee(s) staff that provide direct services and supervise staff who                                                  provide direct
services and manage           homeless grants must receive relevant training. Required training must occur for
staff minimally, within one year from the beginning date of employment and current staff must receive
training   minimally once         every two         years from        the date        of the     previous training taken.               Grantees   and
subgrantee(s) must track who attended each training, the date of the training, and the synopsis of the
training. Records for training must be made available to OHCS, upon request. Training                                                    is an eligible
expense of program development and training topics must minimally include:

    e      Trauma informed services;
    e      Mental health first aid;
    e      Harm reduction;
    e      Supporting victims of Domestic Violence;
    e      Fair housing; and
    e      For those using OHCS funds for Street Outreach, training must include Outreach Safety Strategies.

Other trainings may be required by OHCS more often than every two years.

Privacy Notification

Grantees and subgrantees must have a written privacy notification document that meets the
requirements of this section and provide it to applicant/ Client in written form, or they must have a
standalone policy that describes how the grantee or subgrantee is providing this privacy notification to
applicants/ Clients in compliance with state and federal legal requirements.

The privacy notification provided to applicants/ Clients must include the following:

           “Personally identifiable information is protected by federal laws (Privacy Act of 1974, as
           amended) and will be collected for the purpose of determining program eligibility,
           providing assistance/ service, reporting, and monitoring. Personally identifiable
           information will be shared with Oregon Housing and Community Services and other state
           agencies that are administering programs that serve the same or similar clients or
           populations, as is necessary to carry out the intent of an assistance or service program for
           the benefit of the person applying for such assistance or service. Personally identifiable
           information will be disclosed to Oregon Housing and Community Services without written
           authorization.”




            Oregon Housing and Community Services   | 725 Summer St. NE Suite B, Salem, OR 97301-1266   | (503)986-2000   | FAX (503) 986-2020

                                                                       Page 9 of 44
Grantees and subgrantees must also ask applicants/ Clients to sign a release of information form that
includes a privacy notification. In addition to the information above, such form must include the following
statement:

           “Refusal to sign this release of information
                                                      form cannot be the basis for denying program
           services to otherwise eligible applicants/ Clients. Applicant/ Client refusal to sign this
           release of information form will not prevent the inclusion of personally identifiable
           information in secure reporting to Oregon Housing and Community Services. Oregon
           Housing and Community Services will anonymize applicant/ Client demographic data for
           the purposes of reporting”.

Grantees and subgrantees must document to the applicant/ Client file that a privacy notification was
provided to the applicant/ Client ina manner consistent with state and federal privacy laws. . If grantees
or subgrantees are collecting personally identifiable information for other purposes, grantees and
subgrantees must follow state and federal laws for the collection, use, and sharing of applicant/ Client
information as it pertains to those practices as well.

Grantees     must     ensure     that subgrantees              have     policies that align with               OHCS       requirements           and   are
consistent with the intent of such a policy as outlined by OHCS. OHCS retains the right to require
modification to any privacy policy that, in its determination, does not meet basic principles or
requirements of such a policy.

Confidentiality

Confidential records include all applications, records, files, and communications relating to applicants and
Clients of OHCS-funded services regardless of hard copy or electronic format.

Grantees     must    have a standalone              policy for the maintenance                   of confidentiality of applicant/ Client
records. Such policy must include:

    e      Identification of how all applicant/ Client records are secured and confidentially maintained.
    e      Astatement that all applicant/ Client records must be maintained within state guidelines for the
           proper retention and destruction of records.
    e      Arequirement that all grantee officers, employees, and agents are aware of and are in compliance
           with the grantees’ confidentiality policy and an acknowledgement of such policy, in writing.
    e      Aprovision for the electronic collection of applicant/ Client information which states that:

               o     Computer terminals must be in a secure location, limiting access to only those persons
                     who have a legitimate interest in and are responsible for applicant/ Client records.
               o     Computer monitors must be cleared (or a screen saver activated) immediately after
                     accessing a(n) applicant/ Client record.
               o     Computer terminals must be in a “locked”                                 mode       or turned        off if the terminal            is
                     unattended.
               o     Access to personally identifiable HMIS data will be given to only authorized personnel
                     when necessary for performing the work required for OHCS-funded programs.
               o     A statement that all records will be open for review to federal and state authorized
                     representatives, auditors, and examiners during their regular audits and monitoring
                     functions of OHCS-funded programs.


            Oregon Housing and Community Services   | 725 Summer St. NE Suite B, Salem, OR 97301-1266   | (503)986-2000   | FAX (503) 986-2020

                                                                      Page 10 of 44
Grantees         must     ensure     that    subgrantees           have     policies      that   align      with     OHCS      requirements           and   are
consistent with the intent of such a policy as outlined by OHCS. OHCS retains the right to require
modification to any policy that in its determination does not meet basic principles or requirements of such
a policy.

Domestic Violence Shelter Confidentiality Provision

The address and location of shelters operating solely as domestic violence shelter facilities funded,
partially or in whole, by OHCS must be protected from public disclosure except as authorized by the
director of the organization responsible for operations of the shelter in compliance with federal, state, or
local rules and regulations. OHCS                       retains the right to obtain shelter addresses and locations funded,
partially or in whole by OHCS; however, such information is protected from                                               public disclosure except as
authorized by federal, state, or local rules and regulations.


Service Termination or Denial of Assistance

Grantees and subgrantees must have written termination, denial, and grievance policies and procedures.
The policies and procedures should be readily available to Clients either at intake or by posting the policy
in a public place. A public place should include grantee’s website if services are provided in a remote
capacity. It is important to effectively communicate these policies and procedures to applicants/ Clients
and to ensure they are fully understood.

Grantees and subgrantees are required to provide verbal documented                                              or written        notice to applicants/
Clients        when denying or terminating program assistance. The notice must include the specific reason(s)
for the denial/ termination and identify the steps to appeal the grantee’s or subgrantee’s decision.


Grievances and Appeals

Grantees are required to have an established, written stand-alone policy for addressing applicant/client
grievances/appeal requests. Grantees must ensure that subgrantee(s) have policies that align with OHCS
requirements and are consistent with the intent of such a policy as outlined by OHCS. Applicants/Clients
must have the right and opportunity to grieve/appeal any decision that terminates, denies, limits, reduces
or modifies benefits for any reason.

Applicants/Clients must be notified of their right for a grievance or appeal of such decision and Grantee
policy must clarify how and when applicants/clients are notified of their right to grieve/appeal decisions.
Such grievance/appeal policy must be posted in a public place, to include the grantee website; however,
applicants/clients must receive a verbal documented or written notification for any decision that
terminates, denies, limits, reduces or modifies any benefit. Written notification via email is acceptable.

Applicants/Clients must still receive a denial notification even if the reason for denial is a
Grantee’s/subgrantee’s lack of funding. At a minimum, the policy must include the following components:

          a.     Informs the client/applicant that they can contest any Grantee’s or subgrantee’s decision that
                terminates, denies, limits, reduces or modifies any benefits and identifies the steps to follow to
                contest the decision;
          b.     Informs     the    client/applicant         of the       reason     for termination,              denial,    limitation,      reduction     or



                Oregon Housing and Community Services   | 725 Summer St. NE Suite B, Salem, OR 97301-1266   | (503)986-2000    | FAX (503) 986-2020

                                                                          Page 11 of 44
              modification of benefit;
              Allows    any aggrieved          person       a minimum           of thirty (30) days to request an administrative
              review/appeal of such decision;
              Informs the applicant/client of their right to present written or oral objections before a person
              other than the person (or a subordinate of that person) who made or approved the decision;

      b)      Identifies     what reasonable accommodations are available for applicant/clients who have
              language,      mobility or disability barriers that would prevent them from participating in the
              review/appeal process and how to request such accommodations; and
      Cc)     Informs the applicant/client and OHCS in writing of the final determination                                           and basis for the
              decision within ten (10) days of the final determination.

      d)      Any person or persons designated by Grantee and subgrantee(s) can complete the
              administrative review/appeal, other than the person who made or approved the decision under
              review/appeal or a subordinate of this person.

OHCS retains the right to require modification of any policy that in its determination does not meet basic
principles or requirements for such a policy.

Nondiscrimination

Grantees are required to comply with all state and federal statutes relating to nondiscrimination. Grantee
must have a stand-alone policy that includes the following:

A statement that grantee will comply with all state, federal, and local statutes, rules, and guidelines for
all protected classes and will not take any of the following actions based on race, color, national origin,
age, religion, gender, familial status, or disability; or victims of domestic violence, marital status, sexual
orientation, gender identity, or source of income:


            Refuse to accept an application for housing assistance or services;
            Deny an application for housing assistance or services;
            Set different terms, conditions or privileges for housing assistance or services;
            Provide different or specific housing, facilities or services;
            Falsely deny that housing is available for inspection or rental or that services are available; or
            Deny anyone access to a facility or service; and
            A description of how applicants or clients can request reasonable accommodations to access
            assistance or services, how that process is communicated to applicants and clients and how
            those requests are processed.


Grantees must ensure subgrantee(s) have policies that align with OHCS requirements and are consistent
with the intent of such a policy as outlined by OHCS. OHCS retains the right to require modification to any
policy that in its determination does not meet basic principles or requirements of such a policy.

The Fair Housing Act prohibits discrimination based on protected classes in the housing activities of
advertising, screening, and unit rentals. Using a target population in screening is allowed; however,
refusal to accept applications or provide information on services or available housing to any protected
class, even if these groups do not fit into the targeting strategy, is prohibited.




             Oregon Housing and Community Services   | 725 Summer St. NE Suite B, Salem, OR 97301-1266   | (503)986-2000   | FAX (503) 986-2020

                                                                       Page 12 of 44
Screening criteria cannot be discriminatory and must be consistently applied. A priority population means
persons that are determined to have the greatest need and will receive services first; however, priority
cannot be used as means of denying any person assistance. Refusal to accept applications or provide
information on services, or available housing, to any protected class, even if these groups do not fit into
the priority population, is prohibited. For example, a provider might decide to give priority to
applicants/clients who graduate from a tenant readiness education program that is inclusive of all
protected classes. If two requests come in at the same time and both meet the screening criteria, the
applicant/client who also has the tenant readiness education experience could receive priority over the
applicant who does not; however, providers must always accept the first request meeting their criteria or
prioritization policy.


OHCS reserves the right to require a prioritization of clients when such prioritization is intended from a
specific funding source. Grantees and their subgrantee(s) must adhere to such prioritization required by
OHCS.

For more information, see the Guide to Fair Housing for Homeless and Domestic Violence Shelter Providers
produced by the Fair Housing Council of Oregon, or contact them directly at www.fhco.org.

Limited English Proficiency

The federal government has issued a series of policy documents, guides, and regulations describing how
grantees and subgrantees should address the needs of persons who have limited English proficiency (LEP).
The abbreviated definition of persons with LEP are those who have difficulty reading, writing, speaking,
or understanding English, and do not use English as their primary language.

Grantee must have a LEP standalone policy that includes the following:

     e      The actions grantee took to identify LEP populations in their service area and citations for any
            source(s) used for evaluation;
     e      Defines actions grantee will take to provide language assistance and address language barriers;
     e      States how and how often staff will receive training about assisting LEP persons; and
     e      Identifies that, minimally, LEP populations will be evaluated biennially and that updates to the LEP
            policy will incorporate any needed changes to address new or emerging LEP populations.

Grantees      must    ensure      that    subgrantee(s)          have      policies     that   align     with    OHCS      requirements           and   are
consistent with the intent of such a policy as outlined by OHCS. OHCS retains the right to require
modification to any policy that in its determination does not meet basic principles or requirements of such
a policy.

Grantees      and subgrantees can create a written                       language       access     plan (LAP) to provide a framework to
document how the grantee/subgrantee’s programs will be accessible to all populations in their service
area. Grantees and subgrantees who serve few persons needing LEP assistance can choose not to establish
a LAP; however, the absence of a written LAP does not release grantee’s or subgrantee’s obligation to
ensure LEP persons have access to programs or activities.


Conflict of Interest

Grantees and subgrantees must ensure their performance                                  of activities will create no potential or actual


             Oregon Housing and Community Services   | 725 Summer St. NE Suite B, Salem, OR 97301-1266   | (503)986-2000   | FAX (503) 986-2020

                                                                        Page 13 of 44
conflict of interest, as defined by ORS Chapter 244, for a director, officer, agent, or employee of grantee
or subgrantee(s). A conflict of interest exists if, among other things, a decision or recommendation could
affect the finances of the grantee’s or subgrantee’s officers, agents, or employees or the finances of their
officers’, agents’, or employees’ relatives. If a conflict of interest exists, the grantee’s or subgrantee’s
officer, agent, or employee must always give written notice of the conflict, and in some situations the
officer, agent, or employee is restricted in their ability to participate in the matter that presents the
conflict of interest. No grantee or subgrantee officer, agent, or employee may carry out the initial
evaluation required to obtain services for any person in which an actual or perceived conflict of interest
does or would exist, unless in rare circumstances it is in the interest of the applicant/ Client for the
expediency of housing placement services or to create seamless service delivery while keeping                                                      the
applicant/ Client engaged in services and such situation is documented in the applicant/ Client file.

Grantee     must   have a conflict-of-interest policy that outlines the process for disclosing, in writing, any
potential    or actual      conflict of interest. This               includes         procedures        for staff when           employees,      board
members, friends, or family members apply for program services. Grantees and subgrantees must comply
with conflict-of-interest standards for both individuals and organizations. Grantees and subgrantees must
keep records to show compliance with program conflict of interest requirements.


Organizational Conflict of Interest

The   provision     of any type         or amount          of assistance         must      not be conditioned              on an individual’s or
household’s acceptance or occupancy of emergency shelter or housing owned by a grantee, subgrantee,
or an affiliated organization. Conflict of interest waivers regarding rent assistance and Rental Agreement
requirements can only be approved by OHCS. If a grantee or subgrantee wishes to apply for a waiver, they
must contact the OHCS homeless program analyst or manager for guidance in submission of a waiver
request, which must be approved by OHCS.

Grantees and subgrantees can conduct a Client intake assessment to determine program eligibility if the
Client resides in housing where the grantee or subgrantee has ownership interest for the expediency of
housing placement services and to create seamless service delivery while keeping the Client engaged in
services. A waiver of the conflict-of-interest policy for this purpose is not required.

Grantees and subgrantees cannot steer potential renters to units owned or operated by the grantee or
subgrantee, if the renters will be using a rent subsidy paid with any OHCS funds. Rent-subsidized Tenants
are free to execute a rental contract with another Landlord within the grantee’s or subgrantee’s
jurisdiction or they can choose to rent a unit owned or operated by the grantee or subgrantee. A waiver
request is not required for this situation; however, grantees and subgrantees must comply with this
provision of the conflict-of-interest policy.

Individual Conflict of Interest

For the procurement of goods                and services, grantees and subgrantees                          must comply with the codes of
conduct and conflict of interest requirements.

Persons for whom          the conflict-of-interest requirements                       apply include any person who                   is an employee,
agent, consultant, officer, or elected or appointed official of the grantee or subgrantee organization. No
person who exercises or has exercised any functions or responsibilities with respect to activities assisted
under the Housing Retention programs, or who is ina position to participate in decision-making processes

            Oregon Housing and Community Services   | 725 Summer St. NE Suite B, Salem, OR 97301-1266   | (503)986-2000   | FAX (503) 986-2020

                                                                      Page 14 of 44
or gain inside information with regard to activities assisted under the Housing Retention                                                programs, can
obtain a financial interest or benefit from an assisted activity; have a financial interest in any contract,
subcontract, or agreement with respect to an assisted activity; or have a financial interest in the proceeds
derived from an assisted activity, either for themselves or for those with whom                                              they have a family or
business tie, during their tenure or during the one-year period following their tenure.

Grantee must have a conflict-of-interest standalone policy that complies with the following:

      e     States that grantee officers, agents, and employees will create no perceived, potential, or actual
            conflict of interest;
      e      Identifies how officers, agents, and employees are notified of policy;
      e      Outlines the process for disclosing, in writing, any potential or actual conflict of interest;
      e      Identifies the process the grantee will follow when notice of a perceived, potential, or actual
             conflict of interest is received and includes procedures for staff when employees, board members,
            friends, or family members apply for program services; and
      e      Identifies how records are kept of perceived, potential, or actual conflicts of interest.

Grantees must ensure that subgrantees have policies that align with OHCS requirements and are
consistent with the intent of such a policy as outlined by OHCS. OHCS retains the right to require
modification to any policy that in its determination does not meet basic principles or requirements of such
a policy.


Program Eligibility

OHCS allows for local prioritization processes except for ensuring that applicants/ Clients who are at most
imminent risk of Eviction need to be prioritized for services and supports. This is generally those who have
an active Eviction case, or who have received an Eviction notice. While general practice prioritizes
populations most at risk of houselessness, OHCS allows for flexibility of program design as needed when
serving targeted culturally specific populations.


Housing Status

Homeless or unstably housed households are eligible to receive Housing Retention program funded
services. Housing status may be obtained through a self-certification process alone without regard to
further documentation of housing status. Eligible applicants for program services must meet one of the
following categorical definitions of homeless or be unstably housed and at risk of homelessness.

“Household” means an individual living alone, a family with or without children, or a group of
individuals who are living together as one economic unit.

     TENANT RESIDENT STATUS                              TENANT HOUSING STATUS                                  TENANT INCOME STATUS
 e        Tenant involved isa                        e = Literally unhoused                                 @    Tenant income equal to or
          resident of the state of                   e     Atimminent risk of                                     less than 80% of the area
          Oregon                                           houselessness                                          median income (AMI)
                                                     e     Fleeing domestic violence
                                                     e     Homeless under other
                                                           federal statutes

              Oregon Housing and Community Services | 725 Summer St. NE Suite B, Salem, OR 97301-1266   |   (503) 986-2000 | FAX (503) 986-2020
                                                                       Page 15 of 44
                                                     e     Unstably housed                               |

    e   Tenant household must be a resident of Oregon
    e   with income equal to or less than 80% area median income (AMI).

    e   Tenant must be experiencing or be at risk of housing instability according to at least one of the
    following categories, which are further described below:

    e   Category 1: Literally homeless
    e   Category 2: Imminent risk of homelessness
        oO Example: Notice to vacate housing
    e   Category 3: Homeless under a federal statute
        O       Example: McKinney Vento qualification
    e   Category 4: Fleeing Domestic Violence
    e   Category 5: Unstably housed
        Oo      Example: Highly rent overburdened (over 50% of income spent on direct housing costs)

Category       1: Literally Homeless—Household                            that    lacks a fixed,             regular,      and     adequate           nighttime
residence, meaning:

    e = Living in a primary nighttime residence that is a public or private place not designed for human
        habitation (including, but not exclusive to, a car, park, abandoned                                          building, bus or train station,
        airport or camping ground);
    e   Living       in   a   publicly     or   privately       operated         shelter     designated             to   provide        temporary         living
        arrangements (including congregate shelters, transitional shelter, and hotels or motels paid for
        by charitable organizations or by federal, state or local government programs);
        OR
    e   Exiting an institution where he or she has resided for 90 days or less AND who resided in an
        emergency shelter or place not meant for human habitation immediately before entering that
        institution.


Category 2: Imminent risk of homelessness—Household that will imminently lose their primary
nighttime residence provided:

    e   The primary nighttime residence will be lost within 21 days of the date of application for homeless
        assistance;
    e   No subsequent residence has been identified; AND
    e   The household lacks the resources or support networks (e.g., family, friends, faith-based or other
        social networks, etc.) needed to obtain other permanent housing.

Category 3: Homeless under a federal statute—Unaccompanied youth under 25 years of age, or
families with youth who do not otherwise qualify as homeless under OHCS definition, (literally homeless,
imminent risk of homelessness, or fleeing/ attempting to flee Domestic Violence) but who:

    e   Are defined as homeless under a federal statute;
    e   Have not had a Lease, ownership interest, or Occupancy Agreement in permanent housing during
        the 60 days prior to the program assistance application;


             Oregon Housing and Community Services   | 725 Summer St. NE Suite B, Salem, OR 97301-1266       | (503)986-2000   | FAX (503) 986-2020

                                                                       Page 16 of 44
    e    Have experienced persistent instability as measured                              by at least two moves during the preceding
         60 days; AND
    e    Can be expected            to continue         in such      status for an extended                period         due   to special        needs     or
         barriers.

Category 4: Fleeing/ attempting to flee Domestic Violence—Household who:

    e    Is fleeing, or is attempting to flee, Domestic Violence;
    e    Has no safe residence; AND
    e    Lacks the resources or support networks to obtain other permanent housing.

Category 5: Unstably housed— Household who:

    e    ls at risk of losing their housing, and does                       not otherwise            qualify as homeless            under the above
         listed (1-4) categories, provided that:
               o They have been notified to vacate their current residence or otherwise demonstrate high
                   risk* of losing current housing; AND
               o     They lack the resources or support networks to obtain other permanent housing.

*High risk may be demonstrated                 by but is not solely defined as: having experienced a loss of income or
other threat to housing stability. In addition, sharing housing of other persons due to loss of housing,
economic hardship, or a similar reason (“doubled up”) may demonstrate a high risk of losing current
housing. Owing rental arrears or not having the ability to pay for future rent may also demonstrate                                                       high
risk status.


Income

To be eligible to receive services, applicants must be low income; a household must be at or below 80%
of area median income.

Income includes the current gross income of all adult household members. Income earned by household
members who are minors or full-time students and are not considered heads of household is excluded.
While household assets must be identified to determine that a program applicant lacks the resources to
obtain or retain permanent housing, if using the unstably housed housing status, they are generally not
counted as income, unless an income is derived from such asset’s dividends on investments, stocks,
bitcoins, etc., which must be counted as part of the household’s available income.

Grantees’     processes       for determining             income       eligibility and         the      documentation            required         must      be
consistent with OHCS program requirements.


Grantees’ policies and procedures must identify what method they will use to calculate income eligibility,
and income eligibility must be calculated consistently between applicants of the same program. Grantees
must ensure that subgrantees have policies that align with OHCS requirements and are consistent with
the intent of such a policy as outlined by OHCS. OHCS retains the right to require modification to any
policy that in its determination does not meet basic principles or requirements of such a policy.

Requests for documentation must be either universally applied to all applicants, or consistently applied in
certain pre-determined objectively definable situations.


            Oregon Housing and Community Services   | 725 Summer St. NE Suite B, Salem, OR 97301-1266   | (503)986-2000    | FAX (503) 986-2020

                                                                      Page 17 of 44
Documentation methods may include:

        Previous 12 months of income;
        Year-to-date income divided by the number of months included in the year-to-date income; or
        Previous 30 days (or previous 60 days or other specified period of days) of income.


                   Convert periodic wages to annual income by multiplying:
                   1.   Hourly wages by the number of hours worked per year (2,080 hours for
                   full-time employment with a 40-hour week and no overtime);
                   2.   Weekly wages by 52;
                   3.   Bi-weekly wages (paid every other week) by 26;
                   4,   Semi-monthly wages (paid twice each month) by 24; and
                   5.   Monthly wages by 12.
                   To annualize other than full-time income, multiply the wages by the actual
                   number of hours or weeks the person is expected to work.


A snapshot of current income can be used as an exception to grantees’ policies and procedures, when
warranted and documented in the applicant file. Snapshot method means the process of determining the
estimated annual income that uses a snapshot of the household income at the time of application. It does
not rely on a specific period in the past to determine the annual income amount. The snapshot method
must only be used when          a household’s income                has recently changed              drastically and is not expected to
change from the time of the snapshot (such as in a recent job loss) or when income tends to be very
volatile. The snapshot method cannot be used to avoid accounting for income.


        Standardization: Grantees and subgrantees have the discretion to calculate income standards in
        a manner best suited for the organization, based on their own policies. Example policies include
        using a year-to-date amount divided by the number of months in the year-to-date amount, or
        using the last 30 days of paystubs or the last 60 days of paystubs. The main requirement is that
        the way income is calculated is consistent between clients. Exceptions to the standard way of
        calculating income must be identified in policy (such as circumstances in which a snapshot method
        is used).


        Consistency: Grantees and subgrantees must be consistent in how income calculation standards
        are applied, even if that means it excludes someone from being able to be assisted. Grantees and
        subgrantees cannot use the most current paystub for one person, the last 30 days for another,
        and a year-to-date for someone else, especially if the fluctuating use shows that it is being done
        to under-calculate income. Income calculation standards must be documented in policy and such
        policy will be subject to OHCS monitoring.


        Applicant quit a job: If an applicant quits their job within the past 30 days and meets other
        eligibility, assistance may still be provided; however, the income can be calculated on the
        snapshot method. The snapshot method is an exception to a standardization of income
        calculation and must be identified in the grantee and subgrantee policy as well as documented in
        the applicant file as to why the exception was granted.



         Oregon Housing and Community Services   | 725 Summer St. NE Suite B, Salem, OR 97301-1266   | (503)986-2000   | FAX (503) 986-2020

                                                                   Page 18 of 44
    e    Overtime and bonuses: These types of pay cannot be excluded from income calculations. Income
         cannot be excluded just because it would put the applicant/ Client over the income limit. Year-to-
         date income methodology is an effective way to determine income when income is varied and
         includes overtime or bonuses.


    e    Income from a live-in aide: This is not considered part of the income determination; however, a
         live-in aide must meet certain criteria. Live-in aide means a person who resides with one or more
         elderly household members,                  or near-elderly household                 members,        or member          of the household
         with disabilities, and who:


                    Is determined to be essential to the care and well-being of the household member;
             0




                    Is not obligated for the support of the household member;
             0




                    Would not be living in the unit except to provide the necessary supportive services; and
             0




                    Provides documentation                   of   payment        for     the   live-in     aide    services       provided      to    the
             Oo




                    household.


    e   = Child tax credits, earned income tax credits, stimulus payments, and tax refunds:
               o   These are not considered income.


    e    Self-employment: When calculating self-employment, use the previous year’s tax information, if
         available. Use the gross income and subtract out the deductions claimed on Schedule C to get a
         net income. Schedule C is the profit and loss form used for a business, which deducts expenses,
         such as their vehicle, supplies, offices expenses, travel, utilities, etc. The net income is then
         divided by 12 and the result is used for the household’s monthly income.

More information on income can be found on the OHCS website in the Income Inclusions and Exclusions
form.


Citizenship and Immigration Status

Grantees must provide services to all eligible households                              regardless of immigration status. Immigration
status or citizenship may not be used as a reason for denial of services.

Prioritization Guidance


OHCS    recognizes that prioritization of resources is a reality when there is more                                          need than available
resources. OHCS also notes that prioritization of who is served first should consider local factors and needs
while also ensuring that Discrimination and fair housing laws are followed accordingly. The rest of the
determination processes need to be documented by grantee/subgrantee to determine the most critical
needs for each local community.

To that end, OHCS has the following criteria for prioritization under this program:


OHCS requires that households who are facing an active Eviction case be prioritized for financial assistance
funding over those who             are simply at risk of Eviction. Grantee                        must develop a written strategy for
identifying and prioritizing households that have received an Eviction notice, have a pending                                                        first
appearance, have a written notice to vacate, or are otherwise at imminent risk of Eviction.



           Oregon Housing and Community Services   | 725 Summer St. NE Suite B, Salem, OR 97301-1266   | (503)986-2000   | FAX (503) 986-2020

                                                                     Page 19 of 44
Oregon Residency

Services must be provided to those residing within the state of Oregon;                                     however, there is no length of
time prior to receiving services or financial assistance for which an applicant/ Client had to have been an
Oregon resident.


If   a household’s     documented           housing       status     is Category         4 — fleeing         Domestic        Violence,          legal     and
Mediation services program funding can be used for eligible categorical costs associated with moving out
of Oregon to a safe location, provided that there is documentation in the applicant's/ Client’s service/
housing plan, indicating that the applicant’s/ Client’s destination has been confirmed as an available, safe
housing option and that no funds are used for rent, hotel/ motel, utilities, or other services in a state other
than Oregon. Such allowable costs are restricted to moving costs.

Eligibility Documentation

Documentation of all applicant/ Client eligibility information must be available in applicant/ Client files or
if kept electronically,      available      upon      request      in the format          requested        by OHCS.        Documentation                of all
efforts to obtain high preference verification (third party and intake worker/ case manager observation)
when lower forms of preference are used, must be in writing and kept in the applicant/ Client file.

Remote Application and Documentation

OHCS’ standard preference is for applicants/ Clients to apply for assistance in person or to have in-person
contact with the grantee or subgrantee(s) throughout the application and service delivery process. A
remote application and documentation process can be used when needed; however, the identity and
residence of the applicant/ Client must be verified. Applicant/ Client file must reflect what method of
identity verification was used.

To the extent permissible under grantee or subgrantee’s privacy policy, Applicants/ Clients who apply for
assistance and provide eligibility or other documentation remotely can do so via electronic and other
communication (e.g., phone, email, text, electronic messaging, mail, or other electronic or remote
means). Eligibility and other documentation must be kept in each applicant/ Client file to meet eligibility
and monitoring requirements.


Grantees must have a standalone policy for the use of a remote application and eligibility documentation
process. Grantees must ensure that subgrantees have policies that align with OHCS requirements and are
consistent with the intent of such a policy as outlined by OHCS. Such policy must be applied equitably
across services that use or are supported by OHCS funding and when allowed by the funding source. OHCS
retains the right to require modification to any policy that in its determination does not meet basic
principles or requirements of such a policy.


The grantee’s remote application and documentation policy must address the following elements:


     e    In what circumstances a remote application and documentation process will be used;
     e    How the verification of the identity and residence of the applicant/ Client is ascertained;
     e    How the verification and documentation                         of qualification for assistance in relation to program
          eligibility criteria are ascertained;



           Oregon Housing and Community Services   | 725 Summer St. NE Suite B, Salem, OR 97301-1266   | (503)986-2000   | FAX (503) 986-2020

                                                                     Page 20 of 44
    e   When      remote      verification        and    documentation              is appropriate         for   ongoing       demonstration             of
        eligibility; and
    e   How notifications are provided to applicant/ Client, inclusive of privacy notification and grievance/
        appeal notification.

Order of Preference

OHCS requires grantees and subgrantees to comply with the following general documentation standards
listed in order of preference:

    e   Third-party documentation: Source documents by an outside source, is the preferable form of
        documentation. Third-party documentation                           includes a written statement or document from an
        employer, Landlord, public benefit worker, agency service provider, etc. Written verification sent
        directly to grantee/subgrantee or via the applicant/ Client is preferred.


    e   Intake/ case manager worker observation: Observations documented                                           by grantee or subgrantee
        staff includes oral statements made by a social worker, case manager, or other appropriate official
        at an institution, shelter, or other facility, and documented by the program intake worker/ case
        manager. When the intake worker/ case manager is unable to obtain a written or oral statement
        from a shelter, institution, or facility staff, the intake worker/ case manager must document,                                                   in
        writing, their efforts to obtain eligibility documentation and must place their documentation in
        the applicant/ Client file.

    e   Applicant/      Client self-certification:            An    applicant/       Client signed         document         certifying         eligibility,
        requires a written and signed document by the individual or head of household seeking assistance
        attesting to the eligibility facts for which they are certifying. A third-party can be designated by
        an applicant/ Client to sign documents on their behalf when they are unable to do so. It is the
        responsibility of the grantees and subgrantees to provide access to language interpretation
        services and assistive devices necessary for applicants/ Clients to understand the documents they
        are certifying. Self-certification documentation is only used when documented staff efforts verify
        that third-party or intake worker/ case manager observation documentation is not available.
        However, lack of third-party documentation must not prevent an individual or household from
        being immediately admitted to emergency shelter, receiving street outreach services, or
        immediately accessing Domestic Violence/ victim service shelter and assistance.


Allowable Expenses

                                                                CATEGORIES


                                            CATEGORY A: PROGRAM                         DELIVERY
 Outreach and engagement                            Outreach and engagement activities associated with the
 activities, including street                       community served by the grantee. Street outreach is a
 outreach                                           service that engages with people experiencing
                                                    homelessness who are living outside or in public spaces.
                                                    The goal of street outreach is to help people experience
                                                    houselessness move into permanent housing and connect


          Oregon Housing and Community Services   | 725 Summer St. NE Suite B, Salem, OR 97301-1266   | (503)986-2000   | FAX (503) 986-2020

                                                                    Page 21 of 44
                                                  them with other supports and resources. These expenses
                                                  can include outreach staff time, transportation, promotional
                                                  materials, meetings, and events. Please see the “Safety in
                                                  Outreach” section below chart for more information.
Translation services                              Development of a language access plan and translation of
                                                  web and print materials into languages most utilized in the
                                                  service community. Expenses tied to enabling access to
                                                  services for users with limited English proficiency.
Web, print, social media, and                     Promotions and advertising for the grant program and other
advertising                                       available housing-related services provided by the grantee.
                                                  Web media, print media, social media, advertising and
                                                   promotional expenses.
Research and development                          Grant program design, research to determine community
                                                  needs and service delivery best practices, third-party
                                                  development and programming, software development
                                                  costs, pilot programming, and program testing.
Program implementation                            Planning activities related to preparing to implement the
planning                                          program. Planning meetings, events, onboarding, and
                                                  training expenses.
Equity and accessibility efforts                   Expenses tied to accommodations and efforts to ensure the
                                                   program is delivered equitably with the most vulnerable
                                                  and underserved Oregonians in mind. Expenses tied to
                                                  building equitable service delivery into the program design
                                                  and ensuring the program is accessible to those who are
                                                  differently abled or lack the resources to engage in the
                                                  traditional platforms/ points of program entry.
Program evaluation                                Regular evaluation of program efficacy and outcomes, and
                                                  generating reports, charts, and visualizations. May include
                                                  materials and expenses tied to these efforts.
Training and technical                            Staff training related to the development and
assistance                                        implementation of the grant program. This includes training
                                                  materials, training space rent and expenses, equipment,
                                                  and transportation.
HMIS and data system                              Set up and maintenance of HMIS access and utilization. This
expenses                                          includes hardware, set-up fees, maintenance, software,
                                                  subscription fees, and training needs.
Personnel — staff time                            Wages, salaries, and employment benefits for staff who
                                                  deliver services and those who directly oversee program
                                                  operations.
Direct to Program Non-                            Direct expenses tied to the operation of the program as
Personnel Expenses                                space rent, office supplies, equipment, and vehicle leasing
                                                  tied directly to staff operating the program.




        Oregon Housing and Community Services   | 725 Summer St. NE Suite B, Salem, OR 97301-1266   | (503)986-2000   | FAX (503) 986-2020

                                                                  Page 22 of 44
Capacity building (5% max)                           Please see the “Capacity Building” chart below for more
                                                     information.
Case management services                              Direct services and referrals tied to activities associated
                                                     with individualizing and integrating employment, health
                                                     care, connections to benefits, and other housing-related
                                                     options for or with a household. Case managers assist
                                                     applicants/ Clients in assessing and coordinating any
                                                     services necessary to address their housing instability. It is a
                                                     collaborative process that involves planning, implementing,
                                                     monitoring, and evaluating the options and services for
                                                     each applicant/ Client. Please see the “Case Management
                                                     Services” chart below for more information.
Housing and health navigation                        Housing navigation and housing education are services that
services                                             help individuals and families experiencing housing
                                                     instability or homelessness to identify opportunities and
                                                     address barriers to housing. A specialist who assists people
                                                     in locating and securing affordable housing is called a
                                                     housing navigator. Healthcare navigators can help patients
                                                     navigate the clinical care system. Responsibilities include
                                                     helping patients to find and access treatment. Housing
                                                     stability is a social determinant of health and health stability
                                                     supports housing stability. Thus, we view them as
                                                     interdependent.
Hotline and in-person services                       Telephone and web data systems, call routing, tracking, and
                                                     data collection. HMIS expenses billed separately. On site
                                                     service delivery and setting up trauma-informed spaces for
                                                     applicants/ Clients to converse privately related to their
                                                     cases and housing or case concerns.
Client support meetings and                          Meetings and events involving Clients as a part of the grant
events                                               program to engage in supportive activities such as cohorts,
                                                     services geared toward gaining employment, raising
                                                     income, budgeting, educational opportunities, case
                                                     management activities, etc.
Transportation/ travel                               Transportation, meal expenses, and lodging tied to
                                                     approved grant activities such as out-of-area educational
                                                     conferences. Travel is allowable as a direct program cost
                                                     when such travel will provide direct benefit to the Client or
                                                     grant program. Transportation for employees, volunteers, and
                                                      board members can be reimbursed at the GSA per diem rate.


                                             CATEGORY B: PROGRAM                        EXPENSES




           Oregon Housing and Community Services   | 725 Summer St. NE Suite B, Salem, OR 97301-1266   | (503)986-2000   | FAX (503) 986-2020

                                                                     Page 23 of 44
Civil legal services (Legal                           Civil legal services are legal assistance services to low-
Advice, legal representation,                         income households who have non-criminal legal concerns.
court fees)                                            Legal services may include:
                                                      Mediation to help disputing parties to reach a mutually
                                                      agreeable settlement; arbitration to make a binding
                                                      decision to settle a dispute; preparation of legal documents;
                                                      and representation of Clients in negotiations, court, or
                                                      arbitration.
 Landlord/ Tenant Mediation                            In Landlord-Tenant Mediation, a neutral third party, the
 services                                              mediator, helps Landlords and Tenants resolve conflicts and
                                                      disputes related to their rental relationship. Mediation may
                                                      or may not be mandatory depending on if it falls under ORS
                                                      Chapter 90. The mediator works to facilitate a mutually
                                                       beneficial, and legally-binding (if signed by both parties)
                                                       resolution to their dispute. Mediation is an informal and
                                                      voluntary way of resolving disputes between Tenants and
                                                       Landlords.
 Court or Mediation appearance                         Expenses including childcare and eldercare needs, and
 supports                                             clothing to support court/ Mediation appearance needs.
Transportation/ travel                                Costs, such as bus or train passes, gas vouchers, Uber/ Lift/
                                                      cab fares, and travel related expenses to enable the Client
                                                      to participate in legal services or Mediation services
                                                      appointments and appearances.
 Bridge to stability funds                            Funds are intended to supplement other efforts to secure
                                                      stability funding from other resources within the state of
                                                      Oregon. If a Tenant household faces an emergency need to
                                                      vacate housing within the next 7 business days, bridge to
                                                      stability funds can support with moving, storage, food
                                                      resources, and temporary hotel/ motel shelter for up to 15
                                                      nights. Maximum amount: $2500 per household. Priority
                                                      population: Tenants experiencing Domestic Violence.


                    ADMINISTRATIVE COSTS (15% maximum of full award)
Administrative costs            Costs associated with the administration of the grant. This
                                                      can include direct and indirect costing of operations,
                                                      information technology, executive team, human resources,
                                                      and finance expenses tied to administering the program.
 Indirect to Program Non-                             Operation of the program and overhead expenses, such as
 Personnel Expenses                                   rent, utilities, office supplies, equipment, and vehicle
                                                       leasing.

Case Management Services




            Oregon Housing and Community Services   | 725 Summer St. NE Suite B, Salem, OR 97301-1266   | (503)986-2000   | FAX (503) 986-2020

                                                                      Page 24 of 44
Case management services include:

   e   Intake and assessment, including time spent assessing a household and determining whether or
       not the household was eligible;
   e   Once     an eligibility determination                is made,       case management                services also work to connect
       applicants/ Clients to resources within the organization, or external to the organization if needed
       for stability supports;
   e   Direct client services include developing an individualized housing and service plan, monitoring
       and evaluating household progress, identifying creative and immediate housing solutions outside
       of the traditional homeless service system (diversion), and ensuring that households’ rights are
       protected;
   e   Services that increase access to the income supports. This includes increasing access to earned
       income, or access to disability benefits programs administered          by the Social Security
       Administration for eligible adults who are experiencing or at risk of homelessness and have a
       serious mental illness, medical impairment, or a co-occurring substance use disorder (i.e., SOAR
       or similar style services);
   e   Services for clients entering or in permanent supportive housing who need assistance to stabilize;
   e   Placement services includes services or activities designed to assist households in locating,
       obtaining, and retaining suitable housing, Tenant counseling, assisting households to understand
       Leases, inspections, securing utilities, making                       moving       arrangements,           and     representative       payee
       services concerning rent and utilities;
   e   Mediation and outreach to property owners/ Landlords related to locating or retaining housing;
       and
   e   Data entry.


Gift Cards

Gift cards issued to eligible clients for the purpose of purchasing items must be in support of the
participant’s housing stability goals and allowable under OHCS rules and program guidance, and
any requirements in the grant agreement between OHCS and grantee., Grantee must provide
adequate documentation to support the purpose and the expense and grantee must have an
OHCS-approved Gift Card Policy. Use of gift cards must be rare, for very specific housing-related
goals and only when other payment options are not available.

Gift Card Requirements:
           e   The expense must be allowable under OHCS rules and program guidance and must
           show a connection to housing stability. Programs will be monitored, and expenditures
              will be disallowed without sufficient documentation.
              e Gift cards must be purchased and issued to clients within the same grant period.
              For any gift cards that are not issued to clients before the close of the grant period in
             which they were purchased, grantees must submit a negative request for funds for
             the grant period in which the gift cards were purchased totaling the amount of the
              unissued gift cards and other non-OHCS funds must be used for the cost of the gift
              cards.
              e    Grantee must maintain complete record of gift card purchases and recipients. Gift
              cards must be kept in a secure location prior to being issued.

         Oregon Housing and Community Services   | 725 Summer St. NE Suite B, Salem, OR 97301-1266   | (503)986-2000    | FAX (503) 986-2020

                                                                   Page 25 of 44
            e    Client must receive documentation that identifies the purpose and intent of the
            gift card and must acknowledge, by written, legible, wet signature, the same, and such
            documentation must be kept in the client’s file.
            e    Grantee or subgrantee must develop a gift card policy and obtain OHCS’ written
            approval of the policy. At a minimum, the policy must include:
                        o     Justification          as to why            gifts     cards     are     issued       rather       than          providing
                        assistance through conventional means.
                        o   Authorization levels of approval for gift card purchase and issuance within
                        grantee or subgrantee’s organization
                        o     Dollar limitations per client/participant
                        o    Frequency in which gift cards can be issued in lieu of other alternative
                        payment options.
                        o    Requirement that issuance of gift card is in support of a client’s plan to
                        increase housing stability and that plan is included in the client file.
                        o    Proper documentation: policy must require client-facing policy that
                        identifies allowable purchases and use of gift card. Policy document must be
                        signed as received and read by client/participant. One copy should be
                        provided to client and one copy should be kept in clients’ file.



Direct Payment Assistance


OHCS funds housing services as well as supportive services for low-income households
experiencing or facing housing instability in the state of Oregon. Direct assistance payments allow
participants the flexibility to meet a range of housing related needs without the complication of
third-party payment systems navigated by service providers. Grantee can allow for direct
assistance if it can address the housing stability of the participant, it is an allowable expense
under the program guidelines, grantee has developed an approved OHCS policy that clearly states
the cases in which direct payment assistance is necessary and the reasons why there are limited
alternative options in providing the service to the household. Grantees and subgrantees must
make reasonable efforts to obtain the cooperation                                  of landlords and utility providers to accept
payments directly from the program.




Recommended         alternatives to direct payment assistance:

            e  Offer third party payments from grantee or subgrantee directly to landlord, utility
            company or vendor on behalf of the participant/household.
            e     Partner with bus or transportation services that bill for their eligible clients.
            e     Partner with vendors                  (stores/businesses) for                  a voucher system. A voucher                        is a
            document which is worth a maximum dollar value, and which may be used only for
            specific items at a specific vendor. Vouchers are very similar to purchase orders. In

         Oregon Housing and Community Services   | 725 Summer St. NE Suite B, Salem, OR 97301-1266   | (503)986-2000   | FAX (503) 986-2020

                                                                   Page 26 of 44
             advance, the organization establishes agreements with a vendor under which                                                          the
             vendor agrees to accept a “voucher” at the point of sale and then invoices                                                          the
             organization for the actual purchase.
             e   Partner with clothing stores that will bill for clothing selected by eligible clients
             and the clothing can be picked up once the bill is paid (for example, Salem-Keizer
             Schools currently has this arrangement with Kohl’s).
             e   Grantee/provider staff can purchase items for client either online or at a
             store/business using company credit card. Records of detailed receipts must be
             submitted for reimbursement.

Grantee   or subgrantee            must      develop         a direct       payment          assistance         policy and          obtain     OHCS’
written approval of the policy. At a minimum, the policy must include:

             e   The business case for when direct payment would be considered, how it
             contributes to participant success, and aligns with case management for housing
             stability plans.
             e   Authorization levels of approval for direct payment approval and issuance to client
             within grantee or subgrantee’s organization.
             e   Dollar limitations per client/participant/household.
             e   Frequency at which direct payment assistance can be issued in lieu of other
             alternative payment options.
             e   Requirement that direct payment assistance is in support of a client’s plan to
             increase housing stability and that plan is included in the client file.
             e   Process for staff to document each use of direct payment including:
                         o     How the amount of direct payment was calculated.
                         o     Why direct payment assistance was provided rather than                                                 conventional
                         means.
                      o  Form of direct payment
                      o  Sign off for authorization of payment.
             e    Proper documentation: policy must require a client-facing policy document that
             identifies allowable purchases and uses of direct payment assistance. The policy
             document must be signed as received and read by client/participant. One copy
             should be provided to client and one copy should be kept in client file.



Capacity Building (5% maximum of full award)

Capacity building assists organizations to develop networks to undertake joint activities and coordinate
their services to achieve common goals and provide better service to Clients experiencing housing
instability. If a grantee wishes to hire technical assistance consultants, it is an allowable expenditure.

Funding can be used to support projects and activities that increase a grantee’s service area’s capacity to
provide emergency housing and homeless services. Capacity building includes capacity building internal
to the grantee as well as within the external service area and community. Capacity building includes



          Oregon Housing and Community Services   | 725 Summer St. NE Suite B, Salem, OR 97301-1266   | (503)986-2000   | FAX (503) 986-2020

                                                                    Page 27 of 44
increasing a grantee         or   subgrantee’s         capacity       to   deliver     OHCS       funds     and     include       service      provider
investments.

The specific focus of capacity building is to enhance local Eviction Prevention provider capacity to design
and implement strategies to build, rebuild, and sustain community capacity — especially in deprived
communities and in towns, cities, and regions suffering from economic decline, worklessness, and benefits
dependency. Supporting organizations with mentoring, finance, strategy building, and system analysis are
a vital part of capacity building. Records of capacity building activities must be kept in accordance with
OHCS records requirements, inclusive of meeting records, outcomes, and evaluation records, along with
any fiscal records associated with the project.

Objectives of capacity building are:

    e   To enhance, or more              effectively        utilize, skills, abilities,         and    resources        of Eviction        Prevention
        service providers;
    e   Strengthen understandings and relationships among Eviction Prevention service providers; and
    e   Address       issues of values, attitudes, motivations,                      and conditions to support                    housing stability
        activities in a sustainable manner.

Capacity building is not a category through which to simply share program information and available
services with other providers which can be accomplished through marketing and outreach efforts.
Capacity building projects are activities that are specifically designed to increase the community’s ability
to provide Eviction Prevention services. Costs associated with advertising and public relations designed
solely to promote the grantee or subgrantee organization and their activities are allowable to be billed
under communications.

Transportation / Travel

Costs, such as bus or train passes, gas vouchers, Uber/ Lift/ cab fares, car repairs, and auto insurance are
allowable. Payments that allow Clients to use public transportation are the highest priority and must be
considered first for the purpose of attending required appointments, job searches, or other critical
services. Case managers have the discretion to provide funding for repairs, gas, and auto insurance fora
Client’s personal vehicle. Case managers must document why a Client’s personal vehicle option is
preferred over public transportation options and that the expense will lead to the stabilization of housing.
Costs associated with a vehicle not owned by the Client are not allowed. Client must have a valid driver’s
license.

OHCS funds cannot be used to build assets, such as the purchase of a vehicle or loan payments and cannot
be used for debt payments, such as traffic violations or fines to obtain a license. Private transportation
options can include minor vehicle repair, car insurance, and the least costly option for vehicle registration,
with written grantee or subgrantee                 policy on use of funds for these services and such                               policy must      be
available to OHCS upon request. Grantees must ensure that subgrantees have policies that align with
OHCS requirements and are consistent with the intent of such a policy as outlined by OHCS. OHCS retains
the right to require modification of any policy that in its determination does not meet basic principles or
requirements of such a policy. For example, repair to a vehicle might be preferable to a bus pass if the
community does not have public transportation or if the Client works at night when public transportation
is not operational.




          Oregon Housing and Community Services   | 725 Summer St. NE Suite B, Salem, OR 97301-1266   | (503)986-2000   | FAX (503) 986-2020

                                                                    Page 28 of 44
Transportation does not include insurance to pay for roadside assistance (Such as                                          a membership to AAA),
traffic violations, or any collection costs associated with these fines. Insurance includes only general
liability insurance as required by the State of Oregon;                           however, comprehensive/ collision coverage, can
be allowed, but only when there is documented evidence that such coverage is a requirement of a vehicle
loan. Insurance is paid before the period of service and vehicle owners                                         have 10 days in which to make
payment; therefore, insurance arrears costs are unallowable.

Safety In Street Outreach

Safety in service delivery — each grantee and subgrantee must have a written policy regarding staff safety
in service delivery (such policy must be made available to OHCS upon request). Grantees must ensure that
subgrantees have policies that align with OHCS requirements and are consistent with the intent of sucha
policy as outlined by OHCS. OHCS retains the right to require modification to any policy that in its
determination does not meet basic principles or requirements of such a policy. Policies must include the
following:

     e      Never go out alone. Teams of two should be considered the absolute minimum.
     e      Establish a system in which threats to safety to teammates are identified unbeknownst to others
            while conducting street outreach.
     e      The office or clinic (e.g., team               members         not in the field) should always know the location of
            outreach teams. Keep to a set schedule and use smartphones that have built-in GPS functionality.
     e      Wear matching clothing, ideally in bright colors, so the street outreach team is easily identified.
     e      Linkages with       crisis response          teams      and    behavioral         health     support     are essential,         especially    if
            outreach teams lack a behavioral health provider.
     e      Use trauma-informed de-escalation training for outreach staff.
     e      Use harm      reduction principles: safety and comfort are two different things, as are perceived
            threats to safety and actual threats. Witnessing drug use is not necessarily a threat to safety, for
            example.
     e      Create time and space for street outreach teams to debrief and process any threatening events.
            Trauma-informed supervision of outreach personnel is essential.

Duplication of Benefits

OHCS funds shall not be issued if it duplicates a benefit already paid through another source. If a duplicate
payment is made, grantee has thirty (30) days in which to return the duplicative payment. Grantees and
subgrantees must check to ensure that benefits issued do not duplicate other benefits for the same
payment and service using HMIS and any other data system for which the grantees or subgrantees have
access. Grantees/subgrantees must have a standalone policy that identifies:

     e      How they will ensure benefits are not duplicated; and
     e      What system(s) they use to check for duplicated benefits.

Grantees      must     ensure     that    subgrantees           have      policies     that    align     with    OHCS      requirements           and   are
consistent with the intent of such a policy as outlined by OHCS. OHCS retains the right to require
modification to any policy that in its determination does not meet basic principles or requirements of such
a policy.




             Oregon Housing and Community Services   | 725 Summer St. NE Suite B, Salem, OR 97301-1266   | (503)986-2000   | FAX (503) 986-2020

                                                                       Page 29 of 44
Records Requirements

Case Files

Documentation of Client eligibility and services received must be maintained in Client case files (paper or
electronically). Documentation for applicants found to be ineligible for assistance or for Clients who are
no longer eligible to receive assistance is required and must include the applicant’s/ Client’s request for
assistance, why they are ineligible, and how it was communicated to the applicant/ Client. Ineligible
applicants     do     not need     to be entered           into    HMIS      unless the       use of HMIS          is a part of the grantee              or
subgrantee’s intake/ assessment process.

File documentation will be the basis of OHCS                            monitoring to ensure grantees and subgrantees are in
compliance          with   program        requirements            and     regulations.        OHCS       recommends             that     grantees      and
subgrantees use a Client file checklist to ensure adequate documentation of case files. Sample forms are
available on the OHCS website.

Records Access

Grantees and their subgrantees are required to permit OHCS, the Oregon Secretary of State’s Office, the
federal government, and the duly authorized representatives of such entities access to, and the right to
copy, all applicant/ Client and fiscal records for such purposes as research, data collection, evaluations,
monitoring, and auditing. At the sole discretion of OHCS, access to records shall include the removing of
records from the grantees’ and subgrantees’ offices.

Records Retention

Grantees and subgrantees must retain all program records pertinent to applicant/ Client services and
expenditures incurred under a legal and Mediation services program ina manner consistent with the grant
agreement.

Grantees and subgrantee(s) shall retain and keep accessible all such fiscal and program records, client
records, digital and electronic records, books, documents, papers, plans, and writings for a minimum of
(6) six years,       or such     longer     period      as may       be    required      by applicable          law, whichever            date    is later.
Applicable law includes the following final payment and termination of Legal and Mediation Services
program funding, or until the conclusion of any audit, controversy or litigation arising out of, or relating
to Legal and Mediation Services program funded programs.


Outcomes

Our Housing         Retention contracts outline the number                        of individuals or households to be served                        by our
grantees in the 23-25 biennium with allocated funding. For the designated number of households served,
the following is the key performance measure for success in our Eviction Prevention programming:

Grantee shall, and shall cause and require its subgrantee(s)                               by contract to administer the program                       ina
manner consistent with program requirements designed to achieve the following performance goals:




             Oregon Housing and Community Services   | 725 Summer St. NE Suite B, Salem, OR 97301-1266   | (503)986-2000   | FAX (503) 986-2020

                                                                        Page 30 of 44
    e   Increased housing stability for households at imminent risk of experiencing Eviction or
        homelessness, as measured by the percentage of households stably housed (defined as
        the percentage of total client households who reside in permanent housing upon exit from
        the program or project funded by the program).


This key performance measure uses HMIS as the primary data source.


Data Entry

HMIS

Grantees and their subgrantee(s) are required to enter Legal and Mediation Services program
related client data into the Service Point Homeless Management                                             Information System (HMIS).
Victim Services      Providers, serving survivors of Domestic Violence, are also required to collect
client data, but will not directly enter data into an HMIS. Victim Service Providers must enter
client level data into a comparable database that complies with HMIS requirements. Grantees
and subgrantee(s) are responsible for acquiring and documenting informed written consent from
Clients and protecting Client’s confidentiality.

OHCS reserves the right to request other key datasets including the following:


    e   Detailed budget and spending reports, especially the breakout of costs spent on clients
        (financial assistance) and costs spent on program delivery (staffing, subcontracts, and
        related costs).
    e   Number of clients served to date, including demographics and other trends as indicated
        in the HMIS system.
    e   Number of requests for assistance to date.

Additional guides and assistance with HMIS data entry, data quality and reporting may be found
on our website at: https://www.oregon.gov/ohcs/for-providers/Pages/index.aspx.

Data Timeliness

Timely and accurate data entry is critical to ensuring meaningful data analysis and reporting. For all project
types, Grantees and subgrantee(s)                 must enter data within 72 hours or sooner, depending on local CoC
HMIS policies.




          Oregon Housing and Community Services   | 725 Summer St. NE Suite B, Salem, OR 97301-1266   | (503)986-2000   | FAX (503) 986-2020

                                                                    Page 31 of 44
                            (Remainder of page left blank intentionally)




Oregon Housing and Community Services   | 725 Summer St. NE Suite B, Salem, OR 97301-1266   | (503)986-2000   | FAX (503) 986-2020

                                                          Page 32 of 44
Reporting

Required HMIS data collection:


 3.01    NAME

 3.02    SOCIAL SECURITY NUMBER

 3.03    DATE OF BIRTH

 3.04    RACE & ETHNICITY

 3.06    GENDER

 3.07    VETERAN STATUS

 3.08    DISABLING CONDITION (Y/N)
 3.10    PROJECT START DATE

 3.11    PROJECT EXIT DATE

 3.12    DESTINATION

 3.15    RELATIONSHIP TO Head Of Household

 3.16    ENROLLMENT COC (CLIENT LOCATION)

 3.20    HOUSING   MOVE-IN DATE

 3.917   PRIOR LIVING SITUATION (PROJECT STAY ELEMENTS)

         CURRENT COUNTY OF RESIDENCE




                             Oregon Housing and Community Services   | 725 Summer St. NE Suite B, Salem, OR 97301-1266   | (503)986-2000   | FAX (503) 986-2020

                                                                                       Page 33 of 44
 Data Collection Requirements for FY23-25 Contracts (HMIS and HMIS-Comparable Systems) and EO 23-02

DATA ELEMENTor EVENT




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               >| «| >< |< | >< Joe | oe | oe] oe | oe | oe | oe fe foe Joe foe | oe Joe | |B)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              x] x | ><] >< | a] >< foe Joe [oe | oe Joe | | SP




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ><] x | 9] «| >< | >< | oe Joe fo oe Je |< | SF




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      >| >< | >< | oe | >< [>< | >< | ><] >< | >< | oe | >< foe | oe Joe foe | oe Joe oe | E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      z




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           z


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ~




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         od od Fad od Fad bod bad Cad Cod Cod Cod Ed U3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ><] x | «| >< | 9< | >< | a |e fos | >< [oe |< PB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             &
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | x< | ><] >< | >< | >< [>< |e [>< | > Joe | oe |




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           5



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     5
                                                              mM] x | oc] oe | oe fe foe |e Pe | >< [oe | ED




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   TS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        >] x | ><] >< | >< | >< | >< |< [oe | >< Je | oe |




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 >| >< | ><] 9< | >< | >< | oe |e >< | >< Joe | a |




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         x] ><] «| >< | oe | >< | os Joe Joe | >< [oe | oe |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |
Name & Name Data Quality




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           P< | Oe |< | OX




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ><] ><] >< [>< | >< |< | >< | ><] >< | >< | oe | > foe | >< Joe |e | >< >< | ><
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ><] >< | >< >< | >< | >< | >< | oe] oe | >< | >< | > [>< | >< |< [>< | >< Jos | ><
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             | x
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        =




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 x] x |<] >< | x | >< | >< | ><] >< | >< | >< |< p< |< fe |< |< J |<
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |e |




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       | oe J |
                                              P< | me |< |




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      P< | me |< |




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           P< | oe |< |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Oe |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Pe | oe | Oe |




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Pe | oe Pe |




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     S| oe | OS |< | OS P< | OK | OK P< | Oe |< |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
Social Security No. & Data Quality




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             el
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         [|




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |< |<] >< |< |< | >< |e fe fe |e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  OK | OK PK | OK Pe | OK | OK] OK | OK | OK | OK Pe Pe Pe Pe | KP




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
                                                                                                                DS | >< | OS | OK] OS | OS | OK | OX PK | OK PK | OK | OK] OK | OK | OK | OK PK | OK | OK Pe | OX J




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      J
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |
Date of Birth and DOB Data Quality




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    PK Pe Pe Pe | oe




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             x
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        oe | OS | OS | OS P< | OK P< | oe | Oe | me | OS | OK | OK PK | OK PK P< | oe




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   pe |] x




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Je | 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Pe |




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Pe Pe Pe Pe |




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [oc [oe |]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         HC] OK | HC Pe Pe Pe Pe |




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Pe |




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  P< PK |


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
[Race (Primary and Secondary)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             P|


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Pe




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          x] >< |<] >< |< poe |e [>< |




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Je |
Jethnicity




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       | S| OK | KP OK PK PK
                                              |< |<




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      me | OS PK |< |<




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           p< |<


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           OX | OK P< | OK |<
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        PK LO




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Pe PO




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             PX




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |
Gender




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Pe




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Pe




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Pe




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |e fe |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  SP oe |




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             J
Veteran Status




                                              S| me | OS p<




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        >< | S| OK | OK PK




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           S| me | OS pe




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          | KPO




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |e] 2 | 9 |




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | nc |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   | ep
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             | KP




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Me] He | HC] oe | CP
Disabling Condition (Y/N)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ||
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |
Project Start & End Dates




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ee




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |e] oe |e |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
Destination




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  | OS]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           >< |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |
                                              |




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |
[Relationship to Head of Household




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |<
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             MM




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |x
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          mM)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     mM]




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    mM]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       mM)
Client Location (CoC)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Pe | pe | Pe | oe | |




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |
                                              |




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ||
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ||




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             9 |e | > | oe |
Housing Move-in Date




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       x] ><] >< foc | x [oe |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      >< | >| >< | >< | > |< | >< |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             | a |
Prior Living Situation




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       bad




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           cas
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ad




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          =<
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           | OS | OK P< | Oe DO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         =




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             =




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           =




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       =




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     =




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        DO




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             | OK DO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       XX
                                                                   |<




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |<




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |<
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |
Current County of Residence (3)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             | xX




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             =<




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ad
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ye | >< | OS | OS] OK | OX | OK | OK Pe | OK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  x
                                              x




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           =




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     =


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       =




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         =




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     x




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           oe | OX P< |<




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       “|x
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        oe | OK OK |




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     | Oe | fe |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     HC] Oe | He Pe |




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |
Percent Of AMI




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PO]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              KT




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Po




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Pe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             <p




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             | OP
Level of Households Income (FPL)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |<
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Oe | KP OK |




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |
income  & Sources




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             LX




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ||
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Pe




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             <<


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                po
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |)
Non-Cash Benefits




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             >< | ac] «| >|
                                              oe | OS




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |<




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |<) | x |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  OK |




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             > |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |
Health Insurance




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |<<


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |
                                                                   |




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             =<




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           mM |<]
Specific Disabilities




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           >< | ><]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           me |<]




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
                                                                   |




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
                                              |




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |<]




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |<]




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Pa




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |)


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |]




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           «|x
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Mx




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ||




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |x
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ||




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |X


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |x




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |x
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ve |
                                              SP >< | oe |




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     me]




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Me]
Domestic Violence (Y/N)
                                                                   | |




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
[if Yes’ to DV, currently fleeing?




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ||
                                                                   Mt




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Mx


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ><
Current Living Situation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     =



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        =




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      =

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           =

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           x

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  =

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      =




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       =

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             =

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             x


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                =


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      x


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        =
 Date of Engagement
                                              |




|Bed-Night (Overnight Start/End)
                                                                   =




Coordinated Entry Assessment (4)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          bad
                                              Pd




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Pd
                                                                       =


                                                                                                                x




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             =




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  </|x<
Coordinated Entry Event (S)
                                                                   =




Youth Education Status                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       x@
Last Permanent Address
Service Transactions
LGBTQ+ Community (Y/N)
Eviction (¥/N) (8)
Fund Source                                                                  x                                                                                                                                                                                           x                                                                                                 x                           x                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         xX |X]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      xX] xX]                                                                                                                                                                   XxX
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           cas




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      cas




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       bas




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     cas




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    cas




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                cas
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           =<




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 =<
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       =




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  =




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           =
 Program/Fund (Provider Standards)                                           x                                                         x                                                                                x                                                x                            x                                                                    x                           x                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       x                                 xix




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             =<
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              x

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      =

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           cas =



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  =

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      =




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             =


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             =


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                =


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      =


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        =




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     =
|8ed/Unit Inventory (Prov. Standards)                                        x                                                                                                                                          x                                                x                                                                                                                             x                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       x                                 x                                                                                             x                                   |X




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        bad
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      =
@ RF: Set up as a DRF project or used as a fund in a project funded by another fund in your MGA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |ACRONYMS
@ ES: May include “Alternative” Shelters and/or Day Access Centers                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          BAFI NATO- By and For Initiative,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         H TBRA- Home Tenant-Based Rental Assist.
@ Currently County of Residence: Required for CoCs with more than one County in the geo-area                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Native American Tribes of Oregon                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ORE DAP- Oregon Eviction, Diversion, and Prevention
iQ) Coordinated Entry Assessment: May required if the program is participating in the CoC’s CE system                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CSBG- Community Services Block Grant                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Also EO Eviction Prevention
©) Coordinated Entry Event: Maybe required by the CE project in your area                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   CoC- Continuum of Care                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    PH- Housing with Services (no disability required)
© Fund Source: for Direct Services (example: prescription payment assistance, rent payment assistance, gas voucher)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         DRF- Document Recording Fee                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               PTK- Project Turnkey
@® CSBG: Education Level        is reported for youth ages 14 to 24 and Adults in the CSBG Annual Report.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   EHA- Emergency Housing Account                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            RAY - Rent Assistance for Yoith
     New Element under consideration                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        EO 23-02 Governor's Executive Order 23-02                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 RRH- Rapid Rehousing
(9) CSBG does not required HMIS data entry, but highly recommends                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ERA- Elderly Rent Assistance                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              SHAP- State Homeless Assistance Prog.
NOTE: If new funds/programs or reporting requirments are adding during the biennium then this chart will be updated.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ES- Emergency Shelter                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     SO- Street Outreach
These data are required regardless of which management information is used (example: HMIS, HMIS comparable, other)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ESG- Emergency Solutions Grant                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            SSO- Supportive Services Only
 Reference: HMIS Data Dictionary                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            HP- Homeless Prevention                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   TH- Transitional Housing




                                                                                                               Oregon Housing and Community Services                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 | 725 Summer St. NE Suite B, Salem, OR 97301-1266                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           | (503)986-2000                                                                                                                                                       | FAX (503) 986-2020

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Page 34 of 44
Monthly Reports

Monthly     disaggregated        data    using the SAP            Business       Objects      (the       HMIS    reporting tool) System            Query
Report. Report is due 20 days following the end of each month. Grantee must upload the report into
Procorem or utilize an automated export of disaggregated HMIS client data. The System Query data may
be submitted by the HMIS administrator for all OHCS funded HMIS Participating Agencies/Providers in the
Oregon Multi-Continuum             HMIS instance.


Annual Report

A narrative annual report must be submitted, in form and format required by OHCS, by the 60th day
following the end of the fiscal year (August 30th) providing detail, including, but not limited to
subgrantee(s) budgets, program services, performance, outcomes, successes, and challenges.




                                                      QUALITATIVE RESPONSES:
    e      What were the most pressing needs in the community, and how did you help? Describe specific
           activities.
    e      What types of services did you offer this grant year and secondly, which types of services did
           you prioritize offering?
    e      Describe the impact of bringing on any new staff positions for the agency.
    e      Describe your tenant’s rights education activities under your contract. Who do you serve, and
           how did you reach them? Describe workshops and other educational activities provided. What
           impact is this work having on the communities you serve?
    e       What are the community’s greatest service needs? What are the top languages needed? How
           do you ensure that client’s needs are met?
    e      What additional services did clients request?
    e      Are there any programs or services that you believe will be needed by clients in the next 6
           months?
    e      What other agencies do you refer clients to, and why?
    e      What needs are currently unmet in your community?
    e      Was your waitlist reduced over the course of the funding, or did the community need outpace
           operations and funding?


Monitoring

OHCS will conduct a program monitoring of Grantees once every two fiscal years or more frequently at
OHCS’     discretion.    OHCS      program          monitoring       may     include      desk       audit,     site visit and/or         site visit with
subgrantee(s) (or subgrantee organization’s subgrantee(s). Fiscal monitoring will be conducted once every
two fiscal years unless circumstances and/or risk assessment require less or more frequent monitoring at
OHCS’ discretion. Grantees will be notified thirty (30) days in advance of the monitoring visit and informed
of what documents          and records will be reviewed and any required staff or Board interviews. OHCS will
provide    Grantees     with    a written       monitoring          report inclusive          of any findings,          concerns,        or comments.


            Oregon Housing and Community Services    | 725 Summer St. NE Suite B, Salem, OR 97301-1266    | (503)986-2000   | FAX (503) 986-2020

                                                                       Page 35 of 44
Grantees are required to submit timely corrective action to findings and failure to do so can result in the
withholding of funds or a requirement to return Legal and Mediation Services program funds to OHCS or
other remedies as described in the Grantee’s grant agreement/contract.

Grantees     must    notify and       receive       approval       from       OHCS      when     adding     subgrantee(s)           and/or        renewing
subgrantee(s).      Notification and approval               normally occur during the Grantee’s grant agreement/contract
funding application process. However, if changes are made                                outside of the funding application, Grantees
must submit a request to the Housing Retention team Program Analyst for approval of subgrantee(s)
additions, deletions, or modifications within 30 days of such change.

Subgrantee Monitoring

For the     purposes       of this     operations          manual       the      term     “subgrantee(s)”          shall     mean       any       Grantee’s
subcontractors,       contractors,       vendor,         subgrantee(s)         and      any     subcontractors,           contractors,        vendors     or
subgrantee(s) of a subcontractor, contractor, vendor or subgrantee(s). Subgrantee(s) must follow program
intent, rules, and guidelines for the expenditure of funds.

All subgrantee(s) must comply with all applicable program rules and regulations as noted in this manual,
the Grantee’s grant agreement/contract and Program Element: Scope of Work. Records of subgrantee(s)
monitoring      performed        by the      Grantee        or subgrantee(s)             will    be reviewed         during      OHCS       monitoring.
Subgrantee(s)       monitoring reports must be retained by the Grantee and available for review by OHCS or
other authorized entity, in compliance with program rules.

At least once       during     each     biennium,         Grantee         must       monitor     the    activities    and       expenditures          of its
subgrantee(s) to ensure:

    @      compliance with Grantee’s grant agreement/contract and program rules and requirements; and

    e      achievement of performance goals.

Grantee’s monitoring of its subgrantee(s) must include:

    e      anevaluation of each subgrantee’s risk of non-compliance with rules , regulations, and terms and
           conditions of any applicable subaward for purposes of determining the appropriate level and type
           of subgrantee(s) monitoring;
    e      areview of financial and performance reports;

    e      areview of subgrantee(s) policies and procedures, forms, documentation, client records including
           eligibility, notifications and documentation;

    e      a review of client records               to    ensure      compliance          with    security,     maintenance,             retention      and
           destruction of records; and

    e      follow-up on all deficiencies pertaining to any OHCS funding in accordance with all program rules
           and regulations.

Grantees must have a stand-alone policy that identifies the following:

    e      Frequency of subgrantee(s) monitoring, which must be minimally once during a biennium or the
           term of the Grantee’s grant agreement/contract;
    e      The number of relevant samplings of fiscal transactions per program;

            Oregon Housing and Community Services   | 725 Summer St. NE Suite B, Salem, OR 97301-1266   | (503)986-2000    | FAX (503) 986-2020

                                                                      Page 36 of 44
    e   The     number        of relevant          samplings       of client files and            that such        review       includes         eligibility,
        notification and documentation;

    e   The number of relevant samplings of HMIS entries to ensure appropriate entry and tracking of
        client information and service transactions;
    e   A review        of client      records      to ensure        compliance         with     security,      maintenance,           retention,        and
        destruction of records; and

    e   A review of subgrantee’s policies and procedures, forms, documents and notifications to ensure
        compliance with all program, state and federal rules, regulations and requirements.

OHCS retains the right to require modification of any policy that in its determination does not meet basic
principles or requirements of such a policy.


Financial Management

Mandatory use of OPUS

The OPUS      database is the system of record for financial transactions with OHCS and use of OPUS                                                         is
mandatory for fund allocation, draw down, and fiscal reporting processes.

The OPUS system         is a web-based           centralized data system designed to meet business processing needs.
Grantee staff must complete training before being authorized to use the fiscal operations program of
OPUS. Training can be provided by the Fiscal Grant Specialist at OHCS.


Subgrantee     shall,   and    shall   cause       and    shall    require     its subrecipients           by contract        to comply           with   the
following program specific reporting requirements:

Ensure that data collection and reporting for Housing Retention funded activities be conducted through
the use of the OHCS approved OPUS database or other OHCS designated service data information system
and assure that data entry into OPUS occurs in an accurate and timely manner.

This program uses the following categories within OPUS:


    e   Administration
    e   Program Delivery
    e   Program Development
    e   Outreach and Advertising
    e   Client-facing expenses


OHCS maintains an OPUS Manual and OPUS Help Desk. Staff can be reached at:

Email: opushelp@oregon.gov

Ph: (503) 986-2099

Toll Free: (800) 453-5511, Option 6

Request for Funding Documentation


           Oregon Housing and Community Services    | 725 Summer St. NE Suite B, Salem, OR 97301-1266   | (503)986-2000   | FAX (503) 986-2020

                                                                      Page 37 of 44
Grantees must retain supporting documentation of all costs charged to the applicable grant and be able
to provide evidence that grant funds were spent on allowable costs. When Grantee submits a Request for
Funds (RFF) on OPUS, they are required to download                                 documentation             of the costs for which they are
requesting      payment.       Any     RFF    submitted         without       accompanying               documentation            or with       insufficient
documentation will be returned to the Grantee with instructions to provide additional information.

Budget Change Requests and Amendments

Changes in a Grantee’s scope of work will necessitate a contract amendment. All budget changes require
OHCS approval by submitting a Budget Change Request form electronically to your Housing Retention
Program Analyst.


At the discretion of OHCS, additional information may be required for a budget change request.

Request for Funds

Grantee must request reimbursement of grant funds through the OPUS system, at least once every two
calendar months. OHCS recommends that best practice is submission of a request at minimum of once
every calendar month.


OHCS Spend Down and Reallocation Policy

The following procedures are established for all funds allocated to Grantees through the Grant Agreement
process.

Spending Targets

All funds, with the exception of administrative allocations, will be spent proportional to the Expenditure
Period at the rate prescribed below (as tracked through the OPUS “Award Summary” report).

Minimum spending targets:*

    e     At 25% through Expenditure Period, at least 10% of the funding must be spent.
    e     At 50% through Expenditure Period, at least 25% of the funding must be spent.
    e     At 75% through Expenditure Period, at least 65% of the funding must be spent.
    e     At 90% through Expenditure Period, at least 90% of the funding must be spent.

Any spending         below these targets will be evaluated                         against the Time-Bound                    Expenditure            Plan. Any
spending below both rates is subject to rescission.

*Note: Some OHCS grants                  require      more      aggressive        spending        requirements.             Any    such     requirements
supersede these thresholds.


OHCS and Grantee Collaboration

When      spending is below the thresholds described above, and prior to funding rescission, OHCS                                                         and
Grantee    agree to find solutions that resolve the issues,                            provided     it is within OHCS’              control     (in its sole


             Oregon Housing and Community Services   | 725 Summer St. NE Suite B, Salem, OR 97301-1266    | (503)986-2000    | FAX (503) 986-2020

                                                                       Page 38 of 44
discretion) to adjust to meet Grantee’s needs and does not conflict with federal or state law. Solutions for
resolution may include, but not are limited to:

    1.     OHCS program staff will discuss best practices and training and technical assistance resources to
           aid in resource utilization. This could include special and discretionary funding allocations to assist
           with capacity or training needs.
    2.     If OHCS is aware of local political advocacy or engagement, OHCS will work with the Grantee to
           ensure those parties are involved in planning discussions;


    3.     OHCS staff may contact Grantee to brainstorm and potentially facilitate connections with service
           providers or provide a list of service organizations and recommended contacts to utilize funding.


OHCS will provide written notice to cure to Grantee and OHCS will allow proposals from Grantee to cure
spending issues and prevent funding rescission. Grantee will have 15 calendar days to send the Program
Analyst a time-bound expenditure plan for approval to demonstrate how compliance with spending
targets will be achieved.


General Fund Grant Allocations

Standard    practice for allocation of General                 Fund for programs is to divide the biennial allocation in two,
with 50% allocated in year one, and 50% allocated in year two. Grantee may submit a written request to
OHCS to allocate more than 50% in year one which will be reviewed                                           by Housing Retention                 Program
Analysts and determined on a case-by-case basis.

Late Term         Rollovers

Grantee     can    contact    an    OHCS     Program        Analyst to update             the    original Time-Bound               Expenditure       Plan
(adding rollover to the annual allocation) if the rollover is determined within 90 calendar days after the
initial Time-Bound         Expenditure       plan is created.          These     Implementation            Report and spenddown                  updates
will be considered to be the initial Time- Bound Expenditure Plan, as long as an Amended                                             Implementation
Report has not already been submitted.

Committed          Funds

For grants that include the category of program delivery, Grantees can include these funds as part of the
commitments         in OPUS;       however, the Spend            Down      Policy and remedies apply only to expended funds as
identified in the OPUS “Award Summary” report.

Administration

Grantees are allowed to use up to fifteen percent (15%) of their total Legal and Mediation Services
program allocation for administrative costs, including those allowed for subgrantee(s) organizations with
whom the Grantee contracts. There is an expectation that administrative funds will be shared with
subgrantee(s) commensurate to the services provided through the program by subgrantee(s).

Please note that indirect costs are allowed to be applied to the Administration category.




            Oregon Housing and Community Services   | 725 Summer St. NE Suite B, Salem, OR 97301-1266   | (503)986-2000   | FAX (503) 986-2020

                                                                      Page 39 of 44
Allowable administrative costs typically, but not exclusively, benefit the organization as a whole and
cannot be attributed specifically to a particular program. All amounts billed must be supported by actual
costs.

Allowable costs include, but are not limited to:


     e   Senior executive management                   personnel salaries and benefits (unless they are directly involved
         in program operations), administrative staff travel costs.
     e   General services such as accounting, budget development,                                      personnel, contracting,              marketing,
         agency audit, agency insurance.
     e   Board expenses (excluding meals);
     e   Organization-wide membership fees and dues specific to homeless systems and programs.
     e   General agency facilities costs (including those associated with executive positions), such as rent,
         depreciation expenses, and operation and maintenance (as part of the organization’s direct or
         indirect cost allocation plan);
     e   Equipment rental/purchase, insurance, utilities, and IT costs that are not program specific but
         relate to the administration of the agency as a whole.
     e   Indirect costs, including Negotiated Indirect Cost Rate Agreements (NICRA)


Applicable Rules and Regulations

All the following as can be amended from time to time:

     e   ORS 456.515 through 456.725                  (OHCS)
              o       https://www.oregonlegislature.gov/bills                       laws
     e   ORS 458.505 through 458.545 (Community Services):
            o    https://www.oregonlegislature.gov/bills laws
     e   OAR 166-300 (Retention Schedule):
            o   https://secure.sos.state.or.us/oard/ruleSearch.action
     e   OAR 813-005 (General):
            o   https://secure.sos.state.or.us/oard/ruleSearch.action
     e   HMIS Data Standards Manual:
              o       https://www.hudexchange.info/resource/3824/hmis-datadictionary/
     e   Limited English Proficiency federal interagency website can be found at:
              o       http://www.lep.gov/
                         ="    Guidance and additional materials can be found at
                                     e     =https://www.hud.gov/program_offices/fair                             housing       equal      opp/limited
                                             english      proficiency        0

This manual       as guidelines for our culturally specific and responsive                            program     are amended            from time to
time along with all other references                made      within this manual. All references                     made       in this manual     are
understood to be as written, and as amended from time to time.

     e   ORS cited are amended from time to time and can be found at:
              o       https://www.oregonlegislature.gov/bills_laws/Pages/ORS.aspx
     e   OARs cited are amended from time to time and can be found at:
              o      https://secure.sos.state.or.us/oard/ruleSearch.action


          Oregon Housing and Community Services   | 725 Summer St. NE Suite B, Salem, OR 97301-1266    | (503)986-2000   | FAX (503) 986-2020

                                                                    Page 40 of 44
    e    CFRs cited are amended from time to time and can be found at:
             o     http://www.ecfr.gov/cgibin/text-idx?c=ecfr&tpl=%2Findex.tpl
    e    OMBs cited are amended from time to time and can be found at:
             o       https://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/information-for-agencies/circular


Program Definitions

Brief Legal Services: Brief action on behalf of the tenant, such as a letter or making a phone call; typically,
not more than 2-3 hours of time; no court appearance.

Chronically Homeless: A homeless individual with a disability as defined in section 401(9) of the
McKinney-Vento Assistance Act (42 U.S.C. 11360(9)), who: (a) Lives in a place not meant for human
habitation, a safe haven, or in an emergency shelter, and has been homeless and living as described for
at least 12 months or on at least 4 separate occasions in the last 3 years, as long as the combined occasions
equal at least 12 months and each break in homelessness separating the occasions included at least 7
consecutive nights of not living as described; (b) an individual who has been residing in an institutional
care facility for less, including jail, substance abuse or mental health treatment facility, hospital, or other
similar facility, for fewer than 90 days and met all of the criteria of this definition before entering that
facility; or (c) A family with an adult head of household (or, if there is no adult in the family, a minor head
of household) who meets all of the criteria of this definition, including a family whose composition has
fluctuated while the head of household has been homeless.

Client: A household who has received an assessment of need, has been entered into an OHCS-funded
program (intake), entered in HMIS and who is receiving financial assistance. A client is someone who has
developed a client services/housing plan and is not receiving one-time only assistance.

Court Navigation: General guidance and support regarding the court process and procedures.

Discrimination: The unjust or prejudicial treatment of different categories of people, especially on the
grounds of ethnicity, age, sex, gender, or disability.

Domestic Violence: This definition includes dating violence, sexual assault, stalking, attempting to cause,
or intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly causing or placing another in fear of imminent serious physical
injury or emotional, mental, or verbal abuse, and using coercive or controlling behavior. This does not
include other criminal acts such as violence perpetrated by a stranger, neighbor, acquaintance, or friend,
unless those persons are family members, intimate partners, or household members. Note: This
definitional aligns with TANF rules and regulations.

Essential Components          of Service Delivery:                Included in the Operational               Standards. They are the use of
Housing First, maximizing participation in Coordinated Entry, ensuring availability of Low-Barrier Shelters
in the   community,       incorporating           the     Lived    Experiences        of    Homelessness           into      program        design   and
implements and ensuring service provision has components for Equity and Racial Justice.

Eviction: The court-ordered           removal           of a tenant from the property where                     they reside. A landlord              may
decide to evict a tenant for nonpayment of rent, damages, illegal activity, violating the terms of a lease, or
if the landlord wishes to take possession of the property.

Eviction Court: A court that hears cases that seek evictions from real estate premises.



          Oregon Housing and Community Services    | 725 Summer St. NE Suite B, Salem, OR 97301-1266   | (503)986-2000    | FAX (503) 986-2020

                                                                     Page 41 of 44
Eviction Prevention: Strategies and programs designed to keep individuals and households in their homes,
helping them to avoid the risk of homelessness. Eviction prevention is often seen as an “upstream”
solution to keep individuals and households stably housed, to avoid them falling into unsafe housing
conditions, and to avert the damaging impacts on mental and physical health, economic wellbeing, and
access to future housing options that often come with evictions on record. These strategies intervene and
provide support at different points in the eviction process — before an eviction is filed with the courts,
during an eviction proceeding, and after an eviction judgment                                   is given. The goal is to address the roots
causes of evictions with interventions at different stages in the eviction process, tailored to meet a range
of needs and circumstances.

Full Legal Representation: Representing the tenant for the duration of the case; may involve negotiation,
litigation, or other advocacy; becoming attorney of record.

HMIS:     Homeless           Management          Information           System.       Victim      service       providers        must        use      an    HMIS
comparable database.

Hotel/Motel Vouchers: used as emergency shelter in those areas and times when                                                  no emergency shelter
is available.

Housing    First: An approach               to connect      individuals and families experiencing                        homelessness             quickly and
successfully        to    permanent         housing      without       preconditions          and     barriers      to    entry,     such       as    sobriety,
treatment, or service participation requirements.

Housing     Insecurity: A broad term that encompasses                                     several dimensions                 of housing problems
people may experience. It includes:

                o         Affordability: When             housing costs become burdensome relative to income.

                o         Safety: Concerns about the safety and security of the housing environment.

                ©         Quality: Issues related to the condition and maintenance of the housing unit.

                o         Insecurity: Housing does not or cannot meet long-term stability needs.

                o         Loss   of   housing:          Experiencing          homelessness                or the      imminent           risk        of   losing
                          housing.



Housing Termination or Termination of tenancy: The first step in the eviction process and is often used
interchangeably with the term eviction. When terminating tenancy, the owner gives the tenant notice to
vacate the unit because of a lease violation(s).

Illegal Retaliation by a Landlord: It is harassment, intimidation or the taking of adverse action against a
tenant.   Some           examples     may     include     increasing       rent,    decreasing        services,      serving       an   eviction          notice,
threatening eviction, or filing an eviction case.

Just Cause/No Cause, Just Cause is a legally sufficient reason. Just cause is sometimes referred to as good
cause, lawful cause, or sufficient cause. A litigant must often prove to a court that just cause exists and
therefore the requested action or ruling should be granted.


            Oregon Housing and Community Services     | 725 Summer St. NE Suite B, Salem, OR 97301-1266    | (503)986-2000   | FAX (503) 986-2020

                                                                        Page 42 of 44
The phrase "no cause" can have different meanings depending on the context. Here are some examples:

    e        To not have a clear, legitimate reason to do something.
    e    A     landlord can use a "no cause" notice when there is no lease agreement or when the rental
             agreement between the landlord and tenant does not establish a definite term.
    e        Not able to be shown to be right or reasonable. Without any grounds to support it.

Landlord:      A person       who     rents    land, a building,          or an apartment            to a tenant.           In a lease, the         landlord
transfers part of his or her interest to the tenant, allowing the tenant to occupy and use the property. The
landlord can limit the tenant’s use of the property or require the tenant to do something in the lease .
However, once the lease is signed, right of entry to the property by the landlord is regulated.

Legal Advice: Legal information and a recommendation for a course of action for the specific case, but no
action on behalf of the tenant

Legal Aid Services: Free legal advice or representation for a person who cannot afford it.

Legal    Information         and     Outreach:         General        information         regarding        legal    rights      and     responsibilities;
explanation of options (but not specific legal advice); help with forms Attorneys, licensed paralegals, court
staff, trained community advocates

Limited Scope Representation: Action on behalf of the tenant, but limited in scope and less than full
representation; may include court appearance.

McKinney Vento Definition of Homelessness the term "homeless children and youths": means individuals
who lack a fixed, regular, and adequate nighttime residence (within the meaning of 42 U.S.C. 11302(a)(1);
and includes

    a.       children and youths who are sharing the housing of other persons due to loss of housing,
             economic hardship, or a similar reason; are living in motels, hotels, trailer parks, or camping
             grounds due to the lack of alternative adequate accommodations; are living in emergency or
             transitional shelters; or are abandoned in hospitals;

    b.       children and youths who have a primary nighttime residence that is a public or private place not
             designed for or ordinarily used as a regular sleeping accommodation for human beings (within
             the meaning of section 42 U.S.C. 11302(a);

    c.       children and youths who are living in cars, parks, public spaces, abandoned buildings, substandard
             housing, bus or train stations, or similar settings; and

    d.       migratory children (as such term is defined in section 1309 of the Elementary and Secondary
             Education Act of 1965) who qualify as homeless for the purposes of this subtitle because the
             children are living in circumstances described in clauses (a) through (c).

Mediation: "A process in which a mediator assists and facilitates two or more parties to a controversy in
reaching a mutually acceptable resolution of the controversy.                                  Includes all contacts between a mediator
and any party or agent of a party, until such time as a resolution is agreed to by the parties or the mediation
process is terminated." (ORS 36.110[5]).



              Oregon Housing and Community Services   | 725 Summer St. NE Suite B, Salem, OR 97301-1266   | (503)986-2000    | FAX (503) 986-2020

                                                                        Page 43 of 44
Occupancy/Lease/Rental                  Agreements:             They    are    used       for temporary           or permanent             housing,          which
includes transitional housing. Occupancy/Lease/Rental Agreements are not the same as a code of conduct
agreement.

Priority Population: Persons that the Grantee/subgrantee(s) has determined as having the greatest need
and will receive services first (such as veterans and homeless families with children). (For example, for the
purposes of ORE-DAP, clients with a pending eviction client are a priority.

Rent Cap: A term that can have two different meanings. One meaning is the maximum amount of rent a
landlord is allowed to charge a tenant, also known as ‘rent ceiling’. This is a way of regulating the rental
market and protecting tenants from excessive rent increases. Another meaning is the limit on the number
or percentage of units that may be rented at any one time in a community. This is a way of maintaining
the balance between owners and renters in a community

Rental Assistance: Provision of financial resources to cover tenants’ rental debt and related costs

Subgrantee(s): Entities that, by contract with the Grantee agency, provide assistance payments/services
and may receive funding directly from the Grantee agency. Through its agreements with Grantee agency,
subgrantee(s) must comply with all requirements for the program. Subgrantee(s) include a Grantee’s
subcontractors, contractors, vendor, subgrantee(s)s and any subcontractors,                                                    contractors,       vendors        or
subgrantee(s) of a subcontractor, contractor, vendor or subgrantee(s).

Target Population: Persons a Grantee/subgrantee(s) wishes to reach out to who are under-represented
in their service population, but delivery of funds cannot be limited to only the target population.

Tenant: A person or entity who temporarily occupies or possesses real estate that belongs to a landlord.

Veteran:

    e      Served on active duty with the Armed                        Forces of the United States:
    e      Fora period of more than 90 consecutive days beginning on or before January 31, 1955, and was
           discharged or released under honorable conditions;
    e      For a period           of more      than       178   consecutive         days     beginning        after January          31,    1955,      and     was
           discharged or released from active duty under honorable conditions;
    e      For 178 days or less and was discharged or released from active duty under honorable conditions
           because of a service-connected disability;
    e      For 178 days or less and was discharged or released from active duty under honorable conditions
           and has a disability rating from the United States Department of Veterans Affairs; or
    e      For at least one day in               a combat        zone and was discharged                    or released from           active duty under
           honorable conditions;
    e      Received a combat or campaign ribbon or an expeditionary medal for service in the Armed Forces
           of the United States and was discharged or released from active duty under honorable conditions;
           or
    e      Is receiving a nonservice-connected                         pension      from     the    United      States      Department           of Veterans
           Affairs.

Wraparound            Services:      Services      that     support       housing         stabilization,      such     as      housing      navigation         and
assistance with utilities, food, employment, and childcare.



                Oregon Housing and Community Services   | 725 Summer St. NE Suite B, Salem, OR 97301-1266    | (503)986-2000    | FAX (503) 986-2020

                                                                          Page 44 of 44
