                         UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
               DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT
                      OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS



  In the Matter of:

          HOUSING AND REDEVELOPMENT                        22-AF-0004-OH-001
          INSURANCE EXCHANGE,
                                                           May 13, 2022
                         Respondent.



RULING ON RESPONDENT’S AND GOVERNMENT’S DISPOSITIVE MOTIONS AND
                        INITIAL DECISION

      This matter arises from a Complaint filed by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development (“HUD” or “the Government”) against the Housing and Redevelopment Insurance
Exchange (“Respondent” or “HARIE”) seeking to revoke Respondent’s approval as a Qualified
PHA-owned Insurance Entity (“QPIE”).

        A QPIE is an insurer that has been granted special status by HUD that permits public
housing agencies (“PHAs”) to obtain the insurance coverage required by HUD without engaging
in a competitive bidding process. As relevant here, a QPIE operates as an insurer for its member
PHAs, which means that the members are functionally both the insurer and the insureds. This
special status is granted upon meeting certain requirements and approval by HUD, and the QPIE
must remain in compliance with the regulatory standards in order to retain its approval.

        In the Complaint, HUD seeks the revocation of Respondent’s approval as a QPIE based
on changes in its ownership, control, and membership allegedly affecting its eligibility. The
matter is currently before the Court upon Respondent’s Motion to Dismiss and HUD’s Motion
for Summary Judgment.

                                 PROCEDURAL HISTORY

      On September 24, 2021, HUD issued a Superseding Notice of Withdrawal to Respondent.
On October 6, 2021, Respondent requested a hearing pursuant to 24 C.F.R. § 965.205(e).

         On October 21, 2021, this matter was set for hearing to commence on March 16, 2022 by
the first Notice of Hearing and Order. On November 5, 2021, HUD filed a Complaint outlining
HUD’s basis for revoking Respondent’s approval as a QPIE. The Complaint alleged two
independent bases for revocation, namely: Respondent is not exclusively owned and controlled
by PHAs (Count 1); and Respondent does not limit participation to PHAs (Count 2). On
December 3, 2021, Respondent filed an Answer raising a number of affirmative defenses.
        On January 24, 2022, HUD filed a Motion to Strike Respondent’s Affirmative Defenses.
On February 1, 2022, Respondent filed a Response to the Motion to Strike. On February 23,
2022, the Court issued a Ruling on Government’s Motion to Strike Affirmative Defenses, granting
in part and striking Respondent’s defenses as to failure to state a claim and that the regulation
exceeded statutory authority; and denying in part and not striking Respondent’s defenses as to
deprivation of due process, waiver, ratification, and estoppel.

       On April 22, 2022, Respondent filed the present Motion to Dismiss and HUD filed the
present Motion for Summary Judgment. On May 2, 2022, HUD filed a response to the Motion to
Dismiss and Respondent filed a response to the Motion for Summary Judgment.

   I.      Respondent’s Motion to Dismiss

        On April 22, 2022, Respondent moved to dismiss this proceeding. Respondent asks the
Court to dismiss this proceeding because, it asserts, that HUD has failed to state a claim upon
which relief can granted on the bases that: (1) HUD has not promulgated a regulation requiring
QPIEs to be exclusively owned or controlled by PHAs; (2) Congress has not enacted a statute
requiring QPIEs to be exclusively owned or controlled by PHAs; (3) the terms ownership and
control are not defined by the relevant regulation or statute; and (4) Respondent is not in
violation of the regulation or statute, because it “insures municipalities and their political
subdivisions as the same exclusively and solely provide essential services to PHAs and housing
authority residents including, but not limited to water services, sewer services, police protection,
fire protection, waste collection, public education, etc.”

        In response, HUD asks this Court to deny Respondent’s Motion to Dismiss. Specifically,
HUD asserts that (1) the motion (captioned as a motion to dismiss) is more properly
characterized as a motion for judgment on the pleadings under Federal Rule of Civil Procedure
12(c); (2) this Court has already rejected the statutory and regulatory arguments presented by
Respondent, and that the law-of-the-case doctrine is a sufficient basis to deny Respondent’s
motion; and (3) Respondent’s motion should be denied on the merits because it is inconsistent
with the relevant regulation.

                                   Applicable Legal Principles

         Motions to Dismiss. When reviewing a motion to dismiss, the Court “must accept all
factual allegations in the complaint and draw all reasonable inferences in the [non-moving
party’s] favor.” ATSI Commc’ns, Inc, v. Shaar Fund, Ltd., 493 F.3d 87, 98 (2d Cir. 2007). A
motion to dismiss will be granted only if the non-moving party has failed to plead sufficient facts
to state a claim to relief that is facially plausible. See Bell Atl. Corp. v. Twombly, 550 U.S. 544,
570 (2007). A facially plausible claim is one that contains “factual content that allows the court
to draw the reasonable inference that the defendant is liable for the misconduct alleged.”
Ashcroft v. Iqbal, 556 U.S. 662 (2009). More specifically, a plaintiff must allege facts showing
“more than a sheer possibility that a [respondent] has acted unlawfully.” Id. A complaint that
offers only “labels and conclusions” or “a formulaic recitation of the elements of a cause of
action will not do.” Twombly, 550 U.S. at 555. Additionally, if a plaintiff has not “nudged [its]
claims across the line from conceivable to plausible, [those claims] must be dismissed.” Id. at
570.


                                                 2
        The Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, which do not govern this proceeding but serve as
persuasive authority, consider an involuntary dismissal under Rule 41 or a dismissal not under
that rule as operating as an adjudication on the merits. Fed. R. Civ. Pro. 41(b). Furthermore, a
motion asserting that the nonmovant has failed to state a claim upon which relief can be granted
may only be made in any pleading allowed or ordered under Rule 7(a), 1 by a motion for
judgment on the pleadings under Rule 12(c); or at trial. Fed R. Civ. Pro. 12(h)(2). Like Rule
12(b)(6), “Rule 12(c) does not allow for any resolution of contested facts; rather, a court may
enter judgment on the pleadings only if the uncontested and properly considered facts
conclusively establish the movant's entitlement to a favorable judgment.” Patrick v.
Rivera-Lopez, 708 F.3d 15, 18 (1st Cir. 2013) quoting Aponte-Torres v. Univ. of P.R.,
445 F.3d 50, 54 (1st Cir. 2006).

                                                   Discussion

        Where a motion asks the Court to dismiss for failure to state a claim upon which relief
may be granted, the Court must accept all factual allegations in the complaint and draw all
reasonable inferences in the non-moving party’s favor. See ATSI Commc’ns, Inc, supra. A
motion to dismiss2 will be granted only if the non-moving party has failed to plead sufficient
facts to state a claim to relief that is facially plausible. See Bell Atl. Corp. v. Twombly,
550 U.S. 544, 570 (2007).

        Here, Respondent has not identified any actual factual gap to serve as the basis for
dismissal of Count 2, which alleges that Respondent permits non-PHAs to participate. This is a
problem for Respondent, as the essential requirement for a motion to dismiss to succeed is to
show that there is a deficiency in the pleadings. Instead, Respondent functionally asks the Court
to find that it is correct on the merits. This is not the purpose of a motion to dismiss, nor is it the
purpose of a motion for judgment on the pleadings. Respondent has not shown that it is entitled
to judgment in its favor on the pleadings and Respondent’s Motion shall be denied as to Count 2

       Respondent also asks this Court to dismiss Count 1 on the basis that the relevant statute
and the Regulation here do not require exclusivity in ownership and control by PHAs. The Court




1
 (1) a complaint; (2) an answer to a complaint; (3) an answer to a counterclaim designated as a counterclaim; (4) an
answer to a crossclaim; (5) a third-party complaint; (6) an answer to a third-party complaint; and (7) if the court
orders one, a reply to an answer. Fed R. Civ. Pro. 7(a).
2
  Respondent’s motion requesting that this proceeding be dismissed because “HUD has failed to state a claim upon
which relief can be granted” is captioned as a motion to dismiss. Here, where the motion asserts that the nonmovant
has failed to state a claim upon which relief can be granted, it is more properly characterized as a motion for
judgment on the pleadings. Nonetheless, this does not make any significant difference in this proceeding, as the
same standard apples to both a motion to dismiss under 12(b)(6) and a motion for judgment on the pleadings under
12(c). Jacobsen v. Deseret Book Co., 287 F.3d 936, 941 n.2 (10th Cir. 2002) citing Lowe v. Town of Fairland,
Okla., 143 F.3d 1378, 1381 n.5 (10th Cir. 1998); Republic Steel Corp. v. Pennsylvania Eng'g Corp., 785 F.2d 174,
182 (7th Cir. 1986); and Atlantic Richfield Co. v. Farm Credit Bank of Wichita, 226 F.3d 1138, 1160
(10th Cir. 2000). Thus for ease of reference and in keeping with Respondent’s designation, Respondent’s motion
shall be referred to as a Motion to Dismiss.



                                                         3
need not decide this issue, though it is skeptical as to Respondent’s possibility of success. 3 A
motion to dismiss or a motion for judgment on the pleadings must identify a legal or factual
deficiency in the pleadings – here, Respondent only challenges a matter of legal interpretation. 4
As such, Respondent has not shown that it is entitled to judgment in its favor on the pleadings
and Respondent’s Motion shall be denied as to Count 1.

          Accordingly, Respondent’s Motion to Dismiss is denied in its entirety.

    II.      HUD’s Motion for Summary Judgment

        HUD asks the Court to grant summary judgment in its favor because, it asserts, that:
(1) there is no genuine issue of material fact remaining; (2) Respondent does not limit
participation to PHAs and entities only serving PHAs because it insures municipalities and their
subdivisions; (3) Respondent is not solely owned and controlled by PHAs because the majority
of its voting members are non-PHAs, and because one of Respondent’s board members
represents a non-PHA member; (4) Respondent’s affirmative defense of estoppel fails as a matter
of law and fact; (5) Respondent’s affirmative defense of ratification fails as a matter of law and
fact; and (6) Respondent’s affirmative defense of a denial of due process fails as a matter of law
and fact.

        In response, Respondent asks this Court to deny HUD’s Motion for Summary Judgment.
Specifically, Respondent asserts that: (1) it is compliant with the applicable statute and
regulations; (2) if it is not compliant with the applicable regulation, the regulation is invalid,
arbitrary, capricious, an abuse of discretion, and in excess of statutory authority; and
(3) Respondent’s affirmative defenses of waiver, equitable estoppel, ratification, and deprivation
of due process involve facts in dispute (and thus are not appropriate for summary judgment).

                                        Applicable Legal Principles

        Standard of Review for Summary Judgment. Pursuant to 24 C.F.R. § 26.32(l), this
Court is authorized to “decide cases, in whole or in part, by summary judgment where there is no
disputed issue of material fact.” The Court may exercise its discretion in application of Rule 56
of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure. 24 C.F.R. § 26.40(f)(2).

       Summary judgment is proper where no genuine issue of material fact exists and the
moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc.,
477 U.S. 242, 248 (1986); Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a). A “genuine” issue exists when “the evidence is
such that a reasonable jury could return a verdict for the nonmoving party.” Anderson,

3
  If the Court were to take Respondent at face value and accept Respondent’s argument that the lack of definition for
“ownership and control” should mean that the Regulation is invalid, the Court would logically have to conclude that
no entity could ever be approved as a QPIE – including Respondent – and thus might be required to approve the
revocation of Respondent’s QPIE status regardless.
4
 When it comes to statutory interpretation, “we give the words of a statute their ordinary, contemporary, common
meaning, absent an indication Congress intended them to bear some different import,” and where the word at issue
appears in an agency publication, the same exercise still provides helpful guidance. (internal quotations omitted)
In re Prime Venture Realty Associates, LLC, 2011 HUD ALJ LEXIS 1, *25 and fn. 15 (Mar. 31, 2011) quoting
Williams v. Taylor, 529 U.S. 420, 431 (2000).



                                                         4
477 U.S. at 249. Additionally, a fact is not “material” unless it affects the outcome of the suit.
Id.

         Summary judgment is a “drastic device” because, when exercised, it diminishes a party’s
ability to present its case. Selva & Sons, Inc. v. Nina Footwear, Inc., 705 F.2d 1316, 1323 (Fed.
Cir. 1983). Accordingly, the moving party bears the burden of demonstrating the absence of any
material issues of fact. See Anderson, 477 U.S. at 256. Rule 56 provides that when a party
asserts that a fact cannot be genuinely disputed, that party must: (i) cite to materials in the record;
or (ii) show the cited materials do not establish the presence of a genuine dispute. Fed. R. Civ. P.
56(c). In reviewing a motion for summary judgment, the Court’s function is not to resolve any
questions of material fact, but to ascertain whether any such questions exist. In re Beta Dev. Co.,
HUDBCA No. 01-D-100-D1, at *12 (February 21, 2002). Therefore, when the moving party has
carried its burden under Rule 56(c), the nonmoving party may not rest upon mere allegations or
denials, but must come forward with “specific facts showing that there is a genuine issue for
trial.” Matsushita Elec. Indus. Co. v. Zenith Radio Corp., 475 U.S. 574, 586-87 (1986)
(emphasis added) (citing Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(e)).

        Law of the Case. The law of the case doctrine “posits that when a court decides upon a
rule of law, that decision should continue to govern the same issues in subsequent stages in the
same case.” Pepper v. United States, 131 S.Ct. 1229, 1250, 179 L. Ed. 2d 196 (2011) (internal
quotation marks omitted). The law-of-the-case doctrine binds the parties on issues previously
decided both explicitly and “by necessary implication.” LaShawn A. v. Barry, 87 F.3d 1389,
1394 (D.C. Cir. 1996) (en banc).

       Qualified PHA-owned Insurance Entities. PHAs are generally required to obtain that
insurance through a competitive bidding process, which helps ensure objective contractor
performance and eliminate unfair competitive advantage. See 2 C.F.R. § 200.319; 24 C.F.R.
§ 965.205(a). Competitive proposals are:

               [G]enerally preferred when procuring professional services
               because it allows for the consideration of technical quality or other
               factors (in addition to price) for securing services … Competitive
               offers are solicited, proposals are evaluated, and an award is made
               to the offeror whose proposal is most advantageous to the PHA,
               with price and other factors (as specified in the solicitation)
               considered.”

       In 1992, Congress instructed HUD to promulgate regulations to allow certain nonprofit,
PHA-owned and -controlled insurance entities to offer insurance to PHAs without regard to
competitive bidding requirements normally applicable to PHAs. See 42 U.S.C. § 1436c. In
response, and after notice and comment, HUD promulgated the 1993 regulation setting standards
for QPIEs, 24 C.F.R. § 965.205 (“the Regulation”). See 58 Fed. Reg. 51952 (Oct. 5, 1993).

         Among other requirements, the Regulation specifies that an eligible QPIE must:
(1) “limit[] participation to PHAs (and to nonprofit entities associated with PHAs that engage in
activities or perform functions only for housing authorities or housing authority residents);” and
(2) be “owned and controlled by PHAs.” 42 U.S.C. § 1436c; 24 C.F.R. § 965.205(a), (c). If an


                                                  5
insurance entity meets these and other regulatory criteria, then a PHA may obtain insurance from
it without being subject to the competitive bidding requirements. See 24 C.F.R. § 965.205.
However, HUD may revoke its approval of a non-profit insurance entity under the Regulation
when the QPIE no longer meets the requirements of this section. See 24 C.F.R. § 965.205(e).

                                   Material Facts not Genuinely in Dispute

         Respondent has filed a response to the Motion for Summary Judgment, but only
genuinely contests one material fact asserted in support of the Motion for Summary Judgment.
Where the moving party has cited to materials in the record supporting its account of the material
facts, the nonmoving party must come forward with specific facts showing that there is a genuine
issue for trial. See Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c) and Matsushita Elec. Indus. Co., 475 U.S. at 586-587.

           Accordingly, the Court finds the following material facts to be undisputed: 5

1.         Respondent is a QPIE subject to the requirements of the Regulation.

2.         Respondent is a reciprocal insurance exchange. Entities pay an annual membership fee to
           become a member of Respondent. Members can exchange certain types of liability and
           indemnity contracts.

3.         Respondent began insuring municipalities and their political subdivisions on
           July 1, 1995.

4.         In 2014, Respondent formally amended its by-laws to allow municipalities and their
           political subdivisions to join the company’s membership, and formally amended its
           membership agreements to expressly acknowledge the participation of municipalities as
           members.

5.         Respondent amended its by-laws again in 2020. The amended by-laws retained the exact
           language of the 2014 by-laws and permit municipalities and their political subdivisions to
           join Respondent’s membership.

6.         Respondent admitted that as of September 2021, the members of Respondent included
           school districts, counties, municipalities, water and sewage authorities, and parking
           authorities.

7.         Respondent admitted that it currently markets and solicits membership from school
           districts, counties, municipalities, water and sewage authorities, and parking authorities.

8.         As of September 2021, Respondent’s members included 110 municipalities or their
           political subdivisions, including school districts and sanitary authorities, along with 64
           housing authorities.



5
    Some proposed facts have been omitted as not material to this decision.



                                                           6
9.    As of April 21, 2022, Respondent identifies itself on its website as “a governmental
      insurer, which means it can insure any governmental entity, this includes, but is not
      limited to, counties, cities, sewer and water authorities, transit authorities, boroughs,
      townships, and school districts.”

10.   Respondent is managed by a board of directors (“the Board”), which consists of seven
      persons who meet at least four times per year.

11.   Respondent’s website touts that “[s]hared ownership of the Exchange and policy
      management through a Board of Directors elected by a membership” is one of the
      benefits of membership in Respondent.

12.   Any representative of a member may submit his or her name for nomination to the Board
      and a candidate who submits a petition signed by 35% of members automatically will be
      nominated.

13.   The members may remove an individual director or the entire Board from office, with
      cause, by a majority vote of the members.

14.   Members have the right to review Respondent’s books, records, and annual financial
      statements.

15.   The Board delegates authority to and oversees the performance of an attorney-in-fact,
      who is responsible for the day-to-day operations of Respondent.

16.   The Board manages and has final say over all operations and “shall take all actions
      necessary for [Respondent] to transact the business of the insurance in the
      Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,” including but not limited to:

              i. Approving the management agreement setting forth the duties and
                 compensation of Respondent’s attorney-in-fact;

             ii. Directing or approving advertising decisions;

             iii. Directing or approving firing, hiring, and salary decisions;

             iv. Directing or approving decisions regarding company travel;

             v. Retaining professional services including consultants, actuaries, and
                accountants;

             vi. Directing donations;

            vii. Selling assets; and

           viii. Approving premium and deductible increases.

17.   In February 2017, HUD wrote to Respondent inquiring about the status of filings and
      whether Respondent complied with the Regulations requirement limiting approval for the


                                                7
      bid exemption to “non-profit entities associated with PHAs that engage in activities or
      perform functions only for housing authorities or housing authority residents.”

18.   At the February 27, 2018 meeting of the Board, Respondent’s Solicitor’s Report
      discussed the exchange of correspondence between Respondent and HUD about the
      bidding waiver, and that “[Counsel] does not anticipate any future detrimental
      consequences and if so, [Respondent] will strenuously fight any such decisions.” The
      Board unanimously approved the Solicitor’s Report.

19.   HUD and Respondent exchanged letters regarding Respondent’s compliance with the
      Regulation throughout 2017 and 2018. During that exchange, HUD offered Respondent
      the opportunity to come into compliance with the Regulation, writing:

             [Respondent] has two possible options it could pursue. First, it
             could create a distinct entity to legally separate its Public Housing
             from non-Public Housing business lines. Alternatively, it could
             request a waiver of the requirement that it limit participation to
             PHAs. To support its request, it would need to establish a good
             cause, and provide evidence that it has mitigated financial and legal
             risk to the PHA component of its business. This would, at minimum,
             require the submission of financials, actuaries, as well as opinions
             from counsel that there is no cross liability between the Public
             Housing business line and other business lines.

20.   Respondent replied to HUD on January 3, 2018 but agreed to neither option.

21.   On September 14, 2018, HUD issued a Notice of Withdrawal to Respondent, stating that
      Respondent’s “approval as a qualified PHA-owned insurance entity under 24 CFR 965,
      Subpart B, is rescinded, effective sixty days from the date of this letter, and [Respondent]
      can no longer provide insurance on a noncompetitive basis to PHAs in the
      Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.” The September 14 letter did not cite to 24 C.F.R.
      § 965.205(e) or Respondent’s right under the Regulation to request a hearing.

22.   Respondent requested a hearing to contest the proposed revocation on September 20,
      2018.

23.   At the September 25, 2018 Board meeting, the Solicitor’s Report discussed HUD’s
      Notice of Withdrawal, stating “it is still business as usual for [Respondent]. [Respondent]
      will meet with any [Housing] Authorities which may have questions.” The Board
      unanimously approved the Solicitor’s Report.

24.   On September 28, 2018, HUD notified all PHAs in Pennsylvania that HUD had initiated
      a process to revoke Respondent’s approval under 24 C.F.R. § 965.205(e), that

             “HARIE is entitled to and has requested a hearing,” and that
             pending the outcome of that hearing, “HUD’s approval of HARIE
             under [the Regulation] remains intact. As such … PHAs may
             continue to obtain any line of insurance from HARIE without


                                               8
             regard to competitive selection procedures. After a decision is
             made, HUD will notify, in writing, Pennsylvania PHAs of the
             outcome of the hearing.”

25.   On September 28, 2018, HUD confirmed to Respondent that Respondent would receive a
      hearing consistent with 24 C.F.R. part 26, subpart A, and that “HUD will take no action
      on this revocation until a decision is rendered by the Hearing Officer and will advise
      PHAs in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania that the revocation is under administrative
      hearing review.”

26.   HUD took no further action to revoke Respondent’s bid exemption until September 2021.

27.   At the December 11, 2018 Board meeting, the Solicitor’s Report discussed HUD’s Notice
      of Withdrawal, stating “We have received no response from HUD. ... [W]e are very well
      prepared and have excellent documentation to back our stand on this whole issue.”

28.   At the February 26, 2019 Board meeting, the Solicitor’s Report stated, “We have had no
      contact with HUD in the past five or six months [and] will demand a formal
      acknowledgement from HUD to prevent a similar situation from arising in the future.”
      The Board unanimously approved the Solicitor’s Report.

29.   At the April 23, 2019 Board meeting, the Attorney-in-Fact’s Report stated, “There are
      320 property and casualty carriers in [Pennsylvania] and [Respondent] currently ranks
      32nd in that group. This is certainly something of which [Respondent] can be very
      proud.” The Board unanimously approved the Attorney-in-Fact’s Report.

30.   At the February 11, 2020 Board meeting, the Attorney-in-Fact’s Report stated,
      “[Respondent] [is] establishing a significant presence in the western part of the state.”
      The Board unanimously approved the Attorney-in-Fact’s Report.

31.   At the April 21, 2020 Board meeting, the Attorney-in-Fact’s Report stated, “No housing
      authority business was lost for the upcoming June 1 renewal period.” The Solicitor’s
      Report stated, “We have not heard anything from HUD in over two years.” The Board
      unanimously approved the Attorney-in-Fact’s and Solicitor’s Reports.

32.   At the September 29, 2020 Board meeting, the Solicitor’s Report stated, “Things are
      quiet and running smoothly…Nothing major is pending … [and] no correspondence has
      been received from HUD in over two years.” The Board unanimously approved the
      Solicitor’s Report.

33.   At the June 28, 2021 Board meeting, the Attorney-in-Fact’s Report stated, “We are
      looking at the strongest financial position in our history and predict[] another banner year
      in 2021.” The Board unanimously approved the Attorney-in-Fact’s Report.

34.   On September 24, 2021, HUD issued a Superseding Notice of Withdrawal informing
      Respondent that HUD was withdrawing HARIE’s bid waiver approval pursuant to
      24 C.F.R. § 965.205(e). The September 2021 Notice advised that it superseded the



                                                9
       September 2018 Notice and notified Respondent that it had 30 days to request a hearing
       to challenge the withdrawal action in accordance with 24 C.F.R. part 26, subpart A.

                                            Discussion

         HUD claims the material facts are not genuinely in dispute and that it is entitled to
judgment as a matter of law on Counts I and II. Respondent disputes a material fact in Count I
and raised several affirmative defenses in its answer. As noted supra, a QPIE must meet all
eligibility requirements in order to be approved or retain approval as a QPIE. Therefore, if it is
proven that either requirement is not satisfied, HUD will prevail in the matter at hand, even if it
has not prevailed on the other count.

       A. The material facts support Count 2 of the Complaint (“HARIE does not limit
          participation to PHAs”)

       The Regulation provides an answer as to whether non-PHAs may participate in a QPIE,
providing that only some non-PHAs may participate. The text of the Regulation indicates:

               Under the following conditions, HUD will approve a nonprofit
               self-funded insurance entity created by PHAs that limits
               participation to PHAs (and to nonprofit entities associated with
               PHAs that engage in activities or perform functions only for
               housing authorities or housing authority residents)

(emphasis added) 24 C.F.R. § 965.205(c).

      From the perspective of regulatory history, the parenthetical phrase including some non-
PHAs appears to have included in response to a suggestion from the public during notice and
comment and considered in the Final Notice of 1993:

               Comment. Organizations other than [PHA]s should be able to
               obtain coverage from [QPIEs]. In many cases, an organization
               may have been created solely to provide certain services for a
               [PHA] or its residents, e.g., a child care center, a resident
               management corporation, or a food service organization. The rule
               should be broadened to permit this.

               Response. The Department agrees that certain organizations that
               perform functions for a housing authority should be able to obtain
               coverage from the nonprofit insurance entity. Consequently, the
               final rule provides that approval will be given to a nonprofit self-
               funded insurance entity created by [PHAs] that limits participation
               to [PHAs] (and to nonprofit entities associated with [PHAs] that
               engage in activities or perform functions only for housing
               authorities or housing authority residents).




                                                 10
58 Fed. Reg. 51952, 51953 (Oct. 5, 1993). The Secretary has thus already spoken to whether
non-PHAs may participate in in a QPIE by restricting participation to nonprofit entities
associated with PHAs (“NPEs”) that only engage in activities or perform their functions for
PHAs or PHA residents.

        For purposes of the proceeding before the Court, where the question is whether a
municipality (or its political subdivisions) may participate in a QPIE, the answer is plainly no.
Respondent has admitted that municipalities and other local government subdivisions participate
in Respondent. Respondent has not alleged that the municipalities or political subdivisions only
serve PHAs or PHA residents – instead, Respondent has alleged that PHAs and PHA residents
had no available alternative but to obtain services from these non-PHA members. Respondent
argues that it is not in violation of the Regulation or statute, because it “insures municipalities
and their political subdivisions as the same exclusively and solely provide essential services to
PHAs and housing authority residents including, but not limited to water services, sewer
services, police protection, fire protection, waste collection, public education, etc.” This
convoluted statement misconstrues the meaning of “only” referenced in the Regulation, where
the “only” indicates that the NPE only engages in activities or performs functions for PHAs and
PHA residents, and for no one else. Instead, Respondent has asserted that its non-PHA members
are the “only” source of certain civic services for PHAs and PHA residents – but not that the
non-PHA members only provide those services to PHAs and PHA residents. These are critically
different propositions, and this dooms Respondent’s argument and proves HUD’s argument. 6

           Thus, HUD has shown that it is entitled to summary judgment as to Count 2.

           B. The material facts are disputed as to Count 1 (“HARIE is not exclusively owned and
              controlled by PHAs”)

       Turning to Count 1, HUD has not established every material fact regarding the ownership
and control of Respondent. While it might be possible to establish these facts at a hearing, they
remain in dispute, and thus HUD is not entitled to judgment as a matter of law as to Count 1.
Accordingly, HUD’s Motion as to Count 1 shall be denied.

    III.      Respondent’s affirmative defenses are insufficient.

        Respondent raised several affirmative defenses in the Answer. As noted supra, the Court
struck several of those defenses for being insufficient as a matter of law. With the remaining
affirmative defenses of waiver, ratification, and estoppel, the Court concluded that it was
premature to consider the adequacy of those defenses as discovery was not complete. The Court
further declined to strike a possible defense of deprivation of due process, as it was not
specifically addressed by the Motion to Strike. Discovery has now closed and the Court now
considers the adequacy of those defenses on summary judgment.




6
 To the extent that Respondent argues that the Regulation is arbitrary and beyond statutory authority, those
arguments have already been rejected in the Ruling on Motion to Strike, and remain rejected by the law of the case.



                                                        11
       A. Respondent’s defense of deprivation of due process

       On September 14, 2018 and prior to the Notice at issue in this proceeding, HUD proposed
to revoke Respondent’s QPIE status. On September 20, 2018, Respondent requested a hearing
regarding that proposed revocation and HUD informed Respondent that one would be scheduled.
However, no such hearing was ultimately scheduled. On November 5, 2021, the present
superseding Notice was issued, Respondent again requested a hearing regarding the proposed
revocation, and this proceeding was initiated.

        Respondent argues that the prior failure of due process—not providing a prompt hearing
in response to a request for a hearing after a notice of proposed revocation similar to the one
underlying the present Complaint—should be a basis to deny HUD’s current Complaint and
proposed revocation and implies that this procedural defect is incurable. The Court previously
declined to strike this defense in its Ruling on Motion to Strike, as it was not addressed directly
by HUD’s Motion to Strike. Now HUD specifically asks for this defense to be rejected on legal
and factual grounds; Respondent does not specifically ask the Court to do anything as to this
defense but does ask for the Motion for Summary Judgment to be denied in its entirety.

        From an inspection of the filings before the Court, the crux of Respondent’s argument is
that HUD should have granted referred its request for a hearing to an ALJ sooner, and by
implication that this is an incurable procedural defect. Respondent cites to no precedent or other
legal authority suggesting this is case. HUD in turn suggests that no deprivation of any right
occurred at all, and that Respondent has not shown that it suffered any harm as a result. Given
that the reasonable remedy for the delay would be to institute a proceeding under 24 C.F.R.
§ 965.205(e) and part 26, subpart A to Respondent, it has already been granted. As Respondent
has not identified any meaningful deprivation of due process or impingement upon any right of
Respondent, Respondent has not shown any factual evidence or provided any legal authority to
support this defense.

       Accordingly, this defense shall be stricken.

       B. Respondent’s defenses of waiver of claims, ratification, and estoppel

         In its affirmative defenses, Respondent invokes waiver and ratification by HUD as a
justification to estop HUD’s enforcement action. Respondent recites a history where HUD
previously proposed the revocation of Respondent’s QPIE status before ultimately withdrawing
the proposal. Essentially, Respondent’s argument as to waiver (and ratification of waiver) is that
HUD waited too long to bring the present proceeding because it had already known about the
conduct underlying the present Complaint, and that HUD either waived or ratified the waiver of
the present issues. HUD counters that the appropriate frame of reference is for the Court to
consider Respondent’s affirmative defenses as an estoppel defense, which should fail as a matter
of law for Respondent failing to plead its elements. This Court considered essentially the same
arguments in the Ruling on Motion to Strike, but declined to strike these defenses at that time in
recognition that while discovery remained ongoing, there was a possibility that Respondent
would uncover and produce evidence in support of these then-speculative affirmative defenses.
With the close of discovery, these defenses are now ripe to consider, and the Court will examine
the applicability of these defenses in turn.


                                                 12
        Waiver is not generally available as an affirmative defense against the United States,
especially where there is no indication that the employee acted within the scope of their
authority. “Whatever the form in which the Government functions, anyone entering into an
arrangement with the Government takes the risk of having accurately ascertained that he who
purports to act for the Government stays within the bounds of his authority.” United States ex
rel. Liotine v. CDW Gov't, Inc., No. 05-33-DRH, 2012 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 94837, at *44-45
(S.D. Ill. July 10, 2012) quoting Fed. Crop Ins. Corp. v. Merrill, 332 U.S. 380, 384, 68 S. Ct. 1,
92 L. Ed. 10 (1947)); see also Ferguson v. Fed. Deposit Ins. Corp., 164 F.3d 894, 896-99
(5th Cir. 1999) (affirming summary judgment that defendant's affirmative defense of waiver was
not available against United States where an employee acts outside the scope of the authority).

        Ratification is the affirmance by a person of a prior act which did not bind the person but
which was done or professedly done on their account, whereby the act is given effect as if
originally authorized. For ratification to be effective, a superior must not only (1) have
possessed authority to contract, but also (2) have fully known the material facts surrounding the
unauthorized action of the subordinate, and (3) have knowingly confirmed, adopted, or
acquiesced to the unauthorized action of her subordinate. 7 See Leonardo v. United States,
63 Fed. Cl. 552, 560 (2005).

        As an initial matter, Respondent has not identified or otherwise alleged the involvement
of a person with authority to waive or ratify a waiver, and to thus bind HUD as to Respondent’s
QPIE status. Respondent does not address who had the authority to waive or ratify the waiver of
the present claim against Respondent. Respondent also identifies the letter of October 10, 2000
as sent by Ms. Regina McGill of HUD’s Funding and Financial Management Division as a basis
to believe that waiver or ratification has occurred. However, even assuming that a hypothetical
person with authority to waive sent the letter (or hypothetical superior with authority to ratify
waiver did in fact ratify the letter of October 10, 2000), the relevant language of the letter does
not indicate any action beyond “[b]ased upon the information you sent to [HUD] on September
15, 2000, HUD is withdrawing the pending non-approval of [Respondent] as a [QPIE].” It is
difficult to identify the relevance of this letter as to this proceeding, as it does not include any
statement beyond the very narrow fact that the then-pending non-approval had been withdrawn.
This is not facially a statement of waiver. Further, ratification is not appropriate, as even
accepting the existence of a superior with authority to ratify (which has not been alleged) and the
materiality of the letter, Respondent has not alleged any material facts known by this person, nor
knowing confirmation, adoption, or acquiescence to the letter of October 10, 2000. As such,
neither waiver nor ratification have been raised as a legally sufficient defense, and will be
stricken.

       Even if waiver or ratification thereof could apply in this matter, such defenses would also
need to provide appropriate support for the application of estoppel. Estoppel is an equitable

7
 To the extent that Respondent argues that United States ex rel. Spay v. CVS Caremark Corp. stands for the
proposition that “if plead properly the [court] would have allowed [defendant] to move forward on the affirmative
defense of ratification in a non-contractual dispute,” it is incorrect. 875 F.3d 746, 751 (3d Cir. 2017). The
quotations provided by Respondent are not contained in the Third Circuit’s opinion, but the Court presumes this to
be a product of sloppiness rather than an intentional misrepresentation of legal authority.



                                                        13
doctrine capable of a flexible application. See Heckler v. Cmty. Health Servs., Inc., 467 U.S. 51,
59 (1984). In general, a party claiming estoppel must prove that (1) the opposing party made a
misrepresentation, and (2) the party claiming estoppel reasonably relied on that
misrepresentation, (3) to its detriment. See Kennedy v. United States, 965 F.2d 413, 417
(7th Cir. 1992). For public policy reasons, however, “it is well settled that the Government may
not be estopped on the same terms as any other litigant.” Heckler, 467 U.S. at 60. In fact, the
Supreme Court has never permitted equitable estoppel to lie against the government. In the
limited circumstances where other courts have entertained an estoppel argument against the
government, they have required an additional showing that the government engaged in
affirmative misconduct. See Estate of James v. USDA, 404 F.3d 989, 995 (6th Cir. 2005)
(rejecting estoppel argument); Kennedy, 965 F.2d at 417 (same); HUD v. Lowe, No.
09-M-098-PF-19, 2010 HUD ALJ LEXIS 17, at *9-10 (HUDALJ Jan. 6, 2010) (same).
Furthermore, the party claiming estoppel must also plead that it will be seriously injured if the
government is not estopped, and that estopping the government will not harm the public interest.
See In re Navajo Housing Authority, No. 14-JM-0121-IH-002, 2015 HUD ALJ LEXIS 10, at
*32 (HUDALJ Dec. 14, 2015) aff’d 2016 HUD ALJ LEXIS 2 (HUD May 2, 2016.) citing Office
of Pers. Mgmt. v. Richmond, 496 U.S. 414, 421 (1990); ATC Petroleum Inc. v. Sanders,
860 F.2d 1104, 1111 (D.C. Cir. 1988); Pueblo of Santa Ana v. Kelly, 932 F. Supp. 1284,
1298-1299 (D.N.M. 1996); and Prieto v. U.S., 655 F. Supp. 1187, 1194 (D.D.C. 1987).

        Respondent has failed to plead any facts to support a finding that the government made a
material misrepresentation or engaged in affirmative misconduct related to Respondent’s
exemption from competitive bidding as a QPIE. 8 Respondent speculated that discovery might
potentially uncover affirmative misconduct on the part of HUD, but did not ultimately do so.
However much HUD’s alleged history of proposing and withdrawing a revocation of
Respondent’s exemption from competitive history may be fairly considered in Respondent’s
favor in this case, it does not provide a basis for the Court to take the fairly exceptional step of
allowing an estoppel defense against the government.

        Further, Respondent has not alleged any reasonable reliance upon misrepresentation, and,
most crucially, Respondent has not alleged any detriment to it as a result of a reasonable reliance
upon misrepresentation. Respondent has made only the conclusory statement that “[t]o suggest
that [Respondent] is not in a worse position because of this…is naïve, if not, insulting.
[Respondent] would be required to change its business model entirely.” Brief in Support of
Response to Motion for Summary Judgment, p. 11. When considered in the light of the
counterfactual, i.e., where Respondent would be if HUD had previously withdrawn Respondent’s
approval as a QPIE or not granted it QPIE status at all, it becomes difficult for this Court to
identify the detriment. It may even be reasonable to think that Respondent has received an
unambiguous benefit under the facts as alleged by permitting it to operate for longer with a
special preference it no longer merited. Indeed, when Respondent is viewed as an insurer, it has
received a special dispensation from the government to avoid competing with other potential
insurers; when viewed as a group of insureds, that it has had additional choices for insurance
unavailable to others. In essence, while Respondent may experience a detriment, it has not
identified that detriment for consideration by this Court, nor any reasonable reliance leading to
8
  The Court is not endorsing the alleged conduct of HUD employees as perfect or blameless; indeed, it may be quite
reasonable to be frustrated, but that does not necessarily rise to a legal wrong within this Court’s purview.



                                                        14
that detriment. Respondent has also not identified any way in which it will be seriously injured
if the government is not estopped, and has not pled any facts suggesting that estopping the
government will not harm the public interest.

        Accordingly, Respondent’s defenses as to waiver of claims, ratification, and estoppel are
stricken as legally insufficient.




                                               15
                                                 CONCLUSION

        Consistent with the foregoing, Respondent’s Motion to Dismiss as to both counts is
legally insufficient and is DENIED. HUD has demonstrated that material facts are not in dispute
as to Count 2 and the Court finds Respondent’s affirmative defenses to be insufficient.
Accordingly, HUD is entitled to judgment as a matter of law for Count 2 of the Complaint.
HUD’s Motion for Summary Judgment as to Count 1 (ownership and control) is DENIED
because relevant material facts remain in dispute.

        As each count would be a sufficient basis independent of the other, HARIE’s approval as
a QPIE pursuant to 24 C.F.R. § 965.205 shall be REVOKED. Count 1 of the Complaint is
dismissed without prejudice as moot and in the interest of judicial economy. See, e.g., Damasco
v. Clearwire Corp., 662 F.3d 891, 894-95 (7th Cir. 2011) (holding that where there is no longer a
live case or controversy under Article III of the Constitution because the requested remedy has
been granted, dismissal of the count is appropriate).

                                              So ORDERED,

                                               ALEXANDER
                                                                       Digitally signed by: ALEXANDER
                                                                       FERNANDEZ-PONS
                                                                       DN: CN = ALEXANDER FERNANDEZ-

                                               FERNANDEZ-              PONS email = ALEXANDER.
                                                                       FERNANDEZ-PONS@HUD.GOV C = AD
                                                                       O = OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OU

                                               PONS                    = OHA
                                              ________________________________
                                                                       Date: 2022.05.13 11:48:11 -04'00'

                                              Alexander Fernández-Pons
                                              Administrative Law Judge

Notice of appeal rights. The appeal procedure is set forth in detail in 24 C.F.R. § 26.26. This Order may be
appealed by any party to the Secretary of HUD. Any appeal and the required brief must be received by the
Secretary within 30 days after the date of this Order. Any statement in opposition to an appeal must be received by
the Secretary within 20 days after service of the appeal and brief.

Service of appeal documents. Any petition for review or statement in opposition must be served upon the
Secretary by mail, facsimile, or electronic means at the following:
         U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
         Attention: Secretarial Review Clerk
         451 7th Street S.W., Room 2130
         Washington, DC 20410
         Facsimile: (202) 708-0019
         Scanned electronic document: secretarialreview@hud.gov

Copies of appeal documents. Copies of any Petition for Review or statement in opposition shall also be served on
the opposing party(s), and on the HUD Office of Administrative Law Judges.

Finality of decision. The agency decision becomes final as indicated in 24 C.F.R. § 26.25(f).

Judicial review of final decision. After exhausting all available administrative remedies, any party adversely
affected by a final decision may seek judicial review of that decision in the appropriate United States District Court.
5 U.S.C. § 701 et seq. A party must file a written petition in that court within 60 days of the issuance of the
Secretary’s final decision. Fed. R. App. Pro. 4(a)(1)(B).




                                                          16
