               D i v e r s i t y, E q u i t y
               Inclusion                        PLAN
We believe that Diversity, Equity,
and Inclusion are necessary to
ensure Oregon’s diverse
people and businesses
can do meaningful
work and reach
their full potential.




                                   May 2025
         oregon.gov/employ




                              SUPPORT BUSINESS | PROMOTE EMPLOYMENT
Table of Contents
Vision and Mission .................................................................................................................... 3

Values, Operating Principles, and Strategic Goals ................................................................... 3

Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion Development Activities ........................................................... 4

Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion Initiatives Throughout the Agency........................................... 5

Progress Report for 2023-2025 Goals .................................................................................... 15
   Community Engagement ..................................................................................................... 15
   Communications .................................................................................................................. 20
   Data ..................................................................................................................................... 25
   Decision-Making and Budgets ............................................................................................. 30
   Contracting and Procurement .............................................................................................. 31
   Diversifying workforce and internal culture .......................................................................... 33
   Service Delivery ................................................................................................................... 68

Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion goals 2025-2027 .................................................................. 78
Goal 1: Foster An Inclusive and Fair Work Environment Where Employees Feel
Valued and Supported ............................................................................................................ 80

Goal 2: Achieve Proportionate Representation of People of Color in Higher-Level Leadership
and People with Disabilities Agencywide. ............................................................................... 86

Goal 3: Continually Advance Our Partnerships and Systems to Improve Customer Service
and Accessibility. ..................................................................................................................... 89

Need Help? ............................................................................................................................. 94




                      Oregon Employment Department | Employment.Oregon.Gov | EDPUB 225 052025 | Page 2
Vision and Mission
The Oregon Employment Department envisions an Oregon where meaningful work enables
the state’s diverse people and businesses to realize their full potential, creating prosperity in
every community.
The mission of the Oregon Employment Department is to support business and promote
employment. We administer programs that support financial stability for Oregon’s workers
and collaborate to provide resources, including quality data and information, to connect the
needs of employers and job seekers.



Values, Operating Principles, and Strategic Goals
The Oregon Employment Department’s values and ways of conducting business are crucial
to the success of our programs and the entire workforce system. The Oregon Employment
Department commits to the following values in our work with customers, partners, Tribal
governments, and other interested parties:

Integrity
We lead with honesty, service, and personal responsibility, always seeking opportunities for
continued learning.

Respect
We value our staff, customers, and partners. We promote an inclusive environment, assume
good intent, and treat others with courtesy and compassion.

Community
We foster a sense of belonging and strive for accessibility and engagement to create positive
impacts where we live and work.
Our work is guided by the following operating principles:
   • We are conscientious stewards of public resources.
   • We are accountable for our actions.
   • We are inclusive and transparent in our decision-making.
   • We partner to address community needs.
   • We promote a positive and safe learning environment.
   • We work hard and support wellbeing at work.



               Oregon Employment Department | Employment.Oregon.Gov | EDPUB 225 052025 | Page 3
Our strategic goals are to:
   • Continually advance our partnerships and systems to improve customer service and
     accessibility.
   • Implement a framework for organizational improvement to increase efficiency and
     effectiveness.
   • Foster an inclusive and fair work environment where employees feel valued and
     supported.



Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion Development
Activities
We give all our employees, including managers and represented workers, training,
education, and development activities aimed to help them value diversity, promote inclusion,
and achieve equitable outcomes in their work. OED’s supervisory managers should complete
at least three hours of DEI professional development every quarter. Non-supervisory
employees have the option to participate in a minimum of three hours of DEI professional
development per quarter. We provide a robust selection of required and optional material
focused on equity, diversity, and inclusion with our employees. Below are examples of our
development activities.
   • Disability Awareness, Accessibility, Communication, and Customer Service
   • Language Assistance
   • ADA Reasonable Accommodation Policy for Employees
   • Reasonable Accommodations for Customers
   • Gender Identity and Expression Procedure
   • Equity and Inclusion Overview
   • Culture Matters Part 1: Managing Unconscious Bias
   • Culture Matters Part 2: Bystander Intervention Skill Building
   • Equity Circles

      Equity Circles are dedicated space and intentional time for each agency team to
      share, discuss, and reflect on diversity, equity, and inclusion topics. Managers are
      responsible for scheduling at least 60 minutes of Equity Circle meeting time for their
      teams each quarter. By participating in Equity Circles, employees can cultivate a
      supportive mindset for equitable and inclusive practices and develop useful skills to
      be a change agent. The Equity and Inclusion Council developed all project materials,
              Oregon Employment Department | Employment.Oregon.Gov | EDPUB 225 052025 | Page 4
       including the vision, goals, framework, group agreements, resource list, manager
       instructions, and participant survey.
       The Equity and Inclusion Office is responsible for monitoring participant feedback,
       providing technical assistance to managers and employees, and updating the project
       and resources as needed.


Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion Initiatives
Throughout the Agency
We carry out our mission through our Contributions and Recovery, Paid Leave Oregon,
Unemployment Insurance, Workforce and Economic Research, and Workforce Operations
programs. Our agency programs are guided and supported by Administrative Business
Services, Communications Office, Directors Office, Equity and Inclusion Office, Human
Resources, IT Services, and Modernization. Each division has its own DEI Plan goals and
additional projects for incorporating diversity, equity, and inclusion initiatives into its work and
in alignment with our Affirmative Action Plan and strategic goals. Our internal Equity and
Inclusion Council provides perspectives and recommendations from across the agency to
guide our work.


Administrative Business Services
Administrative Business Services (ABS) helps purchase the necessary goods and services
for Oregon workers and businesses, while making sure all employees follow policies for
purchasing, have sufficient funds to conduct business, and have adequate facilities for our
on-site staff. The program’s services fall under the following categories:

 • Financial – centralized accounting services

 • Budget – financial analysis, guidance, and leadership to make sure we stay within
   funding limitations and maximizes opportunities to serve the public

 • Procurement – centralized contracting and purchasing services

 • Property & Risk Management – centralized safety and facilities services


Starting in late 2024, the Property and Risk Management team began working with the
Equity and Inclusion Council and Equity and Inclusion Office to address accessibility
concerns within OED’s main administrative building. This partnership has grown to include
incorporating accessibility and inclusion principles into future planned maintenance projects.

                Oregon Employment Department | Employment.Oregon.Gov | EDPUB 225 052025 | Page 5
The Chief Financial Officer co-sponsors the Leaders of Color Empowerment Group.


Communications Office
The Communications Office provides both external and internal communication support to
the entire agency and is committed to promoting communication methods and strategies that
are understandable, usable, and meaningful to the workers and businesses we serve.
Services include media relations, strategic communications planning, crisis communication,
consultation, graphic design, social media oversight, web design and content management,
editing for grammar and readability, and more. Products include brochures, fact sheets,
letters, newsletters, news releases, reports, social media cards, web copy, and other creative
communication vehicles. Members of the Communications team each have portfolios within
the agency, with assignments in each division as well as shared services. Through these
assignments, team members gain a better understanding of the programs they support and
the audiences they are trying to reach.
The Communications Office works through a robust equity framework through the following
principles:

 • The Equity and Inclusion Office (EIO) members are embedded in the communications
   process to provide an equity review of all materials

 • Edit all content for readability and ease of translation or transcreation

 • Include OED’s accessibility statement regarding language and disability access on all
   external messages

 • Coordinate between content creators, the Universal Access Coordinator, translators, and
   in-house resources who conduct quality assessments of translations

 • Design products to ADA accessibility standards with closed captioning, alternate text,
   high contrast, etc.

 • Partner with community groups to extend messaging to underserved communities


The Communications director sponsors the Spanish Language Learning or Practice
Empowerment Group.




               Oregon Employment Department | Employment.Oregon.Gov | EDPUB 225 052025 | Page 6
Contributions and Recovery
The Contributions and Recovery Division supports the Unemployment Insurance Program
and Paid Leave Oregon. They support employer payroll reporting and payments, as well as
debt collection functions. Inclusivity is a part of the team’s core values, and all employees
recognize there is an opportunity to be better, individually and as a whole.
The division includes the Equity and Inclusion Office in leadership team meetings to foster a
strong partnership between those areas. The division is also proud to share the Frances
Online employer portal in Spanish with customers.


Equity and Inclusion Council
The Equity and Inclusion Council is composed of 12 employees from across the agency who
serve two-year terms and several permanent advisory members. Council members provide a
wide range of policy recommendations and learning opportunities to the Executive Team and
entire agency. Division managers give council members at least eight hours each month to
participate in council activities. Council members are invited to participate on interview
panels and workgroups on a range of topics. The council helps our workplace be a place
where individual strengths are recognized and all employees are encouraged to contribute.
The agency director sponsors the council to ensure its work is supported across the
agency’s leadership team.


Equity and Inclusion Office
The Equity and Inclusion Office (EIO) at OED was created in 2022 to uphold our agency’s
values of respect, integrity, and community and to support Oregon’s Diversity, Equity, and
Inclusion (DEI) Action Plan. The team works with leadership to review and improve agency
policies and systems to reduce inequities.
The EIO offers interview panel participation, trainings, toolkits, and one-on-one support. The
team helps set DEI goals, conduct equity reviews, and support language and accessibility
needs. The office also supports the Equity and Inclusion Council (EIC), Empowerment
Groups, and each division of the Oregon Employment Department.
Besides supporting divisions in implementing their DEI Plan goals, the EIO has engaged in
several additional projects. Examples include:

 • Led workgroups to improve the functionality of the preferred name and reasonable
   accommodations features in Frances Online for our Paid Leave and UI customers


               Oregon Employment Department | Employment.Oregon.Gov | EDPUB 225 052025 | Page 7
 • Led a workgroup of HR and IT staff to document employee name change processes to
   increase employees’ understanding of the process for legal and preferred names

 • Updated OED’s Reasonable Accommodations Training for OED employees to improve
   the training’s accessibility and interactivity

 • Created training called Compassion in Crisis: Managing Stress, Avoiding Burnout, and
   Caring for Yourself First to help address compassion fatigue in both managers and front-
   line staff

 • Improved tracking mechanisms for the agency’s language access contracts and qualified
   bilingual and multilingual employees

 • Provided technical assistance for creating an all-staff survey and analyzing response
   data on behalf of the Parents, Guardians, and Caregivers Empowerment Group

 • Led an initiative for a Paid Leave Navigator pilot project at various WorkSource Centers
   to provide in-person assistance with Paid Leave claims

 • Organized a robust speaker series for the Women in the Workplace Empowerment
   Group

The Equity and Inclusion director co-sponsors the Management Development Advisory
Committee and ensures that diversity, equity, and inclusion are incorporated into the
committee’s work.


Human Resources
The Office of Human Resources (OHR) provides human resource and labor consultation for
all employees on topics such as recruitment, staff development, personnel administration,
benefits administration, nondiscrimination and affirmative action, and cultural awareness and
diversity. The Office of Human Resources supports the Oregon Employment Department
statewide Labor Management Committee, advises the Equity and Inclusion Council, and
communicates with the Department of Administrative Services (DAS) Chief Human Resource
Office (CHRO). OHR’s Organization and Talent Development team gives classroom, online,
and virtual learning opportunities to employees.
The Office of Human Resources is committed to implementing goals and strategies outlined
in the Oregon Employment Department’s Affirmative Action Plan as well as collaborating with
the Equity and Inclusion Office. Each team within OHR helps embed an equity framework in
work processes to respond to the diverse needs of our employees and Oregonians across
the state in recruitment, promotion, discipline, performance management, accommodations,
training, and policy development.
              Oregon Employment Department | Employment.Oregon.Gov | EDPUB 225 052025 | Page 8
To increase management recruitments in underrepresented populations, recruitment
analysts work with division managers to develop an outreach strategy targeted to the specific
position and appropriate labor market. The recruitment analysts check the demographics of
the applicant pool mid-recruitment to make sure there is appropriate representation. If the
representation does not meet the appropriate labor market representation, recruiters may
extend the job-opening, increase advertising, or increase defined sourcing.
The recruitment team maintains ongoing relationships with Partners in Diversity and similar
organizations to increase sourcing of underrepresented communities. The team works
closely with hiring managers and requires questions centered on equity and inclusion at each
stage of the recruitment. The required equity and inclusion questions are developed in
partnership with the Equity and Inclusion Council and entire Executive Team.
OHR continues to promote a workplace that values equity and inclusion through all practices.
OHR consults with the Director of Equity and Inclusion and Universal Access Coordinator to
address allegations of discrimination and racism and educate staff on related issues. OHR
works with the Equity and Inclusion Council and Executive Team to use relevant
organizational demographic data and engage in conversations to explore data needs and
requests.
The interim HR director sponsors the Wellness Committee and ensures that diversity, equity,
and inclusion principles are incorporated into the committee’s work.


IT Services
Information Technology (IT) Services provides appropriate, sustainable, responsive, and
adaptable information technology services and solutions. IT supports the technology of our
computer systems in all parts of the agency through acquisition, installation, maintenance,
programming, mainframe and database services, internet services and support, security, and
software troubleshooting. The team also manages several key vendor relationships to make
sure we have the necessary tools to support workers and businesses.

Vision: Be a trusted business partner, delivering flexible and scalable technology solutions
that empower OED to equitably serve Oregonians.
Mission: Provide secure and reliable technology solutions that enable accessible and
efficient employment services for all Oregonians.

Guiding Principles: Strategic collaboration; Deliver core services first; Configure over
customize whenever possible; Focus on equitable access; Be engaged; Continuous
improvement; Agency values focus; State of Oregon Enterprise Information Services (EIS)
alignment; We value people

               Oregon Employment Department | Employment.Oregon.Gov | EDPUB 225 052025 | Page 9
The Chief Information Officer co-sponsors the Leaders of Color Empowerment Group.


Modernization
Our Modernization Program is a multi-year initiative focused on transforming the agency’s
business processes and core technology systems. The program’s current focus is updating
the systems that support the delivery of employment services through WorkSource Oregon
centers throughout the state. Computer systems scheduled for replacement include
iMatchskills, which is the State of Oregon’s online job matching system. The Modernization
program helps business systems transform and streamline with new technology. The
program focuses on the agency’s business processes, infrastructure, and applications. It
includes service delivery updates, business process re-engineering, and technical
infrastructure solutions.
Modernization is committed to promoting, supporting, and expanding equity conversations in
daily engagements within the team and across the agency. Leadership encourages staff to
apply skills learned internally and externally. All Modernization staff are encouraged to attend
additional equity and inclusion trainings and to participate in Empowerment Groups.
The Modernization director sponsors an internal DEI committee within the division that has
organized a speaker on mental health for employees. The deputy director for Modernization
sponsors the People with Disabilities Empowerment Group.


Paid Leave Oregon
Paid Leave Oregon provides eligible people with paid time off from work to care for and bond
with a child during the first year of the child’s birth or arrival through adoption or foster care.
This essential program allows people to care for themselves or family members with serious
health conditions or for safety reasons including domestic violence, stalking, sexual assault,
and harassment (safe leave).
Paid Leave Oregon recognizes that this program can inherently help reduce barriers to
stable employment for many historically marginalized communities, including people with
disabilities, older workers, women, working parents, people of color, trans people, and other
historically marginalized groups. The team is committed to providing support, time, and easy
access to paid leave benefits regardless of race, ethnicity, gender, disability, language, or
technology proficiency.
As part of its commitment, Paid Leave Oregon supports an internal Equity and Accessibility
Alliance. This is a committee made of employees focused on equity, inclusion, and
belonging, supporting the Paid Leave vision and values in all aspects of the program. This
committee leads specific projects and provides resources, coaching, and mentoring to the

              Oregon Employment Department | Employment.Oregon.Gov | EDPUB 225 052025 | Page 10
entire team. The division also has a robust outreach team that attends outreach fairs, cultural
celebrations, back-to-school events, awareness month events, and conferences with formats
in multiple languages.
In early March 2025, Paid Leave Oregon launched the Paid Leave Connector program as a
pilot, partnering with three WorkSource Offices: Salem, Woodburn, and Beaverton/Hillsboro.
The intent of the program was to help customers who were facing high barriers to applying
for benefits by offering an in-person appointment for further support. The program is currently
being piloted to help ensure its success by implementing slowly over three quarters. This
approach allows for continuous improvement to processes, structure, and overall function to
meet the long-term goal of having the program available state-wide.
The Paid Leave director sponsors the Women in the Workplace Empowerment Group.


Strategy Office
The Strategy Office is a shared services team in OED’s Director’s Office, with a mission to
make delivering services across the agency more efficient, effective, and simple. The office
partners with teams across OED to improve how the agency serves our customers. The
Strategy Office’s vision is to work with all staff to improve the way OED does our work and
enhance the quality and level of service OED provides to all Oregonians.
The Strategy Office is a key partner to each division in planning and implementing projects,
including DEI Plan goals when needed. The office developed OED’s Customer Service
policy. This policy supports the Oregon Employment Department (OED) in providing a
consistent, fair, effective, efficient, and quality customer service experience across all
programs. The agency aims to promote customer satisfaction, build trust, and uphold OED’s
commitment to public service by:

 • Ensuring accessible, equitable, and culturally responsive service for Oregonians and
   agency partners

 • Supporting continuous improvement of OED programs to address evolving needs

 • Actively measuring and incorporating customer service feedback to improve services

 • Reinforcing a customer-centric, trauma-informed, and inclusive service culture across
   OED programs


Unemployment Insurance
The Unemployment Insurance (UI) Division administers unemployment insurance benefits
that provide temporary, partial wage replacement for workers who are unemployed through
              Oregon Employment Department | Employment.Oregon.Gov | EDPUB 225 052025 | Page 11
no fault of their own. This income provides support for unemployed workers and their
communities by helping to mitigate economic downturns.
Vision: To deliver high quality, innovative, and equitable services to our customers through a
team of experienced professionals who are dedicated to efficiency, transparency, and
personal responsibility and who treat everyone with dignity and respect.
Mission: To administer the unemployment Insurance program in the state of Oregon through
the timely and accurate processing of claims, equitable adjudication, transparent
communication, and high-quality customer service.
Who We Are: The unemployment insurance program is a federal-state partnership that is
funded by employer taxes and provides short-term economic relief to eligible workers who
are unemployed through no fault of their own. Unemployment insurance benefits are an
important income stream that not only provides support to the worker and their family, but
also helps local communities maintain a stable workforce and economy. Our mission and
vision are accomplished through focusing on:

 • Streamlined and balanced service delivery
 • Treating our customers with respect and dignity using inclusive and trauma informed
   approaches

 • Thoughtful policy development and implementation

 • Fostering successful partnerships across and outside the Oregon Employment
   Department

 • Developing and empowering our employees, encouraging an environment where
   everyone owns integrity and strives to protect the unemployment insurance trust fund

 • Dedication to continuous program and process improvement and embracing innovative
   and bold solutions

 • Supporting the agency’s mission, vision, values, and operational goals


The UI division has met all but one of their 2023-2025 DEI Action Plan goals and has
completed several additional equity projects and trainings. Their leadership remains
steadfast and determined to cultivate a division that prioritizes equity and inclusion. Some
additional projects are listed below:

 • UI Claims Mentorship Program: This program pairs newer Claims staff with experienced
   staff to help answer foundational knowledge questions and provide support as needed.
   This has resulted in staff feeling more confident and engaged with their positions.

              Oregon Employment Department | Employment.Oregon.Gov | EDPUB 225 052025 | Page 12
 • UI leadership sent a UI Manager to complete Stanford University's course “Leverage
   Diversity and Inclusion for Organizational Excellence” to assess what could be valuable
   to translate to other members of the UI leadership team. This leader will create
   presentations for UI employees based on what is learned in the course including
   information on implicit bias in hiring, performance evaluations, and job postings.

 • Trauma Informed Customer Service: In October 2024, UI leadership asked the Equity
   and Inclusion Office (EIO) to present a training on trauma informed customer service for
   all UI managers.

 • Escalated Customers Facilitated Conversations: There has been a rise in claimants who
   are in crisis or distress when reaching out to OED, and employees were interested in
   hearing from their peers in how to navigate these escalations in a trauma informed and
   compassionate manner. In January 2025, the EIO facilitated the requested discussions
   with managers and front-line team members in Adjudication and Claims.

 • Caring for Customers - And Ourselves - When Customers Struggle to Cope: In February
   2025, UI leadership invited Canopy Innovative Wellbeing to continue conversations on
   both self-care and claimant care when difficult issues arise.


To assist with meaningful access, the UI benefits automated phone line provides
professionally translated information in five languages, the UI chatbot and Frances system
customers use to claim UI benefits is available in English and Spanish, and the UI website
unemployment.oregon.gov has been professionally translated into 11 languages, following
the agency’s Language Access Procedure and Equity Framework.
The UI director sponsors the Queers & Allies Empowerment Group, and the deputy director
for benefits sponsors the Mental Health and Neurodivergence Empowerment Group.


Workforce and Economic Research
The Workforce and Economic Research Division collects, estimates, analyzes, publishes,
and distributes employment-related economic information to a variety of customers to help
them make decisions. Oregon’s Tribal governments are among our primary customers, as
well as private businesses, people who are unemployed or otherwise seeking jobs, state and
local workforce boards, elected officials and other policymakers, education and training
entities, students, government agencies, and news media. Information from the agency helps
customers understand current and future workforce trends and economic conditions. The
division regularly posts economic and workforce information on QualityInfo.org.
The Workforce and Economic Research Division embraces values and practices that
prioritize equity and inclusion and remains proactive in improving internal processes, as well
as external services by promoting a culture of learning. A large and impactful initiative has
              Oregon Employment Department | Employment.Oregon.Gov | EDPUB 225 052025 | Page 13
been to create an internal committee for developing a diversity, equity, and inclusion action
plan with implementation strategies.
The division has a diversity, equity, and inclusion committee to lead, develop, and support
the division’s strategies that promote diversity, equity, and inclusion. The division director
sponsors this committee. The committee encourages thoughtful research through an equity
and inclusion framework that benefits all members of Oregon’s diverse labor force and
strives to produce labor market research that is accessible to all communities. The
committee helps the Workforce and Economic Research Division become a workplace
where individual strengths are recognized and appreciated, and all employees are
encouraged to contribute. The scope of the committee includes research projects, training,
consulting, outreach to customers, and other initiatives that support or encourage equity and
inclusion.
The team’s employees and managers continue to stay connected with diversity, equity, and
inclusion efforts across the agency and maintain strong partnerships with the Equity and
Inclusion Office and Council.
The division director sponsors the Parents, Guardians, and Caregivers
Empowerment Group.


Workforce Operations
The Workforce Operations Division helps Oregon grow a robust economy by customizing
local workforce services that help the community and solve challenges of the workforce with
recruitment, hiring, retention, promotion, and training. The division assists businesses in
securing federal tax credits and offset training costs for hiring people receiving public
assistance, people with disabilities, Veterans, and those who have been unemployed longer
than six months.
Through a collaborative, customer-centric service delivery model, the division works with
partner agencies and organizations to assess and improve the job-readiness of candidates,
including teaching them job-search skills and coaching them on job-search strategies,
options, and expectations. The division collaborates with WorkSource partners who receive
Future Ready funding. Primary partners include regional and local training providers
(Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act Title I), Workforce and Talent Development
Board, Local Workforce Boards, Office of Workforce Investments (an interagency partnership
between the Higher Education Coordinating Commission and the Oregon Employment
Department), Department of Human Services’ Self-Sufficiency and Vocational Rehabilitation
programs, Commission for the Blind, Oregon’s 17 independent community colleges, and
local economic development organizations.
Workforce Operations promotes equity and inclusion in internal and customer-facing
interactions with tailored outreach to priority populations in all regions of Oregon. The priority
              Oregon Employment Department | Employment.Oregon.Gov | EDPUB 225 052025 | Page 14
is to transform outreach into engagement. Workforce Operations staff regularly engage with
Oregonians facing crises and have received training around Trauma Informed Care and
transformational coaching methods. Workforce Operations acknowledges that its customers
also face many additional barriers to service and re-employment such as racism, ageism,
bias towards gender identity, and other biases related to protected classes. This concern is
at the forefront of the division’s service delivery, and they have worked with the SNAP
Training and Development program to include payment for gender-affirming documentation
for individuals who participate in the program and are in need.
The Workforce Operations Division engages job seekers across the state at 39 WorkSource
Oregon centers, connecting them with potential employers, including agency positions.
WorkSource Oregon centers accept walk-ins and provide an online scheduling tool for in-
person and virtual appointments to increase accessibility for Oregonians who are not able to
travel or otherwise face barriers to attending in-person appointments.
Some of the division’s priority populations include Black, Indigenous, and other communities
of color; Veterans, including disabled Veterans; people who have been justice-involved;
migrant seasonal farmworkers; people with disabilities; tribal employers and workers; and
rural Oregonians. To assist with meaningful access, its website worksourceoregon.org has
been professionally translated into 11 languages, following the agency’s Language Access
Procedure and Equity Framework. WorkSource Oregon centers also employ a high number
of bilingual employees and are trained in working with customers with disabilities to make
sure we are giving them equitable access to our services.



Progress Report for 2023-2025 Goals
The Oregon Employment Department created a bold and ambitious DEI Plan for 2023-2025
and is pleased to report that of its 114 goals, 90 have been completed, 20 are still in
progress, and only four have not been started. Below is our progress report, including
context for the goals we did not start. The seven focus areas of the plan are Community
Engagement; Communications; Data; Decision-making and Budgets; Contracting and
Procurement; Diversifying Workforce and Internal Culture; and Service Delivery.
Each of the seven focus areas below includes the challenges; actions; division or team
responsible for the actions; and initial milestones and next steps. Actions from our 2023-
2025 Affirmative Action Plan are included for full transparency and alignment and are
denoted with an asterisk (*).


Community Engagement
Challenge 1: Communities lack opportunities to easily engage with our programs.

              Oregon Employment Department | Employment.Oregon.Gov | EDPUB 225 052025 | Page 15
Action 1.1:
Use lessons learned from Paid Leave Oregon and UI rulemaking practices to explore ways
to make agency wide rulemaking more accessible.

Division or team responsible for the action:
Executive Team

Initial milestones and next steps:
Explore and adopt accessibility options by June 2025.

Progress report:
Completed. OED completed all expectations from the Governor’s Rulemaking Expectations
letter, including creating a rulemaking calendar. OED has also reviewed its website for
accessibility and is working on additional updates to make the site even more clear and
accessible to constituents. In addition, OED’s rules coordinator is embedding more robust
outreach to Tribes during our rulemaking process. OED includes an accessibility statement
in all rulemaking and public meeting notices to offer language access and reasonable
accommodation assistance.

Action 1.2:
Contract with community-based organizations through the UI navigator grant to increase
engagement, with a focus on English language learners; immigrants and refugees; Black,
indigenous, and people of color (BIPOC) communities; LGBTQIA2S+; people with
disabilities; rural communities; young adults; and low-income households.

Division or team responsible for the action:
Unemployment Insurance

Initial milestones and next steps:
Request for Grant Proposal published by July 2023. Grantees will be expected to distribute
at least 250 paper materials per month, reach at least 15 potential claimants each week, host
at least two UI educational trainings per month, and attend at least one event per month to
provide UI information by June 30, 2025.

Progress report:
Completed. The grant award was delayed; however, UI has now contracted with three
community-based organizations through the UI navigator grant. The first contract completed
with the UI Navigator grant was with the Somali American Council of Oregon (SACOO) in
April 2024. Their UI Navigators were fully trained by OED and began assisting customers in
June 2024. UI’s second contract was completed with Central Cultural de Condado del
Washington (Centro) in July 2024, and their team completed training in September 2024.

              Oregon Employment Department | Employment.Oregon.Gov | EDPUB 225 052025 | Page 16
The third contact was with the Oregon Human Development Corporation (OHDC), in July
2024 and their team completed training in August 2024.

As the grantees ramped up outreach and began assisting customers in local WorkSource
Oregon Offices, their 1:1 services increased. Each grantee has a different approach to
outreach to help reach their constituents. Outreach methods include the use of social media,
WhatsApp, radio, TV, flyers, tables at events or regularly frequented places, and networking
with other organizations.

On May 22, 2205, the U.S. Department of Labor ended this grant for Oregon and other
states that received similar grants, limiting the agency’s ability to make additional progress
on this important work.

Additional outcomes:

 • In 2024, grantees helped an average of 6 people per day with day with questions or
   issues related to UI.

 • From Jan 1, 2025, until March 17, 2025, grantees connected with an average of 23
   people per week.

 • The combined efforts of the Equitable Access to UI and the UI Navigator grantees from
   Jan to March 2025 reached over 330,000 people.

 • The grantees have hosted 39 training events/workshops, some in person and some
   virtually. Over 1,780 people attended in person, and over 3,200 attended virtually.

 • The total number of outreach contacts across all three grantees is almost 130,000 people
   reached.

Action 1.3:
Continue to offer listening sessions to specific audiences or communities when the agency
plans to change UI rules, with a goal of at least two listening sessions hosted for each rule
change and documenting feedback. The listening sessions will have Spanish and American
Sign Language interpreters and possibly others as applicable.

Division or team responsible for the action:
Unemployment Insurance

Initial milestones and next steps:
Documentation of feedback received and how feedback is considered is already in place.
Create a standard operating procedure for rule making that includes how information about
the listening sessions will be publicized to reach impacted audiences, how feedback will be

              Oregon Employment Department | Employment.Oregon.Gov | EDPUB 225 052025 | Page 17
documented, and timelines for the engagement activities by August 2023.

Progress report:
Completed. OED held two listening sessions, with Spanish and American Sign Language
interpretation available at all sessions. However, no feedback was provided during these
sessions. UI has created a written standard operating procedure for offering listening
sessions on UI matters.

Action 1.4:
Continue to ask the Employment Department Advisory Council for feedback on all new UI
rules and document feedback.

Division or team responsible for the action:
Unemployment Insurance

Initial milestones and next steps:
Begin documenting feedback received and how feedback is considered by July 2023.

Progress report:
Completed. OED presented to the Advisory Council on the Unemployment Insurance Equity
& Good Conscience Rule, Informed Consent Data Sharing Rule, and Work Share rule. The
Advisory Council did not provide specific feedback but asked about language access and
other types of customer accessibility, and the UI division explained the steps they have taken
to provide equitable customer access.

Action 1.5:
Continue building relationships and documenting engagement between UI and communities
across Oregon, with a focus on Native American, Black, African, African American,
Latino/a/x, Hispanic, Asian, Pacific Islander, immigrant, refugee, asylum-seeker, linguistically
diverse, economically disadvantaged, people with disabilities, LGBTQIA2S+, and farm and
agricultural communities.

Division or team responsible for the action:
Unemployment Insurance

Initial milestones and next steps:
Begin documenting engagement, including feedback received and how it is considered by
July 2023.

Progress report:
Completed. OED’s Equitable Access to UI outreach team has provided one-on-one guidance
to over 6,300 people across more than 125 outreach events. Five of the events were
              Oregon Employment Department | Employment.Oregon.Gov | EDPUB 225 052025 | Page 18
educational, with a total of 346 attendees. The team has partnered with 25 agencies to
support its outreach efforts. The team has also distributed over 6,300 flyers at outreach
events and mailed flyers to WorkSource Oregon centers, community-based organizations,
and nonprofit organizations.

Action 1.6:
Create and pilot a community engagement plan within the SNAP Employment and Training
and Able-Bodied Working Adult program in Workforce Operations and in collaboration with
ODHS and other community partners.

Division or team responsible for the action:
Workforce Operations

Initial milestones and next steps:
Pilot plan by April 2024. Document outcomes, including feedback received and how
feedback is considered. Make recommendation to either expand this engagement pilot to
more areas or change engagement strategies.

Progress report:
In progress. OED created a draft community engagement plan for the SNAP Employment
and Training program, but the SNAP team has not yet had capacity to finalize and implement
the plan. Goals for the next biennium will include community engagement for the Workforce
Operations division that integrates OED’s new data equity framework and other tools.

Action 1.7:
Begin gathering data through a survey or other tool to inform community engagement for
Workforce Operations.

Division or team responsible for the action:
Workforce Operations

Initial milestones and next steps:
Begin gathering data by June 2023. Compile recommendations and apply recommendations
to engagement pilot.

Progress report:
In progress. The Workforce Operations and WorkSource Center employees participate in
outreach such as Veteran Stand Downs, meetings with migrant seasonal farmworkers, radio
public service announcements, and social media engagement. Some of the workforce
boards are conducting customer surveys and will share the data back with OED. Goals for
the next biennium will include more robust community engagement for the Workforce

              Oregon Employment Department | Employment.Oregon.Gov | EDPUB 225 052025 | Page 19
Operations division that integrates OED’s new data equity framework and other tools.


Communications
Challenge 2: Communities aren’t aware of programs and services available to them.
Action 2.1:
Create media campaigns, marketing, “Did you know?” informational videos, and other
avenues to share Contributions and Recovery information with underserved communities
and in plain language.

Division or team responsible for the action:
Contributions and Recovery

Initial milestones and next steps:
Convene workgroup by June 2024 to discuss most misunderstood contributions topics
identified from phone call and other customer service forums. Workgroup sessions will
include developing measures of success and requesting community feedback. Create plan
for requesting community feedback and measures of success by December 2024.

Progress report:
In progress. OED has completed the planning for this project, including using OED’s Equity
Framework, and plans to conduct two employer workshops each month on how to use
Frances Online system. OED has piloted the first workshop and is now making updates
before conducting it with employers. While the project has been delayed due to employee
turnover, it continues to be worked on as partnership between the Equity and Inclusion Office
and Contributions and Recovery.


Action 2.2:
Conduct focus groups to get feedback on new Frances Online system with at least three
underserved groups.

Division or team responsible for the action:
Modernization

Initial milestones and next steps:
Begin focus groups by June 2023. Document feedback received and how it is considered.
Create survey for participants by June 2023.

Progress report:


              Oregon Employment Department | Employment.Oregon.Gov | EDPUB 225 052025 | Page 20
Completed. OED conducted six virtual focus groups in English, two virtual focus groups
specific to Spanish-speaking community members, and two in-person focus groups specific
to the migrant seasonal farmworker communities. OED was able to incorporate much of the
feedback from these groups, and the project was an overall benefit to the Frances Online
rollout.


Action 2.3:
Create and document partnerships between the EAUI team and other state agencies
working in underserved communities to increase underserved communities’ knowledge of
the UI system.

Division or team responsible for the action:
Unemployment Insurance

Initial milestones and next steps:
Create documentation process by July 2023. Create informal partnerships that support at
least six underserved communities by December 2023.

Progress report:
Completed. OED created and documented partnerships between the Equitable Access to UI
(EAUI) team and 17 other state agencies working with underserved communities.
Partnership activities include onsite workshops, exchanging information about the UI
program and how to access it, raising awareness of the EAUI team and its services, and co-
distributing outreach materials.


Action 2.4:
Contract with marketing consultants to help select and track the best social media
campaigns, marketing, “Did you know?” informational videos, and other avenues to share UI
information with underserved communities and in plain language.

Division or team responsible for the action:
Unemployment Insurance

Initial milestones and next steps:
Contract documentation prepared by July 2023. Develop measures of success and a
process for requesting community feedback by December 2023.

Progress report:
Completed, although changed some of the specific tactics. Due to budget constraints, OED
was not able to contract with marketing consultants. Using internal resources, OED instead

              Oregon Employment Department | Employment.Oregon.Gov | EDPUB 225 052025 | Page 21
created the following informational materials:


 • Three videos in Spanish and English explaining how to create a Frances Online account,
   apply for benefits, and file a weekly claim

 • Multiple updates for several videos to reflect changes in the system

 • A series of guides in English and Spanish explaining how to use various aspects of
   Frances Online

 • Magnets and pamphlets

 • Audiobook version of handbook in Spanish and English, also available in podcast format

 • Braille documents

Video views:
 • Creating an account –English – multiple versions: 16,252

 • Creating an account –Spanish – multiple versions: 355

 • File an initial claim– English – multiple versions: 4,619

 • File an initial claim– Spanish – multiple versions: 108

 • Weekly claim – English– single version: 7,999

 • Weekly claim – Spanish– single version: 117

Due to staff capacity, a community feedback measure was not able to be completed.



Challenge 3: Not enough certified bilingual employees to conduct quality reviews of
translated materials.


Action 3.1:
Contract with community-based bilingual vendors to increase options and turnaround times
for conducting quality reviews of translated materials.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Equity and Inclusion Office

Initial milestones and next steps:
               Oregon Employment Department | Employment.Oregon.Gov | EDPUB 225 052025 | Page 22
Have contract in place by April 2024 to add to our options and turnaround times for
conducting quality reviews.

Progress report:
Completed. OED contracted with a community-based bilingual vendor to conduct quality
reviews of translated materials. The first document for quality review was the UI Claimant
Handbook in 11 languages. OED received detailed edits from the vendor for all languages
and has incorporated those edits.

OED is also contacting employees who have successfully passed speaking and listening
assessments but not translation assessments to check which employees are interested in
taking the translation assessment and adding translation or quality reviews of translations to
their duties.


Action 3.2:
Ensure that language access policy is enforced and practiced during recruitment planning for
public-facing divisions. This will include incorporating translation quality review needs into
recruitment processes for deciding whether a recruitment should be bilingual, and whether it
should be bilingual required or preferred.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Human Resources

Initial milestones and next steps:
Incorporate process by June 2024 and document changes in hiring of bilingual employees.

Progress report:
Completed. OED combined this action with Action 10.4, which the Workforce Operations
division piloted. The pilot was successful in increasing the quality and quantity of bilingual
applicant pools. In February 2024, OED adopted this practice for all bilingual-required
recruitments.

Challenge 4: Without intentional review processes or resources, agency
communications could be difficult to understand or include unintentionally
disrespectful or harmful language.


Action 4.1:
Implement an intentional review process for communications that includes edits for plain
language, terms that are easy to translate across multiple languages, gender-inclusive
terms, non-violent language, and reducing jargon.
              Oregon Employment Department | Employment.Oregon.Gov | EDPUB 225 052025 | Page 23
Division or team responsible for the action:
Communications

Initial milestones and next steps:
Implement process across all divisions by July 2023. Track number of documents that
Communications edits.

Progress report:
Completed. This review process has been successfully used and refined throughout the
biennium. Current roles are as follows:

 • Program: ensure contents of the communications are correct (accurate, legally
   sufficient, etc.)

 • Communications: ensure recipient can read and understand the communications (plain
   language, copy editing, consistent with other communications, etc.)

 • Equity and Inclusion Office: ensure the communications are accessible and inclusive to
   potential recipients (includes online and phone response options, easy to translate into
   other languages, accessible for multiple types of disabilities, respectful language, etc.)


Action 4.2:
Host regular meeting of communications, equity, and program staff to discuss challenges
and successes from the communications review process for agency divisions
Division or team responsible for the action:
Communications
Initial milestones and next steps:
Host first meeting by August 2023 and at least four meetings per year.
Progress report:
Completed. OED has held regular meetings on this topic from August 2023 to the present.
Results from these meetings have included building understanding of and defining each
area’s roles and responsibilities and iterative process improvements.


Action 4.3:
Develop an inclusive, person-centered language guide and update it annually. Share
examples regularly with all staff through multiple formats (newsletters, Equity Circles, team


              Oregon Employment Department | Employment.Oregon.Gov | EDPUB 225 052025 | Page 24
meetings, etc.) so that everyone has a common knowledge and understanding of inclusive
language.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Equity and Inclusion Office

Initial milestones and next steps:
Create first guide by September 2023; send first communication to all staff by October 2023.
Request employee feedback and document how feedback is considered.

Progress report:
Completed. OED created and shared an inclusive, person-centered language guide in
January 2024 through its Paid Leave Oregon division, which is available to all employees.
OED continues to update the guide based on employee feedback and evolving best
practices. The most recent update was July 2024.


Action 4.4:
Develop a glossary of common Paid Leave Oregon terms to assist with document creation
from an accessibility and person-centered perspective.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Paid Leave Oregon

Initial milestones and next steps:
Create first glossary by September 2023. Request and gather employee feedback by April
2024. Document how feedback is considered on a quarterly basis.

Progress report:
In progress. OED began developing this glossary in June 2022, but due to the newness of
the Paid Leave Oregon program and rapidly developing processes and policies, this glossary
has not been finalized yet. In September 2022, Paid Leave Oregon translators developed a
separate glossary and best practices of common Paid Leave Oregon terms in Spanish,
Vietnamese, Arabic, Korean, Russian, Simplified Chinese, and Traditional Chinese to assist
with document translation, which improves accessibility for customers and staff. Paid Leave
updated this glossary most recently in November 2024.


Data
Challenge 5: There are insufficient data on the communities we serve.



              Oregon Employment Department | Employment.Oregon.Gov | EDPUB 225 052025 | Page 25
Action 5.1:
Include options to provide demographics information on sexual orientation and gender
identity for agency customers in modernized systems. Train employees on these new
questions.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Equity and Inclusion Office

Initial milestones and next steps:
Finalize questions by April 2023; create trainings by August 2023. Monitor response rates,
customer feedback, and employee feedback on a quarterly basis through June 2025.
Document how feedback is considered.

Progress report:
Completed. OED created demographics questions on sexual orientation and gender identity
and included them in the launch of Paid Leave Oregon benefits in September 2023 and the
launch of Unemployment Insurance benefits in the new system in March 2024. OED
collaborated with a local LGBTQIA2S+ advocacy organization, internal equity teams, and
internal policy staff to finalize the questions. To support employees in using the questions,
OED created internal employee scripts, an awareness training that over 300 employees have
taken, an FAQ resource, and focus groups. The questions include options for “I do not
understand what this question is asking” and “Prefer not to say” for customers who do not
want to disclose this information.


Action 5.2:
Develop a Data Equity Framework to determine success and key performance benchmarks
for Paid Leave Oregon customer data, including reaching priority populations and evaluating
priority population outcomes.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Paid Leave Oregon

Initial milestones and next steps:
Begin framework by October 2023; complete draft and implement by April 2024. Monitor key
performance indicators on an ongoing basis and conduct quarterly reviews to develop
recommendations for responding to trends in customer data.

Progress report:
Completed. OED began drafting the data equity framework in June 2022 and completed the
first draft in August 2023. Relevant internal reviewers, such as data teams, data stewardship


              Oregon Employment Department | Employment.Oregon.Gov | EDPUB 225 052025 | Page 26
council, research team, etc. have reviewed and updated the framework. OED’s executive
team adopted the data equity framework in March 2025.


Action 5.3:
Gather data from survey engagements to identify gaps and trends in Paid Leave Oregon
engagement efforts.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Paid Leave Oregon

Initial milestones and next steps:
Ongoing; track community survey feedback.
Review each quarter and document how feedback is considered starting September 2023.

Progress report:
Completed. From summer 2022 to fall 2023, the outreach team surveyed community
members at outreach events to learn if the outreach was helpful and learn more about which
communities were attending these outreach events. The surveys were stopped because they
did not yield substantive/actionable information. OED is now working on two updated
surveys. One is to gather information on Paid Leave customers’ experience and OED’s
support for customers in terms of trauma awareness. The second survey is on customer
experience and Frances Online. OED also developed an internal data tracker to collect
qualitative and quantitative data from OED employees on customer experiences with
accessing the program.


Action 5.4:
Collaborate with the agency’s Workforce and Economic Research Division to identify new
methods for gathering demographic data to understand and resolve barriers to the UI system
to increase participation within underserved populations.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Unemployment Insurance

Initial milestones and next steps:
Begin collaboration by July 2023 and develop a plan of action based on the
recommendations by December 2023.

Progress report:
Completed. OED’s Workforce and Economic Research division assisted in developing the
Equitable Access to UI (EAUI) survey questions. EAUI collected a total of 1,367 surveys.

              Oregon Employment Department | Employment.Oregon.Gov | EDPUB 225 052025 | Page 27
They are also working with UI navigator grant recipients to identify barriers that claimants
and the general public experience. EAUI has visited 18 WorkSource centers to build
relationships with their staff to identify UI access barriers and connect with their internal and
external partners to learn about outreach event opportunities. EAUI has also given
workshops about barriers and meeting with claimants experiencing barriers based on
systemic marginalization.

As of January 2025, OED’s UI Navigator has identified and responded to the following
barriers to equitable access to UI and timely receipt of UI benefits:

 • Six awareness barriers

 • 44 communication and language barriers

 • One employer compliance barrier

 • 12 Frances barriers, such as lack of digital literacy/ability to navigate the online system

 • 27 UI processes and/or procedures barriers

 • One UI training barrier


Action 5.5:
Collect customer demographic data during the initial stages of the Workforce Operations
modernization project to inform program goals
Division or team responsible for the action:
Workforce Operations

Initial milestones and next steps:
Collect data from May to August 2023. Review key findings and document equity-based
recommendations for modernization project by December 2023.

Progress report:
Not started. An initial review of the data showed insufficient information to create
recommendations, and OED is now waiting on vendor selection for the modernization project
before continuing this goal. Future planning will use OED’s data equity framework and
lessons learned from demographics collected through Frances Online to inform customer
demographics decisions.

Challenge 6: Decision makers need more data on internal workforce demographics,
including any trends or disparities in hiring, retention, etc.

              Oregon Employment Department | Employment.Oregon.Gov | EDPUB 225 052025 | Page 28
Action 6.1:
Create partnership between Human Resources and the Equity and Inclusion Office to
compile a comprehensive report consisting of multiple aggregated data points (i.e.
organizational diversity, retention and advancement rates, language requests, overall
climate, etc.) to share quarterly and annually agency wide.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Human Resources

Initial milestones and next steps:
Begin by December 2023. Document any trends and identify any actions in response to
trends.

Progress report:
In progress. The Human Resources team shares a quarterly report on anonymized
employee discrimination complaints with the Equity and Inclusion Office and compiles a
regular dashboard of demographics, hiring timelines, reasonable accommodations timelines,
separation reasons, and investigation timelines. The Equity and Inclusion Office teams
publish a quarterly internal report on more in-depth demographics and shares data from

training and other surveys. Both teams have access to the agency’s employee engagement
survey data. To date, the teams have not yet established a comprehensive report to share,
and the teams continue to plan how to appropriately compile the report.


Action 6.2:
Implement metrics to track the Workforce and Economic Research retention rates by
demographics to help identify areas of support

Division or team responsible for the action:
Workforce and Economic Research

Initial milestones and next steps:
Implement metrics by December 2023. Document any trends and identify any actions in
response to trends.

Progress report:
Completed. The Equity and Inclusion Office shares demographics updates with the
Workforce and Economic Research division director on a regular schedule to check for
trends. To date, there have not been any trends to respond to, and reviews are ongoing.


              Oregon Employment Department | Employment.Oregon.Gov | EDPUB 225 052025 | Page 29
Decision-Making and Budgets
Challenge 7: Resource allocation decisions, including discretionary budget allocation,
aren’t informed using an equity framework.


Action 7.1:
Collaborate with the Equity and Inclusion Office and lessons learned from Paid Leave
Oregon to develop mechanisms for tracking and using community feedback on our budget.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Administrative and Business Services

Initial milestones and next steps:
Develop mechanisms by June 2024 Use engagement mechanisms for developing 2025-
2027 budget.

Progress report:
Completed. Responsibility for this goal shifted to OED’s executive team so that each
executive was responsible for incorporating lessons learned into their budgets. Community
feedback during previous budget cycles has consistently emphasized the importance of
excellent customer service; accessibility, which includes multiple ways to access services
and get help, language access, disability access; and robust outreach and education about
OED’s services. Although most of OED’s services are funded by specific federal grants,
OED’s executive team has focused much of its discretionary spending to improve customer
service, accessibility, outreach, and education.


Action 7.2:
Learn from other divisions about how they have invested in priority populations and identify
areas for improvement within Workforce Operations for greater budget equity and complete a
root-cause analysis for barriers faced.

Division or team responsible for the action:
Workforce Operations

Initial milestones and next steps:
Begin bi-monthly meetings in August 2023 with other divisions. Begin gathering data related
to barriers faced in Workforce Operations by December 2023. Complete a root cause
analysis to identify existing barriers by June 2024. Use the findings and conversations with

              Oregon Employment Department | Employment.Oregon.Gov | EDPUB 225 052025 | Page 30
other divisions to improve Workforce Operations budget equity.

Progress report:
Not started. Responsibility for this goal shifted to the Equity and Inclusion Office to learn
more about Workforce Operation’s budget and where discretionary funding could assist with
removing barriers or otherwise prioritizing equitable access. Due to staff turnover, this goal
has been restarted.


Contracting and Procurement
Challenge 8: Minority-owned businesses and vendors are underrepresented in agency
contracts.


Action 8.1:
Continue to streamline processes, participate in state outreach and engagement events, and
promote opportunities with the Department of Administrative Services to support and mitigate
challenges for vendors, with an emphasis on minority owned vendors and small and
intermediate contracts.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Administrative and Business Services

Initial milestones and next steps:
Increase percentage of contracts with COBID vendors from 5% to 10% of total contracts by
June 2025.

Progress report:
In progress. OED met with a COBID subject matter expert in 2023 to learn more about the
process and vendor support. OED also collected the Department of Administrative Services'
current outreach to COBID vendors and attended the Governor’s Marketplace event. To
date, OED has maintained 5% COBID vendor contracts. Currently, OED is collecting
information on more local outreach opportunities to connect with vendors. OED has also tried
to increase its use of COBID and other underrepresented vendors through reminders to
contract administrators across the agency, such as for speaker events and other
opportunities.


Action 8.2:
Establish a tribal consultation process and identify language access needs for contracting
and procurement services by July 2024.
Division or team responsible for the action:
              Oregon Employment Department | Employment.Oregon.Gov | EDPUB 225 052025 | Page 31
Administrative and Business Services (ABS)

Initial milestones and next steps:
Identify mechanism to update language services and establish consultation process by July
2024.

Progress report:
In progress. Due to ABS leadership turnover, this goal has been delayed. OED now has a
Tribal consultation process, which is managed by the Tribal liaison. In March 2025, the Tribal
liaison presented to Administrative and Business Services leadership on working with Tribes
and gave recommendations on the consultation process. OED is working on curating
contracting and procurement opportunities to include in communications to Tribal
governments to go through streamlined, unified messaging. After completing this step, OED
will work on a similar process for language access.


Action 8.3:
Increase transparency in procurement processes by developing infrastructure for additional
data collection mechanisms, exploring existing data sources, and identifying potential
barriers to mitigate with new changes.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Administrative and Business Services

Initial milestones and next steps:
Develop infrastructure by June 2025.

Progress report:
In progress. OED has transitioned to using Oregon Buys for its procurement and must follow
its processes. OED has been looking into what data collection is available in the new system
or through the Department of Administrative Services so we can identify any gaps and
opportunities.


Action 8.4:
Develop small, non-competitive agreements with community-based organizations to connect
Paid Leave Oregon to historically underrepresented groups. Agreements will include food,
childcare, interpreters, and staff time considerations.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Paid Leave Oregon


              Oregon Employment Department | Employment.Oregon.Gov | EDPUB 225 052025 | Page 32
Initial milestones and next steps:
Begin documenting the number of agreements by July 2023. Track community survey
feedback. Review each quarter and document how feedback is considered starting
September 2023.

Progress report:
Completed. Paid Leave continues to offer non-competitive agreements to community-based
organizations that have a desire to help spread awareness about the program. Due to low
participation in the process, there is no actionable feedback at this time. However, it seems
likely that the low participation is due to the relatively small amount that state agencies can
award through non-competitive agreements.



Diversifying workforce and internal culture
Challenge 9: Not all internal trainings are accessible or have been reviewed for
cultural awareness.


Action 9.1:
Review agency trainings and create plan for cultural awareness, including more accessibility
options, such as voiceover, captions, recording live trainings, etc.

Division or team responsible for the action:
Equity and Inclusion Office

Initial milestones and next steps:
Begin review by December 2023. Create first draft of plan by June 2024 and request
feedback from all agency trainers. Finalize plan by September 2024. Assist trainers in
implementing plan and monitor employee feedback from trainings. Document how feedback
is considered.

Progress report:
Completed. OED created an accessible trainings framework that includes all requirements of
this goal and finalized the framework and plan in August 2024. Agency trainers met several
times post launch to make continuous improvements.

Challenge 10: Government recruitment processes can be difficult for external
applicants to understand and access.



              Oregon Employment Department | Employment.Oregon.Gov | EDPUB 225 052025 | Page 33
Action 10.1:
Collaborate with Office of Human Resources to develop equity reviews process for job listing
design and recruitment and hiring practices for each division.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Equity and Inclusion Office

Initial milestones and next steps:
Begin collaboration and develop process with all divisions by June 2024. Track recruitment
data and respond to any new trends.

Progress report:
In progress. This collaboration began in January 2024. Due to hiring surges that greatly
increased work for the recruitment team, the workgroup extended the due dates for this goal
to the end of 2024. In December 2024, the Human Resources team communicated with all
managers about working with the Equity and Inclusion Office to complete equity reviews for
position descriptions. This is ongoing work as both teams develop this collaboration. The
workgroup also combined this action with Actions 11.16, 11.17, 12.9, which adds to the
complexity and scope of the overall project.


Action 10.2:
Develop comprehensive recruitment and interview guidance, including writing interview
questions and position descriptions for increasing plain language and avoiding gender
coding, ableism, violent language, etc.; preparing an interview panel, equity reviews, and
evaluating candidates through the Paid Leave Oregon rubric.

Division or team responsible for the action:
Paid Leave Oregon

Initial milestones and next steps:
Develop guidance and training by September 2023.
Track progress through employee demographic data and engagement surveys. Review
quarterly and give recommendations based on outcomes (for example, in comparing the
division labor force to the statewide labor force.

Progress report:
Completed. OED created a recruitment guide for Paid Leave Oregon managers that includes
these components. Topics include equity reviews of interview questions, required trainings,
how to score candidates from a skills- and qualifications-based perspective, and inclusive
language. Paid Leave’s demographics in terms of gender, race, ethnicity, Veteran status,
and language exceed the Oregon labor force statistics.
              Oregon Employment Department | Employment.Oregon.Gov | EDPUB 225 052025 | Page 34
Action 10.3:
Leverage Business Services team to promote agency recruitments to underrepresented
communities via job boards, community-specific spaces, and other gathering spaces by
inputting these positions in iMatchSkills.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Workforce Operations

Initial milestones and next steps:
Business Services team will begin promoting select agency recruitments by January 2024.
Explore using Workday to track where applicants discovered the job. Track recruitment data
for 6 months and review for new trends in hiring and applications.

Progress report:
Completed. This action overlaps with Action 13.7. The Business Services team began
promoting select agency recruitments in December 2023 and this work continues.


Action 10.4:
Post Migrant Seasonal Farmworker Representative recruitments for use in both English and
Spanish and translate interview questions in both English and Spanish.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Workforce Operations

Initial milestones and next steps:
Begin new process by February 2024. Track recruitment data for 6 months and review for
new trends in hiring and applications.

Progress report:
Completed. This action is combined with Action 3.2. The pilot was very successful at
increasing the quality and quantity of bilingual applicants, and OED’s executive team
adopted the process across OED in February 2024.

Challenge 11: We must continue to foster fairness, equity, and inclusion to maintain a
workplace environment where everyone is treated with respect and dignity.




             Oregon Employment Department | Employment.Oregon.Gov | EDPUB 225 052025 | Page 35
Action 11.1:
Conduct quarterly Equity Circles within Contributions and Recovery, beginning with division
leadership and then moving to frontline employees.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Contributions and Recovery

Initial milestones and next steps:
Conduct one leadership session each quarter, beginning Q2 2023. Collaborate with Equity
and Inclusion Office to establish facilitation technique for leadership team. Conduct at least
one Equity Circle with each team by December 2023.

Progress report:
Completed. All teams began participating in Equity Circles by November 2023 and have
continued the project per the required schedule. The Equity and Inclusion Office continues to
monitor feedback from all employees to address any concerns.


Action 11.2:
Invite at least one representative from our equity-centered groups or committees to each
Contributions and Recovery interview panel for open competitive recruitments.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Contributions and Recovery

Initial milestones and next steps:
Representation from our equity-centered groups or committees will begin by July 2023.

Progress report:
In progress. The Contributions and Recovery division began inviting representatives starting
in July 2023. Representatives can be identified in most situations; however, there is not
always enough notice for employees to adjust their schedules, so this is an opportunity for
improvement.


*Action 11.3:
Train all current employees and regularly train new employees in the Culture Matters Part 1:
Managing Unconscious Bias and Culture Matters Part 2: Bystander Intervention Skill Building
offerings.
Division or team responsible for the action:


              Oregon Employment Department | Employment.Oregon.Gov | EDPUB 225 052025 | Page 36
Equity and Inclusion Office

Initial milestones and next steps:
Start trainings by June 2023 and train all current employees by June 2024. Train new
employees within 6 months of hire. Survey participants and document how feedback is
considered.

Progress report for Part 1:
In progress. From July 1, 2023, through April 30, 2025, OED trained 658 employees in
Culture Matters Part 1. To date, approximately 310 employees (18%) still need to be trained.

 • 90% of post-training survey respondents reported that they could apply what was learned
   to their work, either through improving workplace culture or in how we serve our
   customers.

 • OED hired almost 360 employees during this time, which included a large hiring surge to
   support the launch of Paid Leave Oregon benefits in August 2023. While OED has not
   yet trained all new and current employees due to the large influx of new employees, OED
   will continue tracking progress and sending registration reminders to employees and
   managers.

 • More sessions are scheduled through Feb 2026.


 Progress report for Part 2:

 • In progress. From July 1, 2023, through April 30, 2025, OED trained 698 employees in
   Culture Matters Part 2. To date, approximately 781 employees (44%) still need to be
   trained.

 • 88% of post-training survey respondents reported that they could apply what they
   learned to their work, either through improving workplace culture or in how we serve our
   customers.

 • As mentioned above, due in part to a large hiring surge, OED has not yet trained all new
   and current employees. OED will continue tracking progress and sending registration
   reminders to employees and managers.

 • More sessions are scheduled through February 2026.


*Action 11.4:
Conduct quarterly drop-in sessions open to all staff to practice bystander intervention
techniques.
              Oregon Employment Department | Employment.Oregon.Gov | EDPUB 225 052025 | Page 37
Division or team responsible for the action:
Equity and Inclusion Office

Initial milestones and next steps:
Host first drop-in session by August 2023. Survey participants and document how feedback
is considered.

Progress report:
Completed. OED began offering these quarterly sessions in August 2023 with a session
called “Tone from the Top”.

 • Through April 30, 2025, over 110 employees have attended these sessions. 94% of post-
   training survey respondents reported that they could apply what they learned to their
   work, either through improving workplace culture or in how we serve our customers.
In February 2024, OED added a second session called “Community Cultural Wealth” to this
quarterly series.

 • Through April 30, 2025, over 40 employees have attended these sessions. 88% of post-
   training survey respondents reported that they could apply what they learned to their
   work, either through improving workplace culture or in how we serve our customers.

In September 2024, OED added a third session called “Interview Panels: Inclusion in Action.”

 • Through April 30, 2025, over 65 employees have attended these sessions. 100% of post-
   training survey respondents reported that they could apply what they learned to their
   work, either through improving workplace culture or in how we serve our customers.

OED has created fourth session called “Compassionate Communication” to offer in the first
half of 2025.


*Action 11.5:
Assist managers in facilitating Equity Circles (or future projects related to discussions of
equity and inclusion) upon request/as needed and offer practice sessions.

Division or team responsible for the action:
Equity and Inclusion Office

Initial milestones and next steps:
Offer first practice sessions by July 2023. Survey participants and document how feedback is
considered.

Progress report:
              Oregon Employment Department | Employment.Oregon.Gov | EDPUB 225 052025 | Page 38
Completed. OED’s Equity and Inclusion Office (EIO) staff continue to help multiple individual
managers in planning and leading equity circles, as well as requesting managers’ feedback
on the project in over 35 individual meetings with managers.

 • In September 2023, the office updated the equity circle resource list and created several
   lesson plans as additional resources for managers.

 • At OED’s October 2023 all-manager summit, office staff trained all managers on equity
   circles and provided several practice scenarios that were informed by the individual
   feedback sessions and equity circle participant surveys. 82% of post-training survey
   respondents reported that the training was relevant to their position as a manager, and
   78% reported that the speakers were effective in sharing the information.


*Action 11.6:
Continue facilitating Empowerment Groups (affinity groups) and create more.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Equity and Inclusion Office

Initial milestones and next steps:
Four groups are currently in place; create at least two more groups by December 2023.

Progress report:
Completed. OED announced three more groups at the end of 2023: Mental Health and
Neurodivergence; Women in the Workforce; and Queers and Allies. Each group is also open
to allies and has a liaison from the Equity and Inclusion Office to provide support and an
executive sponsor. The groups meet at least once a month, and all employees are allowed at
least two hours per month for empowerment group meetings.

 • In spring 2024 and spring 2025 surveys of attendees, over 80% of respondents in both
   surveys reported that the groups help them feel valued and supported in reaching their
   full potential


*Action 11.7:
Continue providing a wide range of learning opportunities open to all employees on topics
such as trauma and trauma-informed practices, anti-racism, micro-aggressions, racial equity,
mental health, Veterans, restorative justice, history of race in Oregon, gender, and gender
identity. Topics will also include older and younger workers; parents, guardians, and
caregivers in the workplace; neurodivergence; and autism. The goal is to host at least 15
events.

              Oregon Employment Department | Employment.Oregon.Gov | EDPUB 225 052025 | Page 39
Division or team responsible for the action:
Equity and Inclusion Office

Initial milestones and next steps:
Host at least 15 events by June 2025. Survey participants and document how feedback is
considered.

Progress report:
Completed. Since July 1, 2023, OED has exceeded its goal by proving 23 learning
opportunities open to all employees, with two more scheduled. The learning opportunities
cover all topics listed in this goal and are listed below:

 • Hispanic Heritage Month Celebration

 • Accommodations and Me

 • Living with a Disability as an OED Employee

 • LGBTQIA2S+ History in Oregon with Basic Rights Oregon

 • Behavioral Health 101 with the National Alliance on Mental Illness

 • In Our Own Voices: Panel with the National Alliance on Mental Illness

 • Bridging Cultures: Native American Communities

 • Black History Month: Oregon’s Civil Rights Years:

 • Celebrating Arab Heritage with the Arab American Cultural Center of Oregon

 • Come Take a Walk in Our Shoes: Deaf Culture & Communication with the Oregon
   Association of the Deaf

 • Asian and Pacific Islander Heritage Fest

 • Jewish American Heritage Month: The Normalization of Antisemitism in America with the
   Jewish Federation of Greater Portland

 • Conflict Resolution and Restorative Justice

 • Sticky Notes and Missed Meetings: Navigating ADHD and Learning Disabilities at Work

 • Men's Mental Health Awareness Month

 • Veteran’s Celebration

 • Experience Autism
             Oregon Employment Department | Employment.Oregon.Gov | EDPUB 225 052025 | Page 40
 • Lunar New Year Awareness

 • Supporting Muslim Colleagues During Ramadan

 • Human Trafficking

 • Transgender Day of Visibility

 • Thriving Together: Disability in the Workplace

 • National Infertility Awareness Week,

 • Scheduled learning opportunities for May – June 2025 are National Foster Care Month,
   Older Americans Month, and Juneteenth.

 • 83% of post-training survey respondents reported they could apply what was discussed
   to their work, either through improving workplace culture or in how we serve our
   customers


*Action 11.8:
Develop an agency wide equity framework as a tool for proactively preventing or reducing
unintended disparate impacts of policies, practices, and projects that affect our workforce.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Equity and Inclusion Office

Initial milestones and next steps:
Develop framework by June 2024. Work closely with each division to assist in
implementation, document feedback and lessons learned, and update framework as needed.

Progress report:
Completed. OED’s Executive Team adopted the framework in February 2025.


*Action 11.9:
Request employee input regarding building a culture of equity and inclusion to determine
what strategies are working well and what strategies need to be changed or developed.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Equity and Inclusion Office

Initial milestones and next steps:


              Oregon Employment Department | Employment.Oregon.Gov | EDPUB 225 052025 | Page 41
Ongoing; begin documenting input and how input is considered by August 2023.

Progress report:
Completed. OED asked employees for feedback on building a culture of inclusion through
various methods. These included an all-staff survey in October 2023, ongoing training and
event surveys, a survey from the Equity and Inclusion Office in April 2024, division-specific
focus groups and surveys, an all-staff engagement survey in 2023 and 2024, sessions with
the Equity and Inclusion Council, and focus groups with all seven empowerment groups.

 • To date, feedback has helped inform current trainings, newsletter topics, the 2025-2027
   Affirmative Action Plan, and the 2025-2027 DEI Plan

 • 90% of participants in OED’s equity and inclusion trainings reported that the training
   could be applied to their work


*Action 11.10:
Develop and execute a strategic communications plan to promote the agency’s equity work
throughout the agency, including videos, newsletters, and other tactics to actively engage
existing employees and communicate the agency’s equity work to potential applicants. This
plan will be informed by employee input.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Equity and Inclusion Office

Initial milestones and next steps:
Complete plan by February 2024. Monitor implementation, including employee input and
document how input is considered.

Progress report:
In progress. OED finalized this strategic communications plan in December 2023, created
materials and presentations to support the plan, and has implemented the plan across
agency divisions except for Workforce Operations, which was delayed due to staff turnover.
This final implementation is scheduled for summer – fall 2025.


*Action 11.11:
Develop or obtain anti-bias training for all hiring managers and interview panelists.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Equity and Inclusion Office

Initial milestones and next steps:
              Oregon Employment Department | Employment.Oregon.Gov | EDPUB 225 052025 | Page 42
Announce training by June 2024. Survey participants and document how feedback is
considered.

Progress report:
Completed. OED received an online training on this topic from the Department of
Administrative Services (currently titled “DAS – CHRO - Interview Panelist”) and shared it
with all managers on Nov. 4, 2023.

 • OED requires hiring managers to send the training link to all interview panelists, and this
   requirement is documented in OED’s Recruitment Toolkit.

As stated in Action 11.4, in September 2024, OED also created the live training “Interview
Panels: Inclusion in Action” and hosted three sessions.

 • Through April 30, 2025, over 65 employees have attended these sessions. 100% of post-
   training survey respondents reported that they could apply what they learned to their
   work, either through improving workplace culture or in how we serve our customers. The
   Equity and Inclusion Office has reviewed feedback to incorporate into future sessions.


Action 11.12:
Develop or obtain racial equity training for all employees
Division or team responsible for the action:
Equity and Inclusion Office

Initial milestones and next steps:
Announce training by July 2024. Train all new employees within 90 days of hire and train all
employees by June 2025.

Progress report:
Completed. OED announced this training to all employees and it is required for all new
employees within 90 days of hire.


Action 11.13:
Participate as a leadership team on racial equity, disability inclusion, and trauma-informed
trainings. These trainings would be in addition to the agency’s other required trainings for
leadership teams and other employees.
Division or team responsible for the action:


              Oregon Employment Department | Employment.Oregon.Gov | EDPUB 225 052025 | Page 43
Executive Team

Initial milestones and next steps:
Complete trainings by June 2024.

Progress report:
Completed. OED’s Executive Team completed a nine-hour racial equity training, a two-hour
trauma-informed tools for managers training, and a two-hour training on creating
neurodiversity-friendly workplaces to complete this goal. Several members of the Executive
Team also attended additional trainings on these topics, such as trainings under Action 11.7.


*Action 11.14:
Allocate a minimum number of hours for employees and managers to attend diversity, equity,
and inclusion training, events, and Empowerment Groups. Allocate a required minimum
number of hours for all managers to participate in training on topics such as unconscious
biases, anti-racism, restorative justice, and facilitation skills.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Executive Team

Initial milestones and next steps:
Decide minimum number of hours by November 2023. Monitor implementation and
employee feedback. Document how feedback is considered.

Progress report:
Completed. OED has allocated a minimum of three hours per quarter for non- supervisory
employees to participate in optional DEI professional development, and three hours per
quarter of required DEI professional development time for all supervisory managers.

 • As of June 30, 2024, all executives have shared this goal with their managers and
   represented staff and begun implementation.


*Action 11.15:
Embed accountability for promoting equity and inclusion into all supervisory managers’
performance accountability and feedback (PAF) plans. This will include templates and
examples of what is expected of managers.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Executive Team

Initial milestones and next steps:
             Oregon Employment Department | Employment.Oregon.Gov | EDPUB 225 052025 | Page 44
Complete templates and communicate to all managers by December 2023. Monitor
implementation and compliance.

Progress report:
Completed. In December 2023, OED gave managers guidance on how to include
accountability for promoting equity and inclusion in PAF plans. By June 30, 2024, all
executives shared this goal with their teams and started to put it into action.


*Action 11.16:
Improve the use of inclusive language (plain language, gender-inclusive, transparent) in the
agency’s job postings and ensure the agency’s goal for equity and inclusion is clear and
direct.

Division or team responsible for the action:
Human Resources

Initial milestones and next steps:
Ongoing; Adopt agency language resources to update job posting template and recruitment
documents by April 2024.

Progress report:
In progress. This collaboration began in January 2024. Due to hiring surges that greatly
increased work for the recruitment team, the workgroup extended the due dates for this goal
to the end of 2024. In December 2024, the Human Resources team communicated with all
managers about working with the Equity and Inclusion Office to complete equity reviews for
position descriptions. This is ongoing work as both teams develop this collaboration. The
workgroup also combined this action with Actions 10.1, 11.17, and 12.9, which adds to the
complexity and scope of the overall project.


*Action 11.17:
Review and update applicant screening and interview processes to focus scoring on the
skills and qualities candidates bring, including how they are informed by both lived and
professional experience.

Division or team responsible for the action:
Human Resources

Initial milestones and next steps:
Establish required training and/or guiding documents for process by June 2024.

              Oregon Employment Department | Employment.Oregon.Gov | EDPUB 225 052025 | Page 45
Progress report:
In progress. This collaboration began in January 2024. Due to hiring surges that greatly
increased work for the recruitment team, the workgroup extended this action into the next
DEI Plan. This is ongoing work as both teams develop this collaboration. The workgroup also
combined this action with Actions 10.1, 11.17, and 12.9, which adds to the complexity and
scope of the overall project.


Action 11.18:
Share aggregate data with Equity and Inclusion Office quarterly and annually on workforce
discrimination complaints received related to disability, race, gender, justice involvement, etc.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Human Resources

Initial milestones and next steps:
Implement data sharing structure and cadence by December 2023.

Progress report:
Completed. Human Resources began sharing the aggregate complaints data in March 2024.
The report includes:

 • Number of complaints received under each category

 • Overview and nature of complaint

 • Date received

 • Date resolved

 • Outcome and supporting justification (conclusion findings)

 • Disciplinary action taken


Action 11.19:
Adopt and implement Department of Administrative Services mentoring toolkit to increase
formal mentorships and professional development pathways, with specific opportunities for
employees of color.

Division or team responsible for the action:
Human Resources

Initial milestones and next steps:

              Oregon Employment Department | Employment.Oregon.Gov | EDPUB 225 052025 | Page 46
Implement toolkit framework across agency by December 2024.

Progress report:
Completed. OED reviewed the DAS mentoring toolkit and determined that it would not meet
the needs of underrepresented employees. Working with its Empowerment Groups, OED
created a new mentorship toolkit and launched a pilot in April 2025. The mentorship
framework is built from four pillars:

 • Racial equity

 • Cultural humility

 • Community cultural wealth

 • Trauma informed practice


Action 11.20:
Collaborate with division managers and Workforce Operations Business Services team to
curate and expand outreach and recruitment processes. Document process in our manager
toolkit for agency wide consistency and applicability.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Human Resources

Initial milestones and next steps:
Establish process by June 2025.

Progress report:
Completed. This action overlaps with Action 10.3. The Business Services team began
promoting select agency recruitments in December 2023 and this work continues.


Action 11.21:
Strengthen and develop new partnerships with DEI-focused organizations and educational
institutions to support job pathways, provide interview and training resources, and help
mitigate related employment challenges identified by priority populations. HR Recruitment
team will consult with other state agencies for implementation support.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Human Resources

Initial milestones and next steps:
Ongoing; begin documenting by July 2023.
             Oregon Employment Department | Employment.Oregon.Gov | EDPUB 225 052025 | Page 47
Create system to track partnerships and establish formal collaborations with 10 DEI–focused
organizations by June 2024.

Progress report:
Completed. In combination with the actions from Action 11.20, OED curated a list of DEI-
focused organizations. The recruiters partner with the WorkSource Business Services Team
to source via LinkedIn Recruiter; they have established a great collaborative partnership.
There is ongoing sourcing through various LinkedIn diversity groups, including Oregon
Professionals of Color, NW EEO Group, Diversity Resource Group, Diversity and Cross-
Cultural Professionals, Diversity Professionals, Asian Pacific Islander Community Leadership
Institute, Center for Women’s Leadership, National Association of Asian American
Professionals (NAAP), Minority Professional Network (MPNdiverityjobs.com), ELGL:
Engaging Local Government Leaders, etc. There is additional ongoing sourcing through
various job boards/platforms including Partners in Diversity (PiD), Indeed, Job
Accommodation Network (JAN), Handshake, etc.


Action 11.22:
Collaborate with EIO to review current discrimination, harassment, etc. reporting processes,
identify areas of improvement, and explore a confidential advocate protocol.

Division or team responsible for the action:
Human Resources

Initial milestones and next steps:
Collaborate with state partners (DAS Chief Human Resources Office, Oregon Department of
Jus- tice, etc.) to explore confidential advocate protocol by June 2025.

Progress report:
In progress. This action has shifted to be led by recommendations from the Leaders of Color
Empowerment Group, which is ongoing work. The Leaders of Color group members sent a
proposal to OED’s Executive Team in July 2024 with several recommendations. The
recommended topic areas were hiring and representation; listening and believing; policy and
support; investigation and accountability; training and education; cultural recognition and
inclusion; data and transparency; involvement and participation; mental health and wellness
support; safe reporting mechanisms; inclusive leadership development; and continuous
improvement and evaluation. OED’s director has led discussions with the executive team, a
subcommittee of the Leaders of Color group, and the entire Leaders of Color group to
understand the recommendations and decide next steps.




             Oregon Employment Department | Employment.Oregon.Gov | EDPUB 225 052025 | Page 48
Action 11.23:
Review, update, and enforce agency wide exit interview process and identify mechanism to
use feedback collected through exit interviews.

Division or team responsible for the action:
Human Resources

Initial milestones and next steps:
Complete all actions by December 2023.’

Progress report:
In progress. OED reviewed the currently available exit interview data and questions. During
the DEI Plan period, the Department of Administrative Services also reviewed the exit
interview and created a new draft exit interview. OED provided feedback on the draft exit
interview. The intention is to share data with HR Business Partners so they can follow up
with coaching or other actions as appropriate.


Action 11.24:
Review Performance Accountability and Feedback (PAF) process and identify areas of
improvement.

Division or team responsible for the action:
Human Resources/Chief Human Resources Office

Initial milestones and next steps:
Complete initial review, identify opportunities for improvement, and make recommendations
to DAS Chief Human Resources Office by June 2025.

Progress report:
In progress. OED created guidance on incorporating diversity, equity, and inclusion
professional development into PAF plans in 2024 and will provide live trainings on this topic
over the next biennium. OED invited the Department of Administrative Services to provide a
PAF refresher training to all managers in April 2025, and the EIO and HR teams will develop
PAF equity and inclusion workshops as part of the HR development curriculum for
employees starting in July 2025.


Action 11.25:
Collaborate with Equity and Inclusion Office for foundational equity and language training
opportunities within IT.

              Oregon Employment Department | Employment.Oregon.Gov | EDPUB 225 052025 | Page 49
Division or team responsible for the action:
IT

Initial milestones and next steps:
Ongoing; begin documenting by July 2023. Establish training cadence for at least four
trainings per year for IT managers and staff and begin attending by June 2024.

Progress report:
Completed. IT created a training roadmap for all IT managers, such that their training goals
aligned with equity circle topics. IT also hosts trainings from the Equity and Inclusion Office,
and this training work is ongoing.


Action 11.26:
Create an equity and inclusion committee within Modernization, to include vendors.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Modernization

Initial milestones and next steps:
Create committee by July 2023.

Progress report:
Completed. The Modernization DEI committee began in January 2024 and meets monthly on
a variety of topics. In April 2025, they hosted a speaker from the National Alliance on Mental
Illness.


Action 11.27:
Continue the work of the Paid Leave Equity and Accessibility Alliance, an employee
committee that serves on interview panels, provides mentoring and coaching, and conducts
stay and exit interviews.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Paid Leave Oregon

Initial milestones and next steps:
Ongoing; track committee projects by February 2023.
Determine success measures for projects and continue to track each one, report out each
quarter during division meetings.

Progress report:

              Oregon Employment Department | Employment.Oregon.Gov | EDPUB 225 052025 | Page 50
Completed. The Equity and Accessibility Alliance’s work continues and has evolved into a
consultative role for various equity-focused projects. Although the members no longer
provide stay or exit interviews, they continue to serve on interview panels.


Action 11.28:
Work with Organizational Change Management to develop internal Paid Leave Oregon
conflict resolution path with restorative justice, non-violent communication, and trauma-
informed approaches for interpersonal conflicts that do not rise to the level of policy
violations.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Paid Leave Oregon

Initial milestones and next steps:
Develop plan by December 2023. Implement across division with training by April 2024.
Track number of reported conflicts to managers or leads starting June 2024.

Progress report:
In progress. Paid Leave Oregon works to resolve issues at the lowest level and use trauma-
informed tools that center employees of color to reduce racialized harm and promote safety
and restorative justice. The Leaders of Color Empowerment Group has also been
collaborating with executive leadership to help inform policy on when an employee of color
experiences racial harm and what steps various invested parties should respond to help
repair the harm and mitigate future harm. The empowerment group met with OED’s director
to discuss multiple areas to address, including believing people of color, and what support is
needed. OED has identified next steps and is forming workgroups for each action item.


Action 11.29:
Develop internal Paid Leave Oregon escalation plan that centers Black and brown
employees when interacting with the public or when conflict arises with a manager.

Division or team responsible for the action:
Paid Leave Oregon

Initial milestones and next steps:
Develop plan by September 2023. Implement by December 2023.
Track number of reported conflicts to managers or leads starting January 2024.

Progress report:


              Oregon Employment Department | Employment.Oregon.Gov | EDPUB 225 052025 | Page 51
Completed. Paid Leave implemented this plan “Paid Leave Responding to Intimidation,
Personal Attacks, or Harassment by Customers Procedure” in January 2024.


Action 11.30:
Develop stay and exit interviews within Paid Leave Oregon.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Paid Leave Oregon

Initial milestones and next steps:
Develop interviews by January 2024. Track progress through employee engagement
surveys. Review quarterly and give recommendations based on survey results.

Progress report:
Completed. Paid Leave completed several stay and exit interviews during this time period.
The stay interviews were transitioned out due to the PAF process transitioning in, and the
exit interviews were discontinued due to not identifying any ongoing trends and HR’s work to
refine exit interviews.


Action 11.31:
Develop Paid Leave Oregon expectations focused on a person-centered approach and
psychological safety.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Paid Leave Oregon

Initial milestones and next steps:
Develop expectations by June 2023. Implement by September 2023. Track success through
ongoing quarterly employee engagement surveys and give recommendations based on
results.

Progress report:
Completed. OED implemented customer care principles for Paid Leave Oregon in July 2023
that incorporate these requirements, as well as being trauma-informed. These principles are
used in trainings and new employee orientation.


Action 11.32:
Continue employee discussions within Paid Leave Oregon centering the most impacted to
help inform and guide policies and procedures that affect employees.
             Oregon Employment Department | Employment.Oregon.Gov | EDPUB 225 052025 | Page 52
Division or team responsible for the action:
Paid Leave Oregon

Initial milestones and next steps:
Begin documenting by July 2023. Track success through ongoing quarterly employee
engagement surveys and give recommendations based on results.

Progress report:
Completed. OED created a qualitative discussion group to meet this goal. This group
includes a high percentage of employees of color who provide feedback and guidance on
centering the most impacted communities in Paid Leave Oregon’s policies and procedures.


Action 11.33:
Develop and strengthen partnerships between Research Regional Analysis team and both
educational institutions and industry associations to increase awareness of open positions
and support job pathways for communities of color and other priority populations into the
research field.

Division or team responsible for the action:
Workforce and Economic Research

Initial milestones and next steps:
Ongoing; begin documenting by July 2023, including any feedback received on recruitment
strategies and how feedback is considered.

Progress report:
Completed. The Research Regional Analysis team began to centralize partnership tracking
and documentation, and they expanded their engagement on existing partnerships. They
also increased their outreach and streamlined job posting and Labor Market Information
presentations. Due to low recruitments in this team, there are no substantive outcome data
at this time.


Action 11.34:
Include regular DEI updates at Workforce Operations meetings and events and create a plan
for relationship building between Equity and Inclusion Office and Workforce Operations.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Workforce Operations


             Oregon Employment Department | Employment.Oregon.Gov | EDPUB 225 052025 | Page 53
Initial milestones and next steps:
Create a plan that describes the nature of the updates, duration, frequency, and partnership
between both offices by June 2023. Request employee feedback at least twice a year and
document how feedback is considered.

Progress report:
Completed. OED finalized this plan in September 2023.


Action 11.35:
Provide at least two hours per month of equity-related professional development time to all
Workforce Operations employees.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Workforce Operations

Initial milestones and next steps:
Create guidance around use of the hours by November 2023. Provide allotment to staff by
December 2023.

Progress report:
Completed. OED finalized this for Workforce Operations in February 2024, emailed all
division staff in May 2024, and reminded all division managers in March 2025.


Action 11.36:
Train and support Workforce Operations managers on anti-racist and trauma-informed
practices.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Workforce Operations

Initial milestones and next steps:
Train managers by June 2024. Survey participants to measure impacts.

Progress report:
Completed. This was delayed due to staff turnover; however, Workforce Operations
managers received anti-racist training in July 2024 and trauma-informed training in
April 2025.




             Oregon Employment Department | Employment.Oregon.Gov | EDPUB 225 052025 | Page 54
Action 11.37:
Develop parameters for an open-door policy within Workforce Operations to support
employees.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Workforce Operations

Initial milestones and next steps:
Develop parameters by April 2024. Request employee feedback and document how
feedback is considered at least twice a year.

Progress report:
Completed. Due to staff turnover, the implementation was delayed; however, OED drafted an
open-door policy in June 2024 and completed the notification to all Workforce Operations
employees in April 2025.


Action 11.38:
Offer members of Workforce Operations leadership team as mentors for employees in
Empowerment Groups.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Workforce Operations

Initial milestones and next steps:
Contact Empowerment Groups by May 2024. Equity and Inclusion Office will ask
Empowerments Group for feedback on the process and career progression.

Progress report:
Not started. OED launched its mentorship pilot in April 2025, but no members of the
Workforce Operations leadership team applied as mentors during the application period.


Action 11.39:
Collaborate with the Equity and Inclusion Office to continue implementing Equity Circles
within Workforce Operations, including providing supplementary trainings on difficult
conversations, cultural intelligence, and expanded bystander intervention trainings, and meet
quarterly to discuss impacts, outcomes, and next steps.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Workforce Operations


             Oregon Employment Department | Employment.Oregon.Gov | EDPUB 225 052025 | Page 55
Initial milestones and next steps:
Begin collaboration by June 2023. Review employee feedback at least quarterly and
document how feedback is considered. Survey participants from supplemental trainings to
evaluate impacts and respond to needs.

Progress report:
Completed. This collaboration is ongoing through meetings between Workforce Operation’s
area managers and the Equity and Inclusion Office to update and expand the curriculum.


Action 11.40:
Include training on statewide and regional data related to diversity, equity, and inclusion
topics in the article planning protocols within Workforce and Economic Research.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Workforce and Economic Research

Initial milestones and next steps:
Implement across all planning protocols by December 2023.

Progress report:
Completed. This is ongoing through collaboration between the Workforce and Economic
Research division and the Equity and Inclusion Office. The article authors create a schedule
to align with internal diversity, equity, and inclusion events and newsletters.

Challenge 12: Per Workday demographics, people with disabilities are
underrepresented in our workforce.


*Action 12.1:
Incorporate messaging about disability in our equity and inclusion strategic internal
communications plan to inform employees of the definition of disability and how Workday’s
demographic information is and is not used, with the goal of more employees providing their
disability information in Workday and enabling better tracking of any trends related to
disability. This plan will also include developing internal resources regarding disability and
employment for all employees and managers.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Equity and Inclusion Office

Initial milestones and next steps:

              Oregon Employment Department | Employment.Oregon.Gov | EDPUB 225 052025 | Page 56
Complete plan by February 2024. Monitor employee demographics for changes in voluntary
disability disclosure.

Progress report:
Completed. OED finalized its equity and inclusion strategic communications plan in
December 2023. In January 2024, OED began including guidance for employees on
providing their disability information in Workday in its ongoing “Disability Awareness: Sharing
our Stories in the Workplace” newsletter series. The Equity and Inclusion Office also created
a video on updating demographics information in Workday, and Human Resources assisted
in sharing the video with employees. OED will develop additional communications on this
topic as part of its 2025-2027 goals. OED includes information on disability rights and
inclusion in its New Employee Orientation and hosted several events on disability inclusion
throughout the biennium; see Action 12.2.


*Action 12.2:
Provide at least six all-staff learning opportunities and six all- staff communications related to
disability inclusion per biennium. The learning opportunities will include virtual or recorded
options that staff can consume at various times and locations.


Division or team responsible for the action:
Equity and Inclusion Office

Initial milestones and next steps:
Provide learning opportunities by June 2025. Survey participants and document how
feedback is considered.

Progress report:
Completed. OED has exceeded the goal for all-staff communications by sending 18 all-staff
newsletters:

 • Nine for its “Disability Awareness: Sharing our Stories in the Workplace” series

 • Two for National Disability Employment Awareness Month

 • One for World Autism Day

 • One for Deaf History Month

 • Three for Learning Disabilities Awareness Month

 • Two for Developmental Disabilities Awareness Month


              Oregon Employment Department | Employment.Oregon.Gov | EDPUB 225 052025 | Page 57
OED has exceeded its goal for learning opportunities by hosting nine sessions:

 • Accommodations and Me

 • Living with a Disability as an OED Employee

 • Behavioral Health 101 with the National Alliance on Mental Illness

 • In Our Own Voices: Panel with the National Alliance on Mental Illness

 • Come Take a Walk in Our Shoes: Deaf Culture & Communication with the Oregon
   Association of the Deaf

 • Sticky Notes and Missed Meetings: Navigating ADHD and Learning Disabilities at Work

 • Men's Mental Health Awareness Month

 • Experience Autism

 • Thriving Together: Disability in the Workplace


The Equity and Inclusion Office has reviewed and incorporated participant feedback on an
ongoing basis.


*Action 12.3:
Create one or more Empowerment Groups focused on disabilities. All Empowerment Groups
focused on disabilities will have active executive-level sponsorship and participation. The
groups will provide connection to mentors and a safe space to raise concerns, questions,
and ideas related to disability inclusion.

Division or team responsible for the action:
Equity and Inclusion Office

Initial milestones and next steps:
First group was created in February 2023. Monitor implementation and participant feedback.

Progress report:
Completed. OED’s first group, the People with Disabilities empowerment group, continues to
meet at least once a month. OED also announced a Mental Health and Neurodivergence
Empowerment Group in December 2023.

 • Each group is open to allies and has a liaison from the Equity and Inclusion Office to
   provide support and an executive sponsor.
             Oregon Employment Department | Employment.Oregon.Gov | EDPUB 225 052025 | Page 58
 • All employees are allowed at least two hours per month for empowerment group
   meetings.


*Action 12.4:
Solicit regular input and feedback from all staff regarding disability inclusion, which may
include all-staff surveys and targeted focus groups.

Division or team responsible for the action:
Equity and Inclusion Office

Initial milestones and next steps:
Begin soliciting input by June 2023 and release all-staff survey by October 2023. Document
feedback received and how feedback is considered.

Progress report:
Completed. OED includes a feedback form in all equity and inclusion newsletters and has
several other avenues for sharing feedback, such as the Equity and Inclusion Council, Equity
and Inclusion Office, empowerment groups, and Human Resources. During this reporting
period, employees shared disability inclusion feedback through direct communication,
surveys, and focus groups.


Due to time constraints, OED’s Oct 2023 all-staff survey did not include demographics
information. However, OED conducted two all-staff surveys in 2024 that included optional
questions about disability status to help identify any trends connected to disability status:

 • All-staff April 2024 survey: 17% of employees completed the survey, and 44% of those
   respondents indicated they had a disability. A high percentage of the respondents with
   disabilities felt they lacked fair opportunities for development and advancement. There
   were no other significant findings related to disability status. 70% of respondents said
   they understood the reasonable accommodations process for employees. 16% were
   neutral or found it not applicable, and 14% did not understand the process.

 • All-staff October 2024 survey: 83% of employees completed the survey. About 40% of
   those respondents indicated they had a disability. One finding is these employees with
   disabilities made up about 31% of the agency workforce. However, at that same time
   only 6% of all OED employees had disclosed a disability in their confidential Workday
   profile, leading to the conclusion that disability status is significantly underreported in the
   Workday system. In the survey, employees with disabilities averaged the same or higher
   scores than the agency’s overall average in only three questions, while averaging lower
   scores than the overall average in the following twelve questions:

              Oregon Employment Department | Employment.Oregon.Gov | EDPUB 225 052025 | Page 59
          o Overall satisfaction with OED as a place to work
          o I know what is expected of me at work
          o I have the materials and equipment I need to do my work right
          o At work, I have the opportunity to do what I do best every day
          o In the last seven days, I have received recognition or praise for doing good
            work
          o My manager, or someone at work, seems to care about me as a person
          o There is someone at work who encourages my development
          o At work, my opinions seem to count
          o In the last six months, someone at work has talked to me about my progress
          o This last year, I have had opportunities at work to learn and grow
          o Everyone at this agency is treated fairly regardless of individual differences,
            such as ethnic background, race, age, disability, sexual orientation, gender or
            gender identity
          o My manager creates an environment that is trusting and open


In a spring 2024 survey of the People with Disabilities empowerment group, 80% of the
respondents reported increased networking, mentoring, policy review, or learning
opportunities. 60% also reported increased professional development, leadership, or career
growth opportunities. During a subsequent focus group session, some members identified a
desire for increased professional development and learning opportunities, more time for the
groups, barriers due to busy schedules or not enough manager support, and more
information on responses to their input. Some members also identified that the group has
been helpful for navigating the accommodations process and general resource sharing. They
feel comfortable bringing their full selves to the group without fear of judgment, and it has
been a good opportunity to advocate for employees with disabilities. Although OED repeated
the survey in spring 2025, there were not enough responses to yield substantive data.


*Action 12.5:
Collaborate with community members and partners to strategize ways to increase
employment for people with visible and invisible or hidden disabilities.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Equity and Inclusion Office

Initial milestones and next steps:
             Oregon Employment Department | Employment.Oregon.Gov | EDPUB 225 052025 | Page 60
Begin collaboration by June 2024. Document community recommendations and how
recommendations are considered.

Progress report:
Completed. OED’s Equity and Inclusion director met with representatives of Vocational
Rehabilitation to discuss ideas around internships and job coaches in March 2024 and April
2024, and requested but did not receive additional information on internships. However,
several OED employees, including managers and Human Resources personnel attended a
Vocational Rehabilitation-sponsored workshop on job coaches in May 2024. In 2023, OED’s
Equity and Inclusion Office offered mock interview opportunities to members of the People
with Disabilities empowerment group. OED also included feedback from the People with
Disabilities empowerment group in developing its mentorship program. OED hosted a
speaker from Vocational Rehabilitation for an April 2025 event open to all staff.


*Action 12.6:
Create a National Disability Employment Awareness Month campaign, which may include
guest speakers or public-facing materials.

Division or team responsible for the action:
Equity and Inclusion Office

Initial milestones and next steps:
Complete campaign by November 2023. Document employee feedback and how it is
considered.

Progress report:
Completed. OED held a National Disability Employment Awareness Month campaign in
October 2023. The campaign included two newsletters and four events (also listed in Action
11.7). The events were “Living with Disability as an OED Employee” (panel event),
“Behavioral Health 101” with the National Alliance on Mental Illness, “Our Own Voices”
(panel event with NAMI), and “Accommodations and Me.”

The Equity and Inclusion Office has reviewed and incorporated participant feedback on an
ongoing basis.


*Action 12.7:
Increase the Equity Circle resource list to include additional resources on employees with
disabilities and employees of color with disabilities.

Division or team responsible for the action:
              Oregon Employment Department | Employment.Oregon.Gov | EDPUB 225 052025 | Page 61
Equity and Inclusion Office

Initial milestones and next steps:
Update list by September 2023. Continue monitoring participant feedback and documenting
how it is considered.

Progress report:
Completed. OED completed this update in September 2023 by adding six general disability
resources, seven resources on employees of color with disabilities, and seven resources on
mental health resources and informed managers in an October 2023 training on equity
circles. OED informed employees through an October 2023 all-staff email.


*Action 12.8:
Engage with employees with disabilities to connect them to opportunities to participate on
interview panels and mock interviews in order to gain experience and build skills related to
the hiring process.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Equity and Inclusion Office

Initial milestones and next steps:
Ongoing; begin documenting actions and outcomes by August 2023.

Progress report:
Completed. In August 2023, OED began working with the People with Disabilities
Empowerment Group, which includes people with disabilities and allies. They connected
members to opportunities to join interview panels and participate in mock interviews. In a
spring 2024 survey, 80% of the 15 respondents reported more networking, mentoring, policy
review, or learning opportunities. Additionally, 60% reported more professional development,
leadership, or career growth opportunities. The spring 2025 survey did not have enough
responses to yield substantive data.


*Action 12.9:
Review and update all public facing messages, such as job postings and employee resource
pages, regarding disabilities, including accommodations information, right to access
services, and employment opportunities. One focus of the updates will be to ensure the use
of positive, affirming language around accommodations requests. All employees and
managers will know how to request accommodations and understand the process.

Division or team responsible for the action:


              Oregon Employment Department | Employment.Oregon.Gov | EDPUB 225 052025 | Page 62
Human Resources

Initial milestones and next steps:
Collect data to identify priority accommodations information to provide by October 2024.

Progress report:
Completed. OED conducted this review in March 2024 with consultants from the Job
Accommodation Network and received positive feedback. The feedback and minor
suggested updates were shared with the agency’s Equity and Inclusion Council in June
2024.

Beginning in summer 2024, OED began sending a short, quarterly survey to employees
whose reasonable accommodation requests were completed in the previous quarter to
request feedback on the process and identify any opportunities for improvement.

As reported in Action 12.4, OED surveyed all staff on equity and inclusion in April 2024, with
a 17% response rate. 70% of the respondents reported that they understood the reasonable
accommodations process for employees, with 16% marking “neutral or not applicable” and
14% reporting that they did not understand the process.


*Action 12.10:
Consult with a specialist on disability inclusion to review the reasonable accommodations
process and request recommendations.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Human Resources

Initial milestones and next steps:
Begin consultation process by June 2024. Document recommendations and how
recommendations are considered.

Progress report:
Completed. As reported in Action 12.9, OED conducted this review in March 2024 with
consultants from the Job Accommodation Network and received positive feedback. The
feedback and minor suggested updates were shared with the agency’s Equity and Inclusion
Council in June 2024.

Beginning in summer 2024, OED began sending a short, quarterly survey to employees
whose reasonable accommodation requests were completed in the previous quarter to
request feedback on the process and identify any opportunities for improvement.



              Oregon Employment Department | Employment.Oregon.Gov | EDPUB 225 052025 | Page 63
Challenge 13: Per Workday demographics, people of color are underrepresented in
management positions higher than a PEM B/Supervisor 1.

Action 13.1:
Offer members of the Contributions and Recovery leadership team as mentors for
employees in the Leaders of Color Empowerment Group first and other groups as needed.

Division or team responsible for the action:
Contributions and Recovery

Initial milestones and next steps:
Establish list of interested Contributions and Recovery leaders by September 2023. Contact
first Empowerment Group by October 2023. Equity and Inclusion Office will ask
Empowerments Group for feedback on the process and career progression.

Progress report:
Completed when OED launched its mentorship pilot for Empowerment Group members in
April 2025.


*Action 13.2:
Provide at least four all-staff learning opportunities and four all-staff communications related
to people of color in management. The learning opportunities will include a virtual or
recorded option that staff can consume at various times and locations.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Equity and Inclusion Office

Initial milestones and next steps:
Complete all actions by June 2025. Request employee feedback and document how
feedback is considered.

Progress report:
Completed. OED informed all staff of four learning opportunities related to people of color in
management and communicated them through all-staff communications: two sessions of
OED’s Community Cultural Wealth training; the Department of Labor’s Black Women
Advancing Equity: Federal Leaders Fostering Inclusive Infrastructure Opportunities session;
and the Department of Labor’s Black Women Advancing Equity: Community Leaders
Creating Inclusive Infrastructure Job Opportunities session. OED decided not to record its
two internal trainings to provide a more confidential learning and sharing environment for
employees.

              Oregon Employment Department | Employment.Oregon.Gov | EDPUB 225 052025 | Page 64
*Action 13.3:
Create one or more Empowerment Groups focused on managers of color. All Empowerment
Groups focused on managers of color will have active executive-level sponsorship and
participation. The groups will provide connection to mentors and a safe space to raise
concerns, questions, and ideas related to people of color in higher-level management.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Equity and Inclusion Office

Initial milestones and next steps:
First group was created February 2023. Monitor implementation and participant feedback.

Progress report:
Completed. This group, the Leaders of Color empowerment group, continues to meet at least
once a month.

 • Each group is open to allies and has a liaison from the Equity and Inclusion Office to
   provide support and an executive sponsor

 • All employees are allowed at least two hours per month for empowerment group
   meetings


*Action 13.4:
Solicit regular input and feedback from managers of color, which may include all-staff
surveys and targeted focus groups.

Division or team responsible for the action:
Equity and Inclusion Office

Initial milestones and next steps:
Begin soliciting input by July 2023 on workplace inclusion, challenges, and opportunities and
release all-staff survey by October 2023. Document feedback and how feedback is
considered.

Progress report:
Completed. OED includes a feedback form in all equity and inclusion newsletters. During this
reporting period, OED received and responded to two queries related to communities of
color. OED surveyed all staff on equity and inclusion in April 2024, including by race and
ethnicity to help identify any trends connected to race or ethnicity. Only 17% of employees
responded to this survey, and 24% of the respondents identified as being an employee of
              Oregon Employment Department | Employment.Oregon.Gov | EDPUB 225 052025 | Page 65
color or two or more races. There were no correlations to race and ethnicity in the survey
results. Due to a technical issue with the survey software, OED’s Oct 2024 all-staff survey
could not connect results across race or ethnicity. OED expects to fix this issue in its fall
2025 all-staff survey to identify any trends across race or ethnicity.

In a spring 2024 feedback session with the Leaders of Color empowerment group, some
group members wanted more meeting time, more internal leadership opportunities, and clear
goals and outcomes for meetings. They also said the group provided a safe space for
discussing sensitive topics, reaching consensus, hearing all voices, sharing healing and
solidarity, and making recommendations for mentorship and addressing racial harm. In a
similar spring 2025 survey, the group members shared similar feedback. OED used this
feedback to create its 2025-2027 Affirmative Action Plan and this plan.


*Action 13.5:
Engage with employees and communities of color to connect them to opportunities to
participate on interview panels or mock interviews to gain experience and build skills related
to the hiring process.

Division or team responsible for the action:
Equity and Inclusion Office

Initial milestones and next steps:
Ongoing; begin documenting implementation and employee outcomes by August 2023.

Progress report:
Completed. In August 2023, OED began working with the Leaders of Color Empowerment
Group, which includes leaders of color and allies, to connect members to interview panel
opportunities. Several members have accepted invitations to join these panels. In November
2023, Paid Leave Oregon held three focus groups that addressed new hire experience
during the interview process, specifically the experience of those whose first language was
other than English, and employees of color.


*Action 13.6:
Actively promote trainings to employees of color that will prepare them for higher-level
supervisory management roles, such as on budget and program management.

Division or team responsible for the action:
Equity and Inclusion Office


              Oregon Employment Department | Employment.Oregon.Gov | EDPUB 225 052025 | Page 66
Initial milestones and next steps:
Ongoing; begin documenting by August 2023.

Progress report:
Completed. OED has actively promoted its internal “Tone from the Top,” “Community
Cultural Wealth,” and “Inclusion in Action: Interview Panels” trainings with the Leaders of
Color Empowerment Group, which includes leaders of color and allies.


*Action 13.7:
Increase recruitment strategies, with a focus on direct engagement with Oregon’s
communities of color (including within other state agencies) to build trust and engage
potential applicants. HR recruitment team will partner with hiring managers and Workforce
Operations Business Services team to curate and expand outreach and recruitment efforts.
Any established process will be included in the manager toolkit for agency wide consistency
and applicability.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Human Resources

Initial milestones and next steps:
Begin documenting by August 2023; complete goal by June 2025.
Establish partnership with Workforce Operations Business Services Team and 10
organizations that serve communities of color by June 2025. Track applicant and hiring
demographics and respond to trends.

Progress report:
Completed. This action overlaps with Action 11.21. The Business Services team began
promoting select agency recruitments in December 2023 and this work continues.


*Action 13.8:
Continue checking all higher-level supervisory management applicant pools halfway through
the application period to ensure at least proportionate (30%) representation of applicants of
color. If there is not proportionate representation, we will use strategies such as extending
the application period, advertising the position with professionals of color, etc.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Human Resources

Initial milestones and next steps:



              Oregon Employment Department | Employment.Oregon.Gov | EDPUB 225 052025 | Page 67
Ongoing; lead recruiters will document the process and share with agency managers by
December 2023.

Progress report:
Completed. OED’s recruitment team has checked the applicable applicant pools and
recommended strategies for achieving proportionate representation when proportionate
representation is not already demonstrated. The Human Resources team also shares the
tracking information with the Equity and Inclusion Office. Tracking includes if a goal was met
or not and what action was taken to help meet 30% representation of applicants of color.


Action 13.9:
Offer members of Modernization leadership team as mentors for employees in the Leaders
of Color Empowerment Group first and other groups as needed.

Division or team responsible for the action:
Modernization

Initial milestones and next steps:
Contact first Empowerment Group by October 2023. Equity and Inclusion Office will ask
Empowerment Groups for feedback on the process and career progression.

Progress report:
Completed when the mentorship pilot launched in April 2025.


Service Delivery
Challenge 14: Communities face structural and systemic barriers in accessing our
programs and services


Action 14.1:
Engage in in-depth training curriculum within Communications Office to learn about inclusive
communications, including racial equity, language access, and access for people with
disabilities.

Division or team responsible for the action:
Communications

Initial milestones and next steps:



              Oregon Employment Department | Employment.Oregon.Gov | EDPUB 225 052025 | Page 68
Start training by December 2023. Complete at least three trainings by June 2025. Survey
participants to measure outcomes and document how feedback is considered.

Progress report:
Completed. The Communications teams has participated in two trainings on inclusive writing,
both of which included racial equity, language access, and disability access considerations.
The team’s third training was on gender dynamics in the workplace.


Action 14.2:
Conduct focus groups with frontline Contributions and Recovery staff to learn where
customers are experiencing barriers

Division or team responsible for the action:
Contributions and Recovery

Initial milestones and next steps:
Conduct first focus group by January 2024. Document feedback and how it is considered.

Progress report:
Completed. Contributions and Recovery completed focus groups with all frontline staff
(approximately 150 employees) in February 2024. In response to what employees shared,
OED conducted a subsequent training and created a reference guide for using phone
interpreters and created guidance for responding to customer discrimination complaints.


Action 14.3:
Convene staff across the agency who are involved in language translations to share
successes and strategies for overcoming barriers

Division or team responsible for the action:
Equity and Inclusion Office

Initial milestones and next steps:
Host first meeting by April 2024. Document feedback and how it is considered.

Progress report:
Completed. OED has convened a Spanish glossary workgroup to update the glossary for
Unemployment Insurance terms. Members report feeling empowered from being part of the
process in selecting the most appropriate transcreations for OED programs. OED staff have
also created a list of transcreated terms for Paid Leave Oregon in Arabic, Korean, Traditional
Chinese, Simplified Chinese, Vietnamese, and Spanish. OED included this team in creating

              Oregon Employment Department | Employment.Oregon.Gov | EDPUB 225 052025 | Page 69
the quality review contract in Action 3.1 and incorporated their feedback into the
procurement.


Action 14.4:
In collaboration with EIO and Communications, develop and implement website accessibility
process and identify language access needs for internal and external agency programs and
services.
Division or team responsible for the action:
IT

Initial milestones and next steps:
Research is ongoing; implement website accessibility tool by June 2025.

Progress report:
Completed. OED purchased a website accessibility tool in February 2024 to test website
accessibility across internal and external agency programs and services for the Website
Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) AA standard. Use of this tool is ongoing and has
led to multiple accessibility improvements.


Action 14.5:
Identify technology needs and challenges for external customers and use our Equity
Framework to mitigate identified barriers and improve services.

Division or team responsible for the action:
IT

Initial milestones and next steps:
Establish a collaborative IT support response process for public facing divisions with Equity
and Inclusion partner and Universal Access Coordinator by December 2023. Document
lessons learned and how feedback is considered.

Progress report:
Completed. OED formed an IT Accessibility workgroup for a limited duration to explore
improvements to current processes and systems used and bridge communication across
divisions involved in addressing accessibility needs. Collaboration included the Equity and
Inclusion Office, Administrative and Business Services, Human Resource, Communications,
and other division representatives. As a result, IT documented and adjusted their internal
processes for supporting customer accommodation needs, curated a list of available tools
and software, and identified possible technology training gaps in WorkSource offices. For

              Oregon Employment Department | Employment.Oregon.Gov | EDPUB 225 052025 | Page 70
example, some employees needed more updated information on using JAWS software, and
IT provided the updated information.


Action 14.6:
Create evaluative tools for Paid Leave Oregon policy and rulemaking, internal processes,
and continuous improvement to center equity.

Division or team responsible for the action:
Paid Leave Oregon

Initial milestones and next steps:
Create tools by June 2024. Track success through ongoing quarterly employee engagement
surveys and give recommendations based on results. Meet weekly with Exec level
managers, and quarterly with teams to listen for feedback.

Progress report:
Completed. OED created evaluative tools in February 2025 for Paid Leave Oregon policy
and rulemaking, internal processes, continuous improvements to center equity. These tools
are part of the policy team’s practices and are used on an ongoing basis to discuss and
account for equity impacts.


Action 14.7:
Build surveys or facilitate community-led focus groups to collect feedback on Paid Leave
Oregon service delivery.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Paid Leave Oregon

Initial milestones and next steps:
Begin surveys or focus groups by January 2024. Track success through ongoing monthly
community-based engagement meetings and give quarterly recommendations based on
results.

Progress report:
In progress. OED’s Paid Leave Oregon outreach team is currently working on developing
better tools to gather information on their engagement efforts. Currently, they collect info on
location, audience, who provided the presentation, and if there are any follow ups needed.
As mentioned in Action 5.3, the team is working to develop tools that have more information
on who Paid Leave is reaching out to, and this will need to be an ongoing effort through the
next cycle.

              Oregon Employment Department | Employment.Oregon.Gov | EDPUB 225 052025 | Page 71
Action 14.8:
Train Paid Leave Oregon staff on service delivery topics such as racial equity; trauma-
informed practices; and confidentiality specific to survivors of sexual assault, domestic
violence, stalking, and harassment.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Paid Leave Oregon

Initial milestones and next steps:
Begin documenting by June 2023. Track success through ongoing quarterly employee
engagement surveys and give recommendations based on results.

Progress report:
Completed. OED trained Paid Leave Oregon through an intensive racial equity training
(about 16 hours/cohort) in 2023. OED also trained staff in trauma-informed practices, which
is an ongoing training for new employees, and confidentiality. The Safe Leave team received
an intensive training on confidentiality and additional trauma-informed training.


Action 14.9:
Provide one-on-one guidance at in-person and virtual outreach events to help underserved
communities navigate the UI system. Document community needs and take action to reduce
barriers whenever possible.

Division or team responsible for the action:
Unemployment Insurance

Initial milestones and next steps:
Begin documenting by June 2023. Document community feedback and how it is considered.

Progress report:
Completed. To date, OED’s Equitable Access to Unemployment Insurance team has
participated in more than 125 outreach events and shared information with over 6,300
people. They have conducted surveys and responded to actionable data. For example, rural
customers have expressed difficulties with internet access, and the team has assisted in
connecting them with in-person services at WorkSource offices.


Action 14.10:
Conduct plain language review and translate the updated initial UI claim into the languages
specified within the Employment Department’s Language Access Procedure. These
              Oregon Employment Department | Employment.Oregon.Gov | EDPUB 225 052025 | Page 72
translations will go live in the modernized Frances Online system, which is replacing UI’s
legacy system.

Division or team responsible for the action:
Unemployment Insurance

Initial milestones and next steps:
Plan to go live in Spanish by March 2024. Plan to go live in remaining languages by
December 2024.

Progress report:
Completed. OED’s UI team completed plain language reviews of all UI customer-facing
materials and translated the entire online claims and tax system into Spanish by March 2024.
UI has also translated the initial claim into OED’s 10 other priority languages (pdf versions),
and based on funding and capacity hopes to make these translations available in the online
claims system.


Action 14.11:
Conduct plain language review and translate the UI monetary determination form (form 196)
and accompanying advisements into Spanish, at a minimum, and additional languages
specified within the Employment Department’s Language Access Procedure depending on
funding. These translations will go live in the modernized Frances Online system, which is
replacing UI’s legacy system.

Division or team responsible for the action:
Unemployment Insurance

Initial milestones and next steps:
Plan to go live in Spanish by March 2024. Plan to go live in remaining languages by May
2025.

Progress report:
Completed. OED’s UI team completed plain language reviews of the UI monetary
determination form and translated it into Spanish, and it is now available in the online system
that went live in March 2024. Based on funding and capacity, UI hopes to make additional
translations of this form available in the online claims system.


Action 14.12:
Translate the ten most common UI benefits communications into Spanish and additional
languages specified within the Employment Department’s Language Access Procedure
              Oregon Employment Department | Employment.Oregon.Gov | EDPUB 225 052025 | Page 73
depending on funding. These translations will go live in the modernized Frances Online
system, which is replacing UI’s legacy system.

Division or team responsible for the action:
Unemployment Insurance

Initial milestones and next steps:
Plan to go live by May 2025.

Progress report:
Completed. OED’s UI team translated the entire online tax and claims systems into Spanish,
which went live in September 2022 and March 2024, respectively. Based on funding and
capacity, OED hopes to make more languages available in the online claims system.


Action 14.13:
Incorporate disparate impact analyses into future projects for identifying fraudulent UI claims.

Division or team responsible for the action:
Unemployment Insurance

Initial milestones and next steps:
Conduct first disparate impact analysis by December 2024. Identify any trends and
responses to trends.

Progress report:
Not started. OED’s data analysis team has not been able to incorporate fraud analysis at this
time due to staff turnover and capacity. This is a goal OED hopes to complete in the next DEI
Action plan.


Action 14.14:
Continue analyzing UI customer data across different identities and communities to check
that all agency customers receive equitable outcomes. Present findings and
recommendations to UI division leadership twice a year.

Division or team responsible for the action:
Unemployment Insurance

Initial milestones and next steps:



              Oregon Employment Department | Employment.Oregon.Gov | EDPUB 225 052025 | Page 74
Present first analysis to division leadership by July 2023. Identify any trends and responses
to trends.

Progress report:
Completed. OED’s Unemployment Insurance Navigator team continues to analyze the data
from the contracted community-based organizations to better understand the customers’
experience. The UI Analytics team has completed their disparate impact analysis associated
with non-monetary decisions issued in 2022. The narrative has been shared with both the UI
Navigator team and the Equitable Access to Unemployment Insurance unit to see how these
units can assist with reducing disparate impacts identified in the analysis.


Action 14.15:
Contract with a vendor to implement as many Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG)
2.1 standards as possible at unemployment.oregon.gov.

Division or team responsible for the action:
Unemployment Insurance

Initial milestones and next steps:
Begin contracting process by July 2023.

Progress report:
Completed. OED started the contracting process in July 2023 and completed this goal in July
2024. OED incorporated all suggested changes.


Action 14.16:
Share aggregate data with Equity and Inclusion Office quarterly and annually on customer
discrimination complaints received related to disability, race, gender, etc.

Division or team responsible for the action:
Universal Access Coordinator

Initial milestones and next steps:
Begin by December 2023. Identify any areas of concern or trends and document responses.

Progress report:
Completed. Due to the low number of complaints, this goal has been changed to sharing
aggregate data twice a year instead of quarterly. To date, a review of the complaints has not
provided actionable trends or areas or concern.


              Oregon Employment Department | Employment.Oregon.Gov | EDPUB 225 052025 | Page 75
Action 14.17:
Leverage partnerships with educational institutions and industry associations to increase
awareness and access to Labor Market Information.

Division or team responsible for the action:
Workforce and Economic Research

Initial milestones and next steps:
Ongoing; begin documenting by July 2023. Track partnerships and formalize collaborations
with ten organizations by June 2025.

Progress report:
Completed. As mentioned in 11.33, the Research Regional Analysis team began to
centralize partnership tracking and documentation, and they expanded their engagement on
existing partnerships. They also increased their outreach and streamlined job posting and
Labor Market Information presentations. They received feedback on implementing a
coordinated marketing strategy to understand their current customer profile and identify gaps
and opportunities and creating outreach and communication materials of service information
to provide to community partners and educational institutions. The team is now exploring
potential tools to support large- scale and sustainable marketing efforts.


Action 14.18:
Identify customers’ language access needs for Labor Market information and related
research.

Division or team responsible for the action:
Workforce and Economic Research

Initial milestones and next steps:
Complete all actions by December 2024. Document responses to customer needs.

Progress report:
Completed. OED’s Research team identified three Spanish-speaking staff to work on
Spanish-language projects. The team added information to guide customers on translating
information within the browser they use to access the team’s online articles. Three members
of the team presented to the governments of Uruguay and Argentina on incorporating labor
market information into jobseeker services.
OED printed hard copies of Carreras 2024 (Careers 2024) to serve customers who need
labor market information in Spanish but don't have access to a computer. OED is also
translating Carreras 2025 for distribution.

             Oregon Employment Department | Employment.Oregon.Gov | EDPUB 225 052025 | Page 76
OED’s Research team also presented in Spanish to the World Bank in March 2024. The
team shared best practices in using real-time data sources and innovative methods of
dissemination, and on how Oregon’s advancements in this field are shaping policymaking
and service delivery.


Action 14.19:
Create additional “I Speak” cards as a resource for people who need language assistance at
Work- force Operations events and in the field.

Division or team responsible for the action:
Workforce Operations

Initial milestones and next steps:
Begin distributing cards in every WorkSource office, on our website, and during outreach
events by December 2023.

Progress report:
Completed. OED created “I Speak” cards and informed all Workforce Operations managers
in May 2024 to ensure the cards are printed and available at WorkSource offices and
outreach events.


Action 14.20:
Review the DEI Plan and Equity Framework on a quarterly basis within Workforce
Operations.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Workforce Operations

Initial milestones and next steps:
Begin quarterly reviews by August 2023. Request employee feedback and document how it
is considered at least twice a year.

Progress report:
In progress. Due to employee turnover, this work was delayed but is now ongoing.


Action 14.21:
Create Universal Access Navigators in WorkSource centers to assist with equitable service
delivery.
Division or team responsible for the action:
             Oregon Employment Department | Employment.Oregon.Gov | EDPUB 225 052025 | Page 77
Workforce Operations

Initial milestones and next steps:
Select and provide training to navigators by December 2023. Survey employees and
document how feedback is considered at least twice a year.

Progress report:
Completed. OED created Universal Access Navigators in WorkSource centers in September
2023 and they continue to meet regularly.


Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion goals 2025-2027
OED’s Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion (DEI) Plan outlines broad strategies to diversify the
agency’s internal culture and promote equity and inclusion with partners, community groups,
and customers.
It also includes OED’s 2025–2027 Affirmative Action Plan goals (marked with an asterisk),
which focus on building an inclusive and diverse workforce.

OED’s DEI Plan establishes three key goals:

 • Goal 1: Foster an inclusive and fair work environment where employees feel valued and
   supported.

 • Goal 2: Achieve proportionate representation of people of color in higher-level leadership
   and people with disabilities agencywide.

 • Goal 3: Continually advance our partnerships and systems to improve customer service
   and accessibility.


The State of Oregon DEI Plan includes categories of community engagement,
communications, data, decision-making and budgets, contracting and procurement, service
delivery, and workforce diversity and internal culture. These categories often overlap,
especially when it comes to initiatives that support both our workforce and our customers.
Each of our three goals includes elements from several of these categories. We also used
the following principles when creating our goals:
Community Engagement – OED must build authentic relationships with communities to
build trust. Engagement must be ongoing and designed in partnership with communities. The
agency will establish inclusive feedback mechanisms that reflect diverse community
perspectives.


             Oregon Employment Department | Employment.Oregon.Gov | EDPUB 225 052025 | Page 78
Disaggregated Data – OED will use data to understand who we are serving and who we
may be missing. The agency will focus on collecting, analyzing, and using disaggregated
data to track disparities, identify root causes, and inform equitable solutions. OED aims to
collect demographic and disaggregated data across service points to inform program
adjustments and improve outcomes for any underserved groups.
Equity in Decision Making – OED will center equity in decision-making and resource
allocation. The agency will use our equity framework to assess proposed policies and
budgets and create opportunities for employees and impacted communities to be involved.
OED’s goal is to apply equity considerations to major policy, program, and budget decisions.
Feedback – OED recognizes the importance of actively seeking and incorporating feedback
from all customers. The agency’s goal is to establish feedback systems that are accessible
and culturally sensitive to ensure customers can share their experiences, concerns, and
suggestions.
Service Delivery – OED is committed to ensuring that all individuals — regardless of race,
gender, language, ability, immigration status, or socioeconomic background — have
equitable access to agency services. OED will review service processes to remove barriers
and respond to community needs. The agency’s goal is to address procedural, technological,
and universal access issues.
Communication – Inclusive communication ensures all communities understand and trust
OED. This includes what language we use, the channels we choose, and how we represent
diverse identities and experiences. OED’s goal is to use plain language and accessible
formats for gathering customer feedback.
OED is committed to using metrics and feedback in its ongoing work. Performance measures
focus the agency’s attention and resources, promote accountability and transparency, and
foster a culture of continuous improvement.

Taken together, OED’s DEI Plan has four key measures to gauge success:
1) Scores from the following two questions in OED’s annual employee engagement survey,
   in which possible scores range from 1/strongly disagree to 5/strongly agree:

   a) Everyone at this agency is treated fairly regardless of individual differences, such as
      ethnic background, race, age, disability, sexual orientation, gender or gender identity.

       i) OED’s score from the annual survey in Oct 2024 was 3.90.

   b) My manager creates an environment that is trusting and open.

       ii) OED’s score from the annual survey in Oct 2024 was 4.12.

2) Proportionate representation of people of color in higher-level leadership (Supervisor 2
   and higher) at OED.
              Oregon Employment Department | Employment.Oregon.Gov | EDPUB 225 052025 | Page 79
   A) The proportionate representation is 30%.

   B) OED’s percentage in April 2025 was 27%.

3) Proportionate representation of people with disabilities across the agency.

   A) The proportionate representation is 8%.

   B) OED’s percentage in April 2025 was 6%.

4) Percentage of DEI Plan strategies completed regarding customer service and
   accessibility.

   A) OED completed 86% of the 21 customer service strategies in its 2023-2025 DEI Plan.



Goal 1: Foster An Inclusive and Fair Work
Environment Where Employees Feel Valued and
Supported

Strategies for Supporting Employees’ Professional Development:
1) Create a professional development policy for the agency that outlines minimum
   standards for all employees’ professional development and promotes fair access to
   development opportunities.

   Division or team responsible for the action:
   Equity and Inclusion Office

2) Create self-paced training and professional development options for frontline employees
   in Contributions & Recovery, both during onboarding to learn their roles and for
   professional advancement.

   Division or team responsible for the action:
   Contributions & Recovery

3) Equip WorkSource staff to compassionately assist customers facing unmet basic needs
   through resource coordination, trauma-informed practices tailored to direct service
   workers, and inclusive support systems.

   Division or team responsible for the action:
             Oregon Employment Department | Employment.Oregon.Gov | EDPUB 225 052025 | Page 80
   Workforce Operations

4) Support expansion of OED’s pilot mentorship program focusing on professional growth,
   identity-affirming support, and building community.

   Division or team responsible for the action:
   Human Resources


5) Create additional opportunities and processes to foster respectful and constructive
   communication, feedback, and relationship building between employees and managers.

   Division or team responsible for the action:
   Equity and Inclusion Office


Strategies For Building Internal DEI Knowledge to Promote Fair
Treatment:
6) *Continue holding regular equity circles or similar team-based discussions provided by
   the Equity and Inclusion Office.
   Division or team responsible for the action:
   Executive Team

7) Expand the equity circles curriculum to include case studies centered on OED’s work and
   opportunities for employees to solve problems within their teams.

   Division or team responsible for the action:
   Equity and Inclusion Office


8) *Continue expectation for all managers to complete a minimum amount of training or
   activities on equity and inclusion topics and allocating a minimum number of hours for
   employees to engage in equity and inclusion activities. Document manager requirements
   and outcomes through the Performance, Accountability, Feedback (PAF) process.

   Division or team responsible for the action:
   Executive Team


9) *Continue training all employees on bystander intervention and racial equity.

   Division or team responsible for the action:

             Oregon Employment Department | Employment.Oregon.Gov | EDPUB 225 052025 | Page 81
   Equity and Inclusion Office


10) *Offer 10 or more events or learning opportunities with discussion time to highlight the
    experiences and needs of different employee groups, potential candidates, and
    customers, including older and younger people (generational diversity), women in
    leadership, people whose first language is not English, migrant seasonal farmworkers,
    guest workers, people experiencing houselessness, Veterans, and people with substance
    use disorder, digital divide, or digital generation gap.

   Division or team responsible for the action:
   Equity and Inclusion Office

11) *Offer five or more training opportunities on toolkits or other guidance related to equity
    and inclusion. Examples may include the Equity Circles Toolkit, Inclusive Language
    Guide, and 4 Ds and 4 As of Bystander Intervention.

   Division or team responsible for the action:
   Equity and Inclusion Office


12) *Continue sharing educational newsletters on equity and inclusion topics with all
    employees, with a goal of releasing 12 or more newsletters throughout the biennium.

   Division or team responsible for the action:
   Equity and Inclusion Office


13) *Continue supporting the formation or ongoing work of division-level equity and inclusion
    committees.

   Division or team responsible for the action:
   Executive Team


14) Create and implement a DEI committee within IT.

   Division or team responsible for the action:
   IT

15) Conduct an equity and plain language review of the UI training handbook and employee
    trainings to support equal application of UI requirements by all employees. Use OED’s
    accessible training framework to guide this work and add new content on
              Oregon Employment Department | Employment.Oregon.Gov | EDPUB 225 052025 | Page 82
   microaggressions, unconscious bias, and trauma, and how they relate to fact-finding
   activities.

   Division or team responsible for the action:
   Unemployment Insurance


16) Continue training UI employees and offering additional assistance to support employees
    in using language interpreters. Additional supports could be ongoing live demonstrations,
    a language access quick reference guide, and quality control projects.

   Division or team responsible for the action:
   Unemployment Insurance


Strategies for Internal Communications and Supporting Employee
Engagement:
17) *Continue using and updating the internal equity framework created in the 2023-2025
    biennium. This framework is a tool for proactively preventing or reducing unintended
    unequal impacts of policies, practices, and projects on our employees from historically
    underrepresented or under-resourced communities and promote a fair workplace for all.
   Division or team responsible for the action:
   Executive Team and Equity and Inclusion Office


18) *Continue implementing and updating the strategic communications plan on OED’s equity
    and inclusion work that was created in the 2023-2025 biennium.

   Division or team responsible for the action:
   Equity and Inclusion Office

19) *Continue surveying employees through different formats to inform OED’s equity and
    inclusion work and take action on opportunities to improve.

   Division or team responsible for the action:
   Equity and Inclusion Office

20) Create standards for using inclusive language in all Human Resources customer
    interactions, including written communications, revising as needed based on feedback
    and changing needs of employees.

   Division or team responsible for the action:
             Oregon Employment Department | Employment.Oregon.Gov | EDPUB 225 052025 | Page 83
   Human Resources


21) Engage with the Equity and Inclusion Council (EIC) when developing policy packages
    during the agency’s budget development process.

   Division or team responsible for the action:
   Administrative and Business Services


Strategies for Supporting Employee Retention and Wellbeing:
22) *Continue partnership between Human Resources and Equity and Inclusion Office to
    review and discuss multiple aggregated data points (i.e. organizational diversity, retention
    and advancement rates, language requests, overall climate, etc.) to inform OED’s equity
    and inclusion work and take action on opportunities to improve.
   Division or team responsible for the action:
   Human Resources and Equity and Inclusion Office


23) In collaboration with the Equity and Inclusion Office, create partnership guidelines to
    address general employee concerns, enhance role clarity, and provide inclusive
    development opportunities and support to employees of all levels.

   Division or team responsible for the action:
   Human Resources


24) *Continue using and updating the exit interview process developed in the 2023-2025
    biennium.

   Division or team responsible for the action:
   Human Resources


25) Provide resources and support around burnout, self and community care, and trauma-
    informed care for employees.

   Division or team responsible for the action:
   Equity and Inclusion Office




              Oregon Employment Department | Employment.Oregon.Gov | EDPUB 225 052025 | Page 84
26) *Continue supporting a wide range of empowerment groups, with a focus on historically
    underrepresented and under-resourced groups, and explore increasing the minimum time
    allotment for empowerment group participation.

   Division or team responsible for the action:
   Executive Team


27) Use OED’s internal equity framework to develop a fair and respectful transition plan for
    employees to move out of the Modernization program and into other agency divisions
    when the program ends.

   Division or team responsible for the action:
   Modernization


28) Establish ongoing mental health education and support initiatives for Modernization
    employees.

   Division or team responsible for the action:
   Modernization


29) Create dedicated time to support team alignment, peer support, and employee wellbeing
    in WorkSource centers.

   Division or team responsible for the action:
   Workforce Operations


Strategies for Supporting Fair and Accessible Recruitment:
30) Convene a recruitment-focused workgroup from Human Resources, the Equity and
    Inclusion Council, managers, and other partners to continue the following recruitment-
    focused goals from the 2023-2025 DEI Plan:
   A) Review and update applicant screening and interview processes to focus scoring on
      the skills and qualities candidates bring, including how they are informed by both lived
      and professional experience.


   B) Improve the use of inclusive language (plain language, gender-inclusive, transparent)
      in the agency’s job postings and ensure the agency’s goal for equity and inclusion is
      clear and direct.

              Oregon Employment Department | Employment.Oregon.Gov | EDPUB 225 052025 | Page 85
   C) Develop equity reviews process for job listing design and recruitment and hiring
      practices for each division.

       Division or team responsible for the action:
       Equity and Inclusion Office


31) *Create a toolkit for recruitment-based open houses and information sessions to help
    hiring managers communicate with all potential candidates (both internal and external)
    about the role being recruited for, the agency’s emphasis on equity and inclusion, and
    how candidates can prepare for the application and interview process. The toolkit will
    include recommendations for how to share the open house announcement with
    historically underrepresented and under-resourced groups.

   Division or team responsible for the action:
   Human Resources

32) *Continue promoting OED’s recruitments through our Business Services team to reach
    underrepresented communities.

   Division or team responsible for the action:
   Human Resources and Workforce Operations

33) Develop a process for equity reviews for interview questions within IT to ensure
    consistency and that all candidates have equal opportunity to understand and respond to
    the questions and feel successful in the process.

   Division or team responsible for the action:
   IT


Goal 2: Achieve Proportionate Representation of
People of Color in Higher-Level Leadership and
People with Disabilities Agencywide.

Strategies for Achieving Proportionate Representation of People with
Disabilities:
34) Reduce response time regarding employee ADA accommodations requests and
    questions to support responsive and accessible customer service.
             Oregon Employment Department | Employment.Oregon.Gov | EDPUB 225 052025 | Page 86
   Division or team responsible for the action:
   Human Resources


35) Create an IT workgroup to discuss and create initiatives that help address internal access
    issues or concerns for OED staff when they need to request services, understand various
    IT instructions, and how to complete any general process, as needed.

   Division or team responsible for the action:
   IT

36) *Twice a year or more, OED will ask relevant empowerment groups for their input and
    recommendations on promoting an inclusive and representative workplace for people
    with disabilities and follow up with the group(s) on how their recommendations are
    being used.

   Division or team responsible for the action:
   Equity and Inclusion Office

37) *The recruitment open house toolkit will include a specific focus on people with
    disabilities, including how to request a reasonable accommodation in the recruitment
    process and disability inclusion at OED.

   Division or team responsible for the action:
   Human Resource and Equity and Inclusion Office


38) *Regularly invite feedback from employees with disabilities on their experience within the
    agency, including on the reasonable accommodations process and how the agency can
    support inclusive best practices.

   Division or team responsible for the action:
   Human Resources


39) *Regularly invite employees to check and update their disability status within Workday for
    the purpose of reporting accurate information on employee demographics.

   Division or team responsible for the action:
   Equity and Inclusion Office



              Oregon Employment Department | Employment.Oregon.Gov | EDPUB 225 052025 | Page 87
40) Continue implementing and updating the framework created in the 2023-2025 biennium
    for creating more accessible employee trainings.

   Division or team responsible for the action:
   Executive Team and Equity and Inclusion Office

41) Use OED’s internal equity framework to support building accessibility/usability and
    customer service delivery models for budget, facilities, and procurement services. The
    framework’s principles include engaging with the EIC, Empowerment groups, and other
    partners.

   Division or team responsible for the action:
   Administrative and Business Services


Strategies for Achieving Proportionate Representation of People of
Color in Higher-Level Leadership (Supervisor 2 and Higher):
42) Create a policy for reducing and responding to racialized harm.
   Division or team responsible for the action:
   Equity and Inclusion Office

43) *Twice a year or more, ask relevant empowerment groups for their input and
    recommendations on promoting an inclusive and representative workplace for higher-
    level supervisory managers and follow up with the group(s) on how their
    recommendations are being used.

   Division or team responsible for the action:
   Equity and Inclusion Office


44) *The recruitment open house toolkit will include a specific focus on outreach to
    communities of color. OED’s goal will be to use the toolkit for Supervisor 2 positions and
    higher, with rare exceptions in the case of emergency recruitments.

   Division or team responsible for the action:
   Human Resources and Equity and Inclusion Office


45) *Continue supporting mentorship and other professional development opportunities that
    center the needs of employees of color and are open to all employees.

              Oregon Employment Department | Employment.Oregon.Gov | EDPUB 225 052025 | Page 88
   Division or team responsible for the action:
   Executive Team


46) *OED will collaborate with relevant empowerment groups for their input and
    recommendations to help center the needs of employees of color.

   Division or team responsible for the action:
   Equity and Inclusion Office


47) *Continue offering trainings for all employees that recognize the strengths of employees
    of color and support their professional development and advancement.

   Division or team responsible for the action:
   Equity and Inclusion Office


48) *Continue checking management recruitments for Supervisor 2 positions and higher for
    proportionate (30%) representation of applicants of color. If there is not proportionate
    representation, we will use strategies such as extending the application period,
    advertising the position with professionals of color, etc.

   Division or team responsible for the action:
   Human Resources



Goal 3: Continually Advance Our Partnerships
and Systems to Improve Customer Service and
Accessibility.

Strategies for Improving Customer Communications, Outreach, and
Engagement:
49) Create an agencywide inclusive language guide and training plan
   Division or team responsible for the action:
   Communications and Equity and Inclusion Office



              Oregon Employment Department | Employment.Oregon.Gov | EDPUB 225 052025 | Page 89
50) Create an employee and customer feedback process for agency communications to
    continuously improve OED’s communications.

   Division or team responsible for the action:
   Communications


51) Create or update glossaries of program-specific terms in English and translate them into
    OED’s significant and priority languages.

   Division or team responsible for the action:
   Equity and Inclusion Office


52) Use the data equity framework to enhance outreach and marketing efforts, increasing
    customer awareness of WorkSource services.

   Division or team responsible for the action:
   Workforce Operations


53) Use OED’s communications review process to ensure all Workforce Operations internal
    and external messages (all-division emails, websites, signage, flyers, etc.) are
    welcoming, in plain language, and inclusive — emphasizing respect, understanding, and
    empathy.

   Division or team responsible for the action:
   Workforce Operations


54) Explore options and strategies for continuing outreach to underserved communities in a
    sustainable manner once the Equitable Access to Unemployment Insurance grant ends.

   Division or team responsible for the action:
   Unemployment Insurance


55) Explore conducting a pilot project of UI connectors who are available to assist high-
    barrier customers in-person across the state, such as in WorkSource Oregon centers.

   Division or team responsible for the action:
   Unemployment Insurance

             Oregon Employment Department | Employment.Oregon.Gov | EDPUB 225 052025 | Page 90
56) Explore capacity for translating initial and weekly UI claims and adjudication decisions
    into Vietnamese.

   Division or team responsible for the action:
   Unemployment Insurance


57) Develop educational content around Administrative and Business Services’ functions to
    improve transparency and knowledge base with agency, partners, and vendors.

   Division or team responsible for the action:
   Administrative and Business Services


58) Use accessible training framework and trainings to develop outline/guide for accessibility
    checks before sending Research products to customers.

   Division or team responsible for the action:
   Workforce and Economic Research


Strategies for Tracking and Improving Equitable Impacts of OED’s
Programs:
59) Fully implement the data equity framework created in the 2023-2025 biennium across all
    divisions and update it as needed. This framework is a tool for proactively preventing or
    reducing unintended unequal impacts of policies, practices, and projects on our
    employees from historically underrepresented or under-resourced communities and
    promote a fair workplace for all.
   Division or team responsible for the action:
   Executive Team and Equity and Inclusion Office


60) Conduct additional disparate impact studies for UI outcomes across various
    demographics (zip code, race, income level, etc.), conduct root cause analyses for any
    potential disparate impacts, and create plans to address them. Use OED’s data equity
    framework to guide this work.

   Division or team responsible for the action:
   Unemployment Insurance


              Oregon Employment Department | Employment.Oregon.Gov | EDPUB 225 052025 | Page 91
61) As part of the Modernization project, incorporate OED’s data equity framework in
    Workforce Operations decision making. This could include refining data collection,
    making data-informed decisions, and reviewing outcomes for accountability.

   Division or team responsible for the action:
   Modernization and Workforce Operations


62) Use the Workforce Operations modernization project to enhance customer-centric,
    trauma-informed, and accessible services to jobseekers and employers. This could
    include designing accessible dashboards and additional multi-language support for
    customers and employees; expanding communications options; providing information in
    different formats to explain what to expect and the resources available; and seeking
    customer feedback to support continuous improvement.

   Division or team responsible for the action:
   Modernization and Workforce Operations


63) Continuously analyze Workforce Operations customer service delivery processes to
    identify any opportunities to deliver services in a more streamlined, inclusive, and
    customer-centered manner.

   Division or team responsible for the action:
   Workforce Operations


64) Use data from phone lines and phone interpretation services to better understand and
    respond to the demand for various languages within the employer community.

   Division or team responsible for the action:
   Contributions & Recovery


65) Establish a system for collecting direct feedback from employers to inform future service
    improvements.

   Division or team responsible for the action:
   Contributions & Recovery

66) Conduct a study to identify barriers that may keep employers from using online services.
    Develop targeted solutions to increase online services adoption.
              Oregon Employment Department | Employment.Oregon.Gov | EDPUB 225 052025 | Page 92
   Division or team responsible for the action:
   Contributions & Recovery


67) Use Customer Satisfaction Survey to gather data regarding potential gaps in accessibility
    with Research services.

   Division or team responsible for the action:
   Workforce and Economic Research


68) Use data equity framework when collecting and disseminating data in the Research
    division to support inclusive service delivery.

   Division or team responsible for the action:
   Workforce and Economic Research


69) Use the recommendations from Trauma-Informed Oregon’s evaluation to identify specific
    Paid Leave improvements projects, implement changes, and monitor outcomes.

   Division or team responsible for the action:
   Paid Leave Oregon


70) Continue piloting the Paid Leave Connector program through the next three quarters.
    Review data collected at the end of 2025 and assess whether and how the pilot can be
    expanded.

   Division or team responsible for the action:
   Paid Leave Oregon


71) Create and implement Paid Leave customer service experience survey.

   Division or team responsible for the action:
   Paid Leave Oregon




             Oregon Employment Department | Employment.Oregon.Gov | EDPUB 225 052025 | Page 93
Need Help?
This information is vital. The Oregon Employment Department (OED) is an equal opportunity
agency. OED provides free help so you can use our services. Some examples are sign
language and spoken-language interpreters, written materials in other languages, large print,
audio, and other formats. To get help, please call 503-947-1444. TTY users call 711. You
can also send an email to communications@employ.oregon.gov.


¿Necesita ayuda?
Esta información es vital. El Departamento de Empleo de Oregon (OED) es una agencia de
igualdad de oportunidades. El OED proporciona ayuda gratuita para que usted pueda utilizar
nuestros servicios. Algunos ejemplos son intérpretes de lengua de señas e idiomas
hablados, materiales escritos en otros idiomas, letra grande, audio y otros formatos. Para
obtener ayuda, por favor llame al 503-947-1444. Usuarios de TTY pueden llamar al 711.
También puede enviar un correo electrónico a communications@employ.oregon.gov.


Нужна помощь?
Далее приведена чрезвычайно важная информация. Управление занятости штата
Орегон (OED) является агентством по обеспечению равных возможностей.
Управление занятости штата Орегон (OED) оказывает бесплатную помощь, чтобы вы
могли воспользоваться нашими услугами. В качестве примера можно привести услуги
сурдо- и устных переводчиков, предоставление письменных материалов на других
языках, материалов с использованием крупного шрифта, а также материалов в аудио-
и других форматах. Если вам требуется помощь, позвоните по телефону 503-947-1444.
Пользователи телетайпа могут позвонить по номеру 711. Вы также можете направить
нам электронное сообщение по эл. почте: communications@employ.oregon.gov.


Cần trợ giúp?
Thông tin này rất quan trọng. Cơ quan Việc làm của Tiểu bang Oregon (Oregon
Employment Department, OED) là một cơ quan cung cấp cơ hội công bằng. OED cung cấp
trợ giúp miễn phí để quý vị có thể sử dụng các dịch vụ của chúng tôi. Trong đó bao gồm
thông dịch viên ngôn ngữ ký hiệu và ngôn ngữ nói, các tài liệu bằng văn bản với các ngôn
ngữ khác, bản in khổ lớn, âm thanh và các định dạng khác. Để được trợ giúp, vui lòng gọi
503-947-1444. Người dùng TTY xin gọi 711. Quý vị cũng có thể gửi email tới
communications@employ.oregon.gov.


             Oregon Employment Department | Employment.Oregon.Gov | EDPUB 225 052025 | Page 94
需要帮助？

这条信息至关重要。“Oregon州就业部 (OED)”是一个提供均等机会的机构。
OED提供免费帮助，便于您使用我们的服务。服务内容示例包括手语和口语
翻译、其他语种的书面材料、大字体、音频以及其他格式文档。如需帮助，
请致电503-947-1444。TTY用户请拨打711。您也可以发送电子邮件至
communications@employ.oregon.gov。


需要幫助？

這條消息至關重要。「Oregon州就業部 (OED)」是壹個提供均等機會的機構。
OED提供免費幫助，便於您使用我們的服務。服務內容示例包括手語和口語
翻譯、其他語種的書面材料、大字體、音頻和其他格式文檔。如需幫助，請
致電503-947-1444。TTY用戶請撥打711。您還可以發送電子郵件至
communications@employ.oregon.gov。


도움이 필요하시나요?
이 정보는 필수적입니다. 오레곤 주 고용부(OED)는 기회균등 기관입니다.
OED는 서비스를 이용할 수 있도록 무료로 도움을 제공합니다. 일부 예시로는
수화, 통역 서비스, 다른 언어 번역 서비스, 큰 활자, 오디오 및 기타 형식의
자료 제공 서비스 등이 있습니다. 도움이 필요하시다면, 503-947-1444로 연락
주시기 바라며, TTY 사용자는 711로 연락주십시오. 또한
communications@employ.oregon.gov로 이메일을 보낼 수 있습니다.


ຕ້ ອງການຊ່ ວຍເຫື ຼ ອບໍ?
ຂ້ໍ ມູ ນນີ້ສໍາຄັນຫຼາຍ. ກົມຈັດງງານແຫ່ ງລັດອໍຣີກອນ (OED)
ຄືໜ່ ວຍງານໃຫ້ ໂອກາດຢ່າງເທ່ົ າທຽມກັນ. OED ຈັດໃຫ້ ມີການຊ່ ວຍເຫື ຼ ອທີ່ບໍ່ເສຍຄ່ າ
ເພື່ອວ່ າທ່ ານຈະສາມາດໃຊ້ ບໍລິການຂອງພວກເຮົາ. ບາງຕົວຢ່າງແມ່ ນລ່ າມແປພາສາມື ແລະ
ພາສາເວົ້າ, ເນ້ື ອຫາລາຍລັກອັກສອນເປັນພາສາອື່ນໆ, ແບບພິມໃຫຍ່ , ສຽງ ແລະ
ຮູ ບແບບອ່ື ນໆ. ເພື່ອຮັບການຊ່ ວຍເຫື ຼ ອ, ກະລຸນາໂທຫາ 503-947-1444. ຜູ້ ໃຊ້ TTY ໂທ 711.
ທ່ ານຍັງສາມາດສ່ົ ງອີເມວໄປຫາ communications@employ.oregon.gov.



             Oregon Employment Department | Employment.Oregon.Gov | EDPUB 225 052025 | Page 95
እርዳታ ይፈልጋሉ?
ይህ መረጃ አስፈላጊ ነው። የኦሬጎን የቅጥር መምሪያ (The Oregon Employment Department,
OED) የእኩል እድል ኤጀንሲ ነው። አገልግሎቶቻችንን መጠቀም እንዲችሉ OED ነፃ እገዛን
ይሰጣል። አንዳንድ ምሳሌዎች የምልክት ቋንቋ እና የንግግር ቋንቋ አስተርጓሚዎች፣ በሌሎች
ቋንቋዎች የተጻፉ ጽሑፎች፣ ትልቅ ህትመት፣ ኦዲዮ እና ሌሎች ቅርጸቶች ናቸው። እገዛ
ለማግኘት፣ እባክዎ በ 503-947-1444 ይደውሉ። የTTY ተጠቃሚዎች 711 ይደውላሉ። ወደ
communications@employ.oregon.gov ኢሜይል መላክም ይችላሉ።


‫ھل ﺗﺣﺗﺎج إﻟﻰ اﻟﻣﺳﺎﻋدة؟‬
‫ إدارة ﺗوظﯾف وﻻﯾﺔ أورﯾﻐون‬.‫( ھذه اﻟﻣﻌﻠوﻣﺎت ﺿرورﯾﺔ‬The Oregon Employment Department
(OED)) ‫ ﺗﻘدم‬.‫ وﻛﺎﻟﺔ ﻣﺗﻛﺎﻓﺋﺔ اﻟﻔرص‬OED ‫ ﺗﺷﻣل ﺑﻌض اﻷﻣﺛﻠﺔ‬.‫ﻣﺳﺎﻋدة ﻣﺟﺎﻧﯾﺔ ﺑﺣﯾث ﯾﻣﻛﻧك اﺳﺗﺧدام ﺧدﻣﺎﺗﻧﺎ‬
‫ﻣﺗرﺟﻣﯾن ﻓورﯾﯾن ﻟﻠﻐﺔ اﻹﺷﺎرة واﻟﻠﻐﺎت اﻟﻣﻧطوﻗﺔ وﻣواد ﻣﻛﺗوﺑﺔ ﺑﻠﻐﺎت أﺧرى وﻣطﺑوﻋﺎت ﻛﺑﯾرة اﻟﺧط وﻣﻠﻔﺎت‬
503 ‫ ﯾرﺟﻰ اﻻﺗﺻﺎل ﻋﻠﻰ اﻟرﻗم‬،‫ ﻟﻠﺣﺻول ﻋﻠﻰ ﻣﺳﺎﻋدة‬.‫ﺻوﺗﯾﺔ وﺻﯾﻎ أﺧرى‬-947-1444. ‫ﯾﺗﺻل ﻣﺳﺗﺧدﻣو‬
                               ً ‫ ﯾﻣﻛﻧك أﯾ‬.711 ‫اﻟﮭﺎﺗف اﻟﻧﺻﻲ ﻋﻠﻰ اﻟرﻗم‬
‫ﺿﺎ إرﺳﺎل رﺳﺎﻟﺔ ﺑرﯾد إﻟﻛﺗروﻧﻲ إﻟﻰ‬
communications@employ.oregon.gov.


‫ﺑﮫ ﮐﻣﮏ و راھﻧﻣﺎﯾﯽ ﻧﯾﺎز دارﯾد؟‬
‫اداره‬۰‫ ﯾﮏ آژاﻧس ﺑﺎ ﻓرﺻت ھﺎی ﺑراﺑر اﺳﺗﺧداﻣﯽ اﺳت‬،‫ اداره ﮐﺎر اورﮔﺎن‬۰‫اﯾن اطﻼﻋﺎت ﺿروری اﺳت‬
‫ زﺑﺎن‬: ‫ﺑﮫ ﻋﻧوان ﻣﺛﺎل‬۰‫ ﺑﮫ ﺷﻣﺎ ﮐﻣﮏ راﯾﮕﺎن اراﺋﮫ ﻣﯽ دھد ﺗﺎ ﺑﺗواﻧﯾد از ﺧدﻣﺎت ﻣﺎ اﺳﺗﻔﺎده ﮐﻧﯾد‬،‫ﮐﺎر اورﮔﺎن‬
‫ ﭼﺎپ ﺑﺎ ﺣروف‬،‫ ﻧﺷرﯾﺎت و ﻣطﺎﻟب ﻧوﺷﺗﺎری ﺑﮫ زﺑﺎنھﺎی دﯾﮕر‬، ‫اﺷﺎره و ﻣﺗرﺟم ﺑرای زﺑﺎﻧﮭﺎی ﻣﺧﺗﻠف‬
‫ ﻟطﻔﺎ ً ﺑﺎ ﺷﻣﺎره ﺗﻠﻔن‬،‫ ﺑرای درﯾﺎﻓت ﮐﻣﮏ‬۰‫ ﺑﮫ ﺻورت ﺻوﺗﯽ ودﯾﮕر ﻗﺎﻟﺑﮭﺎ وﻓرﻣﺗﮭﺎی ﻣﺧﺗﻠف‬، ‫درﺷت‬
۱۴۴۴ ۹۴۷ ۵۰۳ ‫ ھﻣﭼﻧﯾن‬۰‫ ﺗﻣﺎس ﺑﮕﯾرﻧد‬۷۱۱ ‫ اﻓراد ﻧﺎﺷﻧوا ﯾﺎ ﮐم ﺷﻧوا ﻣﯾﺗواﻧﻧد ﺑﺎ ﺷﻣﺎره‬.‫ﺗﻣﺎس ﺑﮕﯾرﯾد‬
‫ﻣﯽ ﺗواﻧﯾد اﯾﻣﯾل ﯾﺎ راﯾﺎﻧﺎﻣﮫ ﺑﮫ اﯾن آدرس ﺑﻔرﺳﺗﯾد‬
communications@employ.oregon.gov.


Ma u baahan tahay caawimaad?
Macluumaadkani waa mid aad u muhiim ah. Waaxda Shaqaalaynta ee Oregon (The Oregon
Employment Department, OED) waa wakaalad leh fursad loo siman yahay. OED waxay ku
siineysaa caawimo bilaash ah si aad u isticmaasho adeegyadeena. Tusaalooyinka qaarkood
waa luqadda dhegoolaha iyo tarjumaannada luuqada lagu hadlo, agab ku qoran afaf kale, far
waaweyn, maqal iyo qaabab kale. Si aad u hesho caawimo, fadlan wac 503-947-1444.
Isticmaalayaasha TTY waca 711. Waxaad sidoo kale iimaayl u diri kartaa
communications@employ.oregon.gov.



               Oregon Employment Department | Employment.Oregon.Gov | EDPUB 225 052025 | Page 96
