Table of contents
Agenda

Metro respects civil rights

Clackamas county 2024 annual progress report

Washington county 2024 annual progress report

City of beaverton 2024 annual progress report

City of Hillsboro 2024 annual progress report

Housing communications report february 2024

Materials received during the meeting

03.17.2025 meeting powerpoint

03.17.2025 zoom chat record




                                                Page 1 of 98
Meeting:    Housing Bond Oversight Committee Meeting
Date:       Monday, March 17, 2025
Time:       3:00 p.m. to 5:30 p.m.
Place:      Virtual meeting (Zoom link)
Purpose:    Discuss implementation progress with the remaining 4 jurisdictions.
ADA:        For questions about accessibility or accommodations for person with disabilities, or
            to request a translator, interpreter, or other communication aids, please contact
            Sandi Saunders at housing@oregonmetro.gov




3:00 p.m.    Welcome and Introductions

3:10 p.m.    Conflict of Interest Declarations

3:15 p.m.    Public Comment

3:20 p.m.    Annual Progress Report: Clackamas County

3:45 p.m.    Annual Progress Report: Washington County

4:10 p.m.    Break

4:20 p.m.    Annual Progress Report: City of Beaverton

4:45 p.m.    Annual Progress Report: City of Hillsboro

5:10 p.m.    Panel Q&A with jurisdictions and Committee discussion

5:25 p.m.    Closing/Next steps

5:30 p.m.    Adjourn
Page 3 of 98
Housing Bond Progress Report for Clackamas County | 2024
This progress report summarizes how local jurisdictions are carrying out their Affordable Housing Bond strategies. Each year, jurisdictions share
progress reports with Metro, which are then reviewed by the Affordable Housing Bond Community Oversight Committee.

SECTION 1: UNIT PRODUCTION AND FUNDING
This section provides a high-level overview of the Affordable Housing Bond projects and units in your jurisdiction

Figure 1. Production progress and resources committed
                                                                                                                                                         Construction
                                                                        Number of BOND ELIGIBLE units                                                                      Completion
                                                                                                                                                            start
                                                                                                                                          Status
                                   Metro Bond                                                                                                                              (anticipated or
                                                                                                                                                         (anticipated or
           Project               Funds (excludes                   (excludes manager units and non-eligible units)                                           actual)           actual)
                                  SAP portion)
                                                                                                                                        Concept, final
                                                                                                                        Number of
                                                                                    Family sized                                          approval,
                                                     Total units    30% AMI units                     PSH units          occupants                        Month/Year           Month/Year
                                                                                      (2+ BRs)                                          construction,
                                                                                                                     (as of Dec-2024)
                                                                                                                                          complete


  Fuller Station Apartments       $    8,570,000        99               30             82               25               231            Complete           Apr-21              Sep-22


   Good Shepherd Village          $   18,330,000        142              58             79               58               301            Complete           Mar-22              Sep-23

                                                                                                                                             In
 Hillside Park Buildings A & B    $   23,509,307        143              40             14               13                 0                               Oct-24              June-26
                                                                                                                                        Construction
                                                                                                                                             In
   Hillside Park Building C       $   18,190,693        78               68             53               8                  0                               Jun-24              Feb-26
                                                                                                                                        Construction
                                        $0                                                                                                 Pre-
   El Nido (FKA Lake Grove)                             54               20             28               10                 0                               May-25              Nov-26
                                 (100% SAP funded)                                                                                      Construction
          Las Flores              $   15,903,000        171              70            129               17               456            Complete           June-22             May-24

      Mercy Greenbrae             $    3,000,000        100              40             83               40               257            Complete           Sep-22              May-24

                                                                                                                                             In
    Shortstack Milwaukie          $      700,000        15               0              15               0                  0                               Oct-24              Oct-25
                                                                                                                                        Construction




                                                                                                                                                                Page 4 of 98
     Tukwila Springs        $    5,548,542        48            48            0             48             48         Complete        Jun-21            Jun-22

                                                                                                                          In
          Vuela             $    8,000,000        120           35            79            20             0                          Aug-24            Dec-25
                                                                                                                     Construction
   Total committed or
                            $ 101,751,542         970           409          562           239
       underway
    LIS commitment          $ 122,018,094        812            333          406            0
    % of commitment
                                 83%             119%          123%         138%           N/A
        complete
                                                 Goal          Goal         Goal
    Remaining for LIS       $ 20,266,552
                                               Exceeded      Exceeded     Exceeded


SECTION 2: LOCAL IMPLEMENTATION STRATEGIES UPDATE
Please share how the development plan in your LIS is going. Please highlight any best practices, lessons learned, or
opportunities for improvement. Please address:

       a. Do you have any projects that you feel are at risk and/or have potential funding gaps?
          El Nido – due to unfortunate timing, which overlapped with the role out of the state’s centralized application process (aka ORCA),
          the shovel ready El Nido project is not able to access the LIFT funding they anticipated using to fill a gap in their capital stack. In
          order to access LIFT funds, the project needs to relinquish its tax credit/PAB allocation and reapply through the new ORCA process.
          This exposes a permitted and shovel-ready project to a high degree of uncertainty and inevitable delay.
          Through a concerted construction streamlining and value engineering process, the development team was able to reduce a financial
          gap of nearly $3.5 million to $1 million. However, the development team feels they have exhausted their VE options and any further
          cuts to the construction budget will negatively impact the project.

           Hillside Park Buildings D&E – inherent to a multi–acre redevelopment project, which includes new utilities and the realignment of
           the street grid, are significant infrastructure upgrades and requirements. Hillside Park Buildings D &E includes infrastructure costs
           estimated at nearly $10 million. This is on top of the costs associated with the buildings themselves. As such, the project is carrying a
           $3.5 million gap. HACC and Related NW are exploring all options to close the gap but resources are limited.

           HACC encourages Metro to consider allocating housing bond interest earnings to close the gaps on these projects and facilitate the
           development of over 200 new affordable units in high opportunity areas of Clackamas County.



                                                                                                                                         Page 5 of 98
       b. Please describe the approach and timelines for achieving remaining unit production targets, including any priorities for remaining
          unit production targets, such as homeownership or supportive housing.
          In November 2024, HACC submitted Concept Endorsement applications for its last two bond funded projects. Both projects are
          Public Housing repositioning projects. Together, the Park Place Redevelopment (formally known as the Clackamas Heights) and
          Hillside Park Buildings D&E (formerly known as Hillside Park) will produce 384 new affordable units (of which 239 are bond eligible).
          In February 2025, HACC received Concept Endorsement approval from Metro for both projects and, with those endorsements,
          Clackamas County has allocated all of its Affordable Housing Bond funds.

           Clackamas County will exceed all three production goals under the Bond. Including its unit production goal of 812 units by nearly
           150% or 400 units, its family-sized unit goal of 406 units by 160% or 245 units, and its goal of delivering 333 units at 30% of AMI by
           156% or 188 units.

       c. How have local jurisdictions’ policies, regulations or incentives helped or hindered development of specific bond-funded projects?
          The City of Milwaukie has proven to be an invaluable project partner in the Hillside Park Redevelopment project. At every level of
          government—from the engineering department, to the planning department, all the way up to City Council and the Mayor’s office—
          the City has been supportive and collaborative. Their spirit of partnership paired with housing-forward policies, including a
          construction excise tax (CET) that funds affordable housing and provided the project with a crucial pre-development source, were
          paramount to bringing 275 new affordable units into construction at Hillside Park.


SECTION 3: PROJECT HIGHLIGHTS
This section is intended to provide a brief overview of each project in the pipeline—and some of the noteworthy features. Please update any
information in the project summaries provided in 2023 (below) and add a summary of each new project in your portfolio, along with an image of
the project.




                                                                                                                                         Page 6 of 98
TUKWILA SPRINGS: 18000 WEBSTER ROAD, GLADSTONE, OR 97027
Located in the City of Gladstone, Tukwila Springs is the rehabilitation of a former congregate care facility into 48 units of Permanent Supportive
Housing. Originally constructed in the early 1960s, the building was previously used as a nursing home and most recently as a juvenile




                                                                                                                                         Page 7 of 98
rehabilitation center but has been vacant since 2017. The Housing Authority of Clackamas County (HACC) acquired the property in 2019 using
Metro Affordable Housing Bonds. Tukwila Springs is Clackamas County's first Phase 1 Housing Bond Project.

Tukwila Springs has 48 units, consisting of 40 studios & 8 single-room occupancy (SROs) units. All units include full bathrooms and a microwave
and mini-fridge. Energy-efficient heating and cooling are provided in every unit. The project includes a robust array of community amenities
including an inviting community living room with a fireplace and television, a community kitchen with a spacious dining hall, a large conference
room, a wellness room, an exam room with telehealth capabilities, a shared laundry room, and dedicated offices for Property Management,
Resident Services, and Case Management. Free wireless internet is available throughout the building. The site design includes a landscaped
courtyard, accessible resident garden beds, walking paths around the property, and covered outdoor seating areas. The project incorporates
trauma-informed, sustainable, and universal design elements throughout. The project received a Multifamily Platinum certification from Earth
Advantage.

All 48 units serve households with incomes 30% of AMI and below, with HUD project-based Section 8 rental assistance supporting all units. The
tenant selection plan targets near-elderly (50 or older) households who are currently experiencing houselessness and have a disabling condition
(SHS Population A). Leasing preferences are provided to applicants who live or work in Gladstone and/or request culturally specific supportive
housing services for Native Americans. All applicants are referred through the county's Coordinated Housing Access (CHA) wait list. Wrap-around
services are supported by OHCS Permanent Supportive Housing (12 units) and Metro Supportive Housing Services (36 units) funding. Home
Forward provides property management and resident services, and the Native American Rehabilitation Association (NARA) provides culturally
specific supportive services that are available to all residents.

HACC’s team of development staff led the design team comprised of Walsh Construction, Carleton Hart Architects, and Cornerstone
Management. Home Forward provides property management and resident services and NARA provides culturally specific supportive services.

Funding sources leveraged for this project include low income housing tax credits, tax-exempt bond financing, metro affordable housing bond,
OHCS permanent supportive housing funding, Clackamas county home funds, project-based vouchers from HACC, Metro supportive housing
services funding, seller financing, deferred developer fee, and private funding.




                                                                                                                                       Page 8 of 98
FULLER STATION APARTMENTS: 9608 SE FULLER RD, HAPPY VALLEY, OR 97086

Fuller Station Apartments is a six-story, 100-unit development located directly adjacent to the MAX Green Line in unincorporated Clackamas
County. Fuller Station consists of 17 one-bedroom units, 63 two-bedroom units, and 20 three-bedroom units. Energy-efficient heating and




                                                                                                                                    Page 9 of 98
cooling are provided in every unit and any unit in the building can be converted for ADA accessibility. Additionally, the three-bedroom units
include in-unit washer/dryers.

Project-based Section 8 vouchers provided by HACC support 30 units reserved for households with incomes at or below 30% of AMI, including 25
PSH units reserved for households experiencing houselessness. Services funding from the Metro Supportive Housing Services measure supports
the 25 PSH units. In addition, two units serve households at or below 50% of AMI, and 67 units serving households at or below 60% of AMI.
There is also one unregulated manager’s unit. This project achieved 100% occupancy in April 2023.

Residents benefit from amenities such as a community room with free Wi-Fi, a computer lab with free Wi-Fi, an outdoor community plaza, open-
air nature playgrounds, community gardens, 83 parking spaces, secure bike storage, excellent public transit, and gathering space available to
local community groups for on-site services.

Clackamas Women’s Services is providing supportive housing services for the 25 PSH units. Five units are supported with project-based
Mainstream vouchers and serve households with incomes at or below 30% of AMI and where the head of household is disabled and houseless or
at risk of houselessness. In addition, seven units are reserved for housing insecure or houseless youth and DevNW provides housing payment
assistance for these individuals.

Cornerstone Community Housing is providing resident services for all households at Fuller Station as well as additional services including
transition support, stabilization support, and case management. Guardian Real Estate Services manages the property, oversees leasing, and
coordinates resident services and supportive case management with its non-profit partners Clackamas Women Services and DEV NW.

Funding Sources leveraged for this project include Low-Income Housing Tax Credits, OMEP, Metro Affordable Housing Bonds and Transit
Oriented Development funds, Clackamas County HOME funds, Project-based vouchers from HACC, Metro Supportive Housing Services funding,
and private funding.




                                                                                                                                       Page 10 of 98
LAS FLORES APARTMENTS: SOUTH MAPLE LANE COURT, OREGON CITY, OR 97045
Las Flores, formerly known as Maple Apartments, consists of 171 affordable homes. It was completed in phases by building with the last building
approved for occupancy in May 2024, and as of 12/31/2024 all 171 units were leased. Located minutes from the Clackamas Community College



                                                                                                                                    Page 11 of 98
campus in Oregon City, the 5-acre site rests on a hillside abutting a quiet residential neighborhood to the east and overlooking retail and
commercial amenities to the west. Designed with agricultural workers, immigrants, and low-income Oregon City families in mind, units are a mix
of 1-, 2-, 3- and 4-bedrooms, with 75% being two-bedrooms and larger. Las Flores is made possible by a partnership between Community
Development Partners (CDP) and Hacienda CDC.

Supported by the Agriculture Workforce Housing Tax Credit (AWHTC), 12 units are set aside for agricultural workers and their families. Las Flores
will provide year-round, off-farm, permanent housing with programmatic elements designed for farm workers. Seventy (70) project-based
Section 8 vouchers will support households at or below 30% AMI and will include low-barrier leasing provisions to support vulnerable
households. Las Flores includes 17 units reserved for households transitioning out of houselessness, including 8 units reserved for formerly
homeless veterans that are supported by Veterans Affairs Supportive Housing (VASH) housing vouchers. Through a partnership with Northwest
Housing Alternatives (NHA), wrap-around supportive services will be offered to formerly houseless households in addition to services provided
by Hacienda’s Youth and Family Services division and the VASH program.

Situated in a park-like setting, the property boasts a variety of outdoor amenities including a community garden space, walking paths, play areas,
and outdoor picnic areas. The project also includes a community building with space for a movie and game room, a book-share library, computer
stations, and a community kitchen for events and classes.

CDP and Hacienda CDC collaborated with the Center for Public Interest Design (CPID) during the early design phase of the project. CPID
promotes a mode of practice that is socially conscious, environmentally sustainable, and economically accessible to all. The development team
integrated PTAC heat pumps into every unit and achieved Earth Advantage Multifamily Platinum certification. Included among the project’s
various sustainable design elements, is a functioning solar panel array on the community building and all residential buildings are solar-ready.

The design team is led by a partnership between Community Development Partners (CDP) and Hacienda CDC and comprised of Salazar Architect
and LMC Construction. The project will be managed by Guardian Real Estate Services and resident services will be led by Hacienda Youth and
Family Services. NHA will provide supportive services.

Funding Sources leveraged for this project include: Low-Income Housing Tax Credits, Tax-Exempt Bond Financing, Metro Affordable Housing
Bond, OHCS financing, Project-based vouchers from HACC, Seller Financing, Deferred Developer Fee, and private funding.




                                                                                                                                       Page 12 of 98
GOOD SHEPHERD VILLAGE: 12608 SE SKYSHOW PL, HAPPY VALLEY, OR 97086
Good Shepherd Village has the distinction of being the first regulated affordable housing development in Happy Valley, OR.
Construction was completed in fall 2023 and the property is fully leased. The community consists of 143 homes, 58 of which are




                                                                                                                         Page 13 of 98
reserved for families and individuals experiencing houselessness (PSH), including 15 reserved expressly for veterans. Good Shepherd
Village serves priority populations with a broad range of needs based on an analysis of people living and/or working in Happy Valley.
The community was made possible, in part, by a generous donation from the Brockamp Family to Catholic Charities of Oregon (CCO).
In 2012, the Brockamp Family donated the 11-acre site to CCO with the intent to have the land used for affordable housing. Included
on the site is a four-acre natural area that will remain untouched, focusing the development on the remaining seven acres. As the
affordable housing arm of CCO, Caritas Community Housing Corporation (Caritas Housing) works to advance equity for immigrants,
refugees, and people who are houseless and vulnerable, with a special emphasis on those who are not served by other providers.
Caritas Housing is the sponsor and developer of the project.
Good Shepherd Village includes one unregulated management unit, 13 studios, 50 one-bedrooms, 60 two-bedroom, and 19 three-
bedroom units. The three-bedroom and several of the two-bedroom units are focused in two buildings each surrounding a small
courtyard. A third building houses all the studios, one-bedrooms, and the remaining two-bedrooms, as well as the community rooms
and office space for residents and supportive services.
This community will serve families and individuals with incomes up to 60% of the area median income. Fifty-eight (58) units are
reserved for households with incomes at or below 30% of AMI and eighty-four (84) units are reserved for households with incomes
up to 60% of AMI. VASH and HUD project-based Section 8 vouchers support 35 PSH units and project-based RLRA rental assistance
supports 23 PSH units. Wrap-around services for all 58 PSH units are supported with Metro Supportive Housing Services funding.
In addition to the large, multi-use community room, multiple resident lounge areas have been incorporated into the design based on
trauma-informed design feedback received through community engagement. Community amenities include laundry facilities, secure
bike enclosures, on-site parking, outdoor gathering space, children’s play areas, and a community garden. The community
incorporates trauma-informed, sustainable, and universal design elements throughout. Earth Advantage Multifamily Gold
certification was achieved for all three buildings and each unit provides energy-efficient heating and cooling.
Resident and supportive services are provided by Catholic Charities of Oregon. The development team consisted of WALSH
Construction as the general contractor, MWA Architects providing architectural services, and the Housing Development Center
providing development consulting.
Funding Sources leveraged for this project include Low-Income Housing Tax Credits, OHCS Permanent Supportive Housing Funds,
OHCS Multifamily Energy Program, Metro Affordable Housing Bonds, Project-based vouchers from HACC, Metro Supportive Housing
Services funding, private funding, and donated land.




                                                                                                                           Page 14 of 98
MERCY GREENBRAE APARTMENTS: 3190 FURMAN DRIVE, LAKE OSWEGO, OR 97034
Greenbrae at Marylhurst Commons Apartments is located on the former Marylhurst University campus in Lake Oswego, completed
construction in May 2024, delivering 100 homes for low-income families. Leasing is complete as of September 30th, 2025. Mercy
Housing Northwest (MHNW) leases the 4.25-acre parcel of land from the Sisters of the Holy Names of Jesus and Mary (SNJM).
Mercy Greenbrae at Marylhurst Commons is a mixed-income community serving both low-income households and households
experiencing or at risk of houselessness (consistent with Supportive Housing Services Population B Criteria). This community includes
one-, two-, and three-bedroom apartments, with more than 80% of the units having two or more bedrooms. Sixty (60) units serve




                                                                                                                           Page 15 of 98
households at 60% AMI or below and forty (40) units serve households at 30% AMI or below. The 30% AMI units are available to
households referred to the project through a partnership with the Lake Oswego School District and the Housing Authority's
Coordinated Housing Access program.
With this unit and income mix, Greenbrae provides an important opportunity for lower-wage working families to be included in the
high-opportunity Lake Oswego community. Mercy Housing Northwest is working in partnership with the Lake Oswego School District
to reduce the number of families with children enrolled in Lake Oswego Schools who are houseless or at risk of houselessness. On
any given year, the Lake Oswego School District (LOSD) serves 30-50 households who struggle with housing insecurity. To help bridge
this gap, LOSD is providing referrals for up to 25 of the 40 units set aside for households earning 30% of AMI or below. Mercy
Greenbrae ensures these households have an affordable living option, allowing these kids to stay enrolled in their local schools and
remain integrated in their communities. Mercy Housing Northwest also provides on-site services supported by Metro Supportive
Housing Services funding. Partnerships with community organizations were tailored to meet the specific needs of residents.
The development team focused on creating comfortable and welcoming spaces, such as the two- and three-bedroom units, to appeal
to and accommodate families. The property includes a spacious community room with free Wi-Fi, a community kitchen, and
computer workstations. Outdoor spaces feature a playground, basketball hoop, community garden space, and seating. Spacious
laundry rooms are also located on each floor.
Mercy Greenbrae is among the largest affordable housing projects built to Passive House US (PHIUS) energy efficiency standards. The
building is 100% electric and emissions-free, using approximately 40% less energy than comparable new construction buildings. The
building includes centralized tempered and filtered air to ensure comfortable and healthy indoor air, even on days when outdoor air
quality is hazardous. Additionally, the project includes water-efficient fixtures, LED lighting, and high-performance windows
throughout. Furthermore, every unit is carpet-free, improving indoor air quality and reducing maintenance demands for residents.
The project was designed by Carleton Hart Architecture and was built by Walsh Construction Company. Mercy Housing manages and
provides resident services and programming for the property.
Funding Sources leveraged for this project include Low-Income Housing Tax Credits, OHCS LIFT, Metro Affordable Housing Bond,
OHCS Multifamily Energy Program, RLRA Project-based vouchers, Metro Supportive Housing Services funding, and private funding.




                                                                                                                          Page 16 of 98
HILLSIDE PARK BUILDINGS A, B, & C: 2889 SE HILLSIDE CT, MILWAUKIE, OR 97222 –
Construction commenced on Hillside Park Building C in July 2024 and on Buildings A and B at the end of October 2024. All three buildings are
progressing on-schedule. The partnership between HACC and Related NW (RNW) includes the redevelopment of the 13.7 acre Hillside Park
public housing site, transforming 54 obsolete public housing units into 275 new affordable units that will serve households at or below 60% AMI.
Ankrom Moisan Architects designed the property with Walsh Construction serving as the general contractor. Plans include all-electric systems,
energy-efficient heat pump heating and cooling, low-impact development (LID) infrastructure elements, and solar arrays for each building. The
Hillside Projects include extensive public improvements and infrastructure work, including a complete realignment of the existing street network
in order to integrate the community into the city grid. Impact NW, Unite Oregon, Community Vision, and HACC’s service team will provide
culturally responsive and specific services to future residents.

140 units will be supported with project-based Section 8 rental assistance, including 21 units reserved for service-enhanced permanent
supportive housing (PSH) supported by Metro Supportive Housing Services funding. 108 units will be reserved for households earning 30% AMI
or below and 67 units will be family-sized units.



                                                                                                                                     Page 17 of 98
Building C will be four-story, elevator serviced building that includes 100 units supported with project-based Section 8 rental assistance. The
project includes 68 units that will be restricted to households earning at or below 30% of AMI and the remaining 32 units will be restricted to
households earning 50% of AMI. Among the 30% AMI units, eight will be reserved for PSH with wrap-around supportive services provided by
Impact NW. Building C will be developed by RNW and, upon conversion to permanent financing and an approved 8609, RNW will exit the limited
partnership.

Construction of Building C is over 30% complete. Foundation installation, grading, and framing have been completed, and the building is on track
to open in February 2026. Construction of Buildings A and B is on-track for completion in July 2026 and April 2026, respectively. In Building B,
grading, excavation and framing up to the second level has been completed. In Building A, concrete foundation, plumbing waste lines, and
underground MEP has been completed.

Funding Sources include: 4% LIHTC, Metro Affordable Housing bonds, OHCS LIFT, tax-exempt bonds, permanent debt, HOME-ARP, City of
Milwaukie CET funding, Metro TOD funds, project-based Section 8 vouchers, and SHS services funding.




                                                                                                                                     Page 18 of 98
EL NIDO (FKA LAKE GROVE) AFFORDABLE HOUSING - 16719 BOONES FERRY ROAD, LAKE OSWEGO, OR 97035
The El Nido housing development, (FKA Lake Grove) is being designed on a site in Lake Oswego’s Lake Forest neighborhood, which
was previously owned and used for construction staging by the City of Lake Oswego. The City identified the roughly 1.4-acre property
as a suitable location for the development of multi-family affordable housing. HACC is working in partnership with Hacienda CDC,
Metro, and the City of Lake Oswego to develop this much-needed affordable housing.
This community will serve a mix of families and individuals earning 60% and below the Median Income Area (AMI). This 55-unit
property will provide 28 one-bedroom, 22 two-bedroom and 5 three-bedroom homes. 20 units will be rent-restricted to 30% AMI
and 10 of those units will be dedicated to PSH. The 10 PSH units will be supported with RLRA project-based rent assistance and wrap-
around services provided by New Narrative and supported by SHS funding. The remaining units will serve individuals and families in a
variety of unit sizes and rents set at 60% AMI or below. With the larger units through targeted outreach to communities of color, the
development team aims to meet the needs of BIPOC families in our region.
The development is aiming to achieve Earth Advantage Gold Certification or higher. Plans include 100% electric systems, energy-
efficient mini-split heat pump heating and cooling, EV charging stations, and a solar system estimated to offset two-thirds of the
building’s total electrical needs. All electric utilities will be paid for by the owner. The project will also include a multipurpose
community room that will be used for life-enriching resident services and programs offered by Hacienda.
Financial closing is anticipated for May 2025, with a PAB/4% Low-Income Housing Tax Credit reservation, an equity partner, and
construction and permanent lenders in place. The development team is actively working to close a financial gap of approximately




                                                                                                                               Page 19 of 98
$3.5 million to ensure the project's success. The development team is exploring creative reductions to hard and soft projects costs to
close the gap.
The development team includes Access Architecture, a minority-owned, equity-driven architecture firm that brings quality design
with a strong emphasis on community engagement; Mackenzie, a design-forward architecture firm committed to creating lasting,
inclusive, and just-built environments; Colas Construction (COLAS), a minority-led seasoned general contractor with decades of
affordable housing experience and a strong track-record of MWESB participation; and New Narrative, a dedicated service provider of
permanent supportive housing services. The property management partner will be selected through a Request for Proposal process
to ensure that the selected firm aligns with the missions of the stakeholders and the needs of the community. Anticipated funding
sources include 4% LIHTC equity, tax-exempt bond financing, Metro Affordable Housing Bonds, Project Based Regional Long-term
Rental Assistance Vouchers, SHS services subsidy, SDC waivers, Permanent Debt, and OR-MEP.




                                                                                                                           Page 20 of 98
SHORTSTACK MILWAUKIE - 3736 SE HARVEY STREET, MILWAUKIE, OR 97222
The Shortstack Milwaukie project will deliver an innovative, replicable homeownership solution, led by a partnership between Shortstack
Developers and Proud Ground. This project closed in October 2024 and is currently 9% complete with completion anticipated in October 2025,
project will create 15 affordable homes in Milwaukie, via smart densification at the “missing middle” / “cottage cluster” scale. Shortstack
Milwaukie leverages recent up-zoning for middle housing neighborhoods and is located near amenities that working families need to thrive.

This project takes advantage of middle housing legislation recently passed in Oregon, including House Bill 2001 (2019); the City of Portland’s
Better Housing by Design (2020) and Residential Infill Project (2021); and the City of Milwaukie’s Middle Housing Zoning Code Update (2022).
These policies address the State’s urgent need for affordable housing options by creating opportunities to increase residential density for infill
sites. This project also responds to housing needs detailed in Governor Kotek’s Executive Order No. 23-04 which calls for the production of
36,000 housing units per year.

The homes in the Shortstack Milwaukie community will be priced for households earning up to 80% AMI. The homes will feature a compact,
open floorplan concept that is desirable and marketable for home buyers. These ~900sf cottages are 2-bedroom, 1.5 bath, two-story structures
clustered together utilizing the City of Milwaukie’s recently adopted cottage cluster zoning provision. The units are intended to serve a mix of
small families, couples, and individuals – all of whom are constituents in need of more affordable home-buying options.




                                                                                                                                         Page 21 of 98
The 24,300-sf site, located in the Ardenwald neighborhood, is well-connected to Milwaukie’s thriving downtown commercial center, good
schools, and major employers. The site is within ½ mile of the MAX yellow line, and less than ¼ mile from several Tri-Met bus lines (the nearest
stop is only a block away). This community is within walking distance of Providence Hospital, Safeway, Ardenwald Elementary School, Downtown
Milwaukie, and many other public amenities. Water Tower Park is a block away and the larger Mintorn North Natural Area is ½ mile from the
site.

These all-electric homes are designed to exceed the energy efficiency requirements set forth by the City of Milwaukie building code and the
development team is pursuing Energy Trust of Oregon’s Pathway to Net Zero Program.

The development team includes Works Progress Architecture as the architect, GSI as the general contractor, Shortstack as the developer and
Proud Ground as the sponsor. This project was funded by the City of Milwaukie CET funds, OHCS LIFT, Metro Affordable Housing Bonds, a USDA
Wood Innovation Grant, Proud Ground Subsidy, and conventional construction debt.




                                                                                                                                     Page 22 of 98
VUELA (FKA WILSONVILLE TOD): 9749 SW BARBER STREET, WILSONVILLE, OR 97070

Vuela, (FKA Wilsonville Transit-Oriented Development) is a mixed-use multifamily development located in Wilsonville that includes 120
affordable housing units situated over active ground floor commercial space. This project closed in August 2024 and is currently 16.3% complete
with completion expected in December 2025.

All units will be restricted to households earning between 30% - 80% of the area median income (AMI), including 35 homes reserved
for households making 30% of AMI or below of which 20 are reserved for PSH households. The homes will be a mix of 4 studios, 38
one-bedroom, 67 two-bedroom, and 13 three-bedroom units. The building will be a single five-story elevator building with a
landscaped plaza and a mix of on-site and shared parking on the adjacent tri-met parcel. Building amenities include on-site
management offices, social service offices, parcel lockers, a fitness room, a multi-purpose community room, a bike room, and a
laundry room. To further reduce barriers for residents, all common areas will include complimentary Wi-Fi access. Exterior amenities
will include a children’s playground, sports court, covered picnic tables, outdoor patio spaces, and EV charging stations.

Palindrome will activate the ground floor with community amenities such as the SMART Transit welcome center, Wilsonville
Community Sharing food bank, commercial space, and resident amenities. For the commercial space, Palindrome plans to create a
coffee shop and craft beer tap room with a focus on commuters, area employees, and neighborhood residents within walking or
biking distance.




                                                                                                                                    Page 23 of 98
With sustainability in mind, the project will pursue an Earth Advantage sustainability certification. Upgraded sustainable features will
include a rooftop photovoltaic solar system, enhanced insulation, high-performance windows, LED lighting, Energy Star appliances,
and smart thermostats in every unit. The landscape design will use native water-smart plants, and the units include low-flow water
fixtures. Each residential unit will include through-wall PTAC air conditioning combined with ceiling fans in each bedroom. The
common areas of the building will be serviced by roof-top condensers. The development will also include EV parking spaces on-site
for residents and guests.

Palindrome is partnering with Latino Network, a Latino-led education organization grounded in culturally specific practices and
services, to facilitate community outreach during the predevelopment period, provide referral services to the property management
agent, and develop programming at the new apartment community.

The development team was comprised of Palindrome as the lead developer, the Latino Network as the service provider, PacifiCap
Construction as the general contractor, and YBA Architects as the architect.

Vuela was financed with tax-exempt bond financing, 4% Low-Income Housing Tax Credits (LIHTCs), energy tax credit equity, State
grant funding for the Wilsonville SMART transit welcome center, a METRO transit-oriented development grant, deferred
development fees, City of Wilsonville Land Contribution, Metro Affordable Housing Bond funding, Project-based RLRA vouchers, and
Private Debt.




                                                                                                                             Page 24 of 98
PARK PLACE REDEVELOPMENT (FKA CLACKAMAS HEIGHTS REDEVELOPMENT): 13930 GAIN ST OREGON CITY, OR 97045
The Park Place Redevelopment will transform Clackamas Heights, a low-density, obsolete public housing site that spans 16 acres and includes
100 units, into a community that includes 224 units of cluster housing. Clackamas Heights was originally built in the early 1940s, making it one of
Oregon’s oldest public housing communities. After more than 80 years of service, the aging buildings have surpassed their useful life and require
redevelopment to ensure safe housing and sustainable operations for future generations.

The Housing Authority plans to utilize Oregon City’s recently adopted cottage cluster zoning to make more efficient use of the site while
supporting each household's independence and privacy. Oregon City’s cluster zoning permits the development of up to 12 homes clustered
around a common green space, allowing for more efficient land use and more affordable housing options to accommodate a growing population
and rising housing costs.




                                                                                                                                        Page 25 of 98
The Park Place Redevelopment will be comprised of 18-20 cottage clusters, each containing up to 12 units arranged around a shared courtyard.
The dwellings themselves will be attached structures that will include a mix of townhouses, duplexes, and 3- to 4-plexes. Each cluster will have
its own open space and shared amenities like mail and trash. Four to six clusters will be arranged into blocks, opening to broader green spaces,
activity zones, gardens, and play areas. Together these blocks will create a site-wide, pedestrian-centered network, linking residents and
neighbors to gathering areas and neighborhood amenities.

This new community will serve households with incomes at or below 60% of the area median income (AMI) and will be able to accommodate all
residents currently residing at the Clackamas Heights and Oregon City View Manor public housing communities who are interested in staying in
the Park Place neighborhood. The project will include 112 Project-Based Vouchers that will support households with incomes at or below 30% of
AMI.

The development team consists of Bora Architecture as the architect, Truebeck Construction as the general contractor, JH Brawner & Company
as the development consultant, and the Housing Authority of Clackamas County as the developer and resident services provider. The
development team is planning to release and RFP seeking a culturally specific service provider to provide community outreach and marketing
during lease-up.

Anticipated sources include tax-exempt bond financing, 4% Low-Income Housing Tax Credits, OHCS LIFT, Metro Affordable Housing Bond funds,
Clackamas County HOME funds, OR-MEP, GP Equity, and project-based vouchers.

Construction is expected to commence in fall 2025 with completion expected in late 2027.




                                                                                                                                      Page 26 of 98
SECTION 4: PERMANENT SUPPORTIVE HOUSING
Permanent supportive housing (PSH) is defined as: a type of housing program for people with disabilities and extremely low incomes who have
long or multiple histories of homelessness and other significant barriers to housing stability. PSH provides permanent housing, rent assistance
and intensive yet voluntary services, with no time limits. This section confirms PSH unit commitments in your jurisdiction.

Figure 2. Permanent Supportive Housing Commitments
Complete and/or update this table for all bond-funded projects in your portfolio
                                                                                                                            # of PSH units   # of PSH units using
                            Total   PSH                                                                                       using SHS      SHS funded services
          Project                                  Target Population                       Service Partners
                            Units   Units                                                                                   funded rental
                                                                                                                              assistance
                                            PSH, Asian, Latine, Foster     Dev NW, Clackamas Women’s Services,                    0                   25
 FULLER STATION APTS        99      25      Youth to Independence (FYI),   Cornerstone Community Housing
                                            Asian, Latine, Veterans, PSH   Catholic Charities of Oregon, APANO, El               23                   58
                                                                           Programa Hispano Católico, Familias en Accion,
 GOOD SHEPHERD VILLAGE      142     58
                                                                           Do Good Multnomah
 HILLSIDE PARK A & B        143     13      PSH, Families                  Impact NW, Community Vision, Unite Oregon              0                   13

 HILLSIDE PARK C            78      8       PSH, Families                  Impact NW, HACC Service Team                           0                    8

 EL NIDO (FKA LAKE GROVE)   54      10      Latine, PSH, Families          New Narrative                                         10                   10

 LAS FLORES                 171     17      PSH, Families, Farm Laborers   Northwest Housing Alternatives (NHA)                   0                    9

 MERCY GREENBRAE            100     40      PSH, Families                  Mercy Housing NW, Mercy Housing Mgmt                  40                   40

 SHORTSTACK MILWAUKIE       15      0       First time home buyers                                                                0                    0

 TUKWILA SPRINGS            48      48      PSH                            NARA                                                   0                   36

 VUELA                      120     20      Latine, PSH, Families          Latino Network                                        20                   20

 TOTAL                      970     239                                                                                          93                  219




                                                                                                                                             Page 27 of 98
SECTION 5: CONTRACTING AND WORKFORCE OUTCOMES UPDATE
Local implementation strategies prioritize racial equity by setting contracting goals for COBID-certified firms and tracking workforce participation
in the construction of Metro bond projects. Please review and confirm the information in Figures 3 and 4 and let us know of any changes.

Figure 3. Equitable contracting goals and outcomes

                                                                                         Contracting goals                       Contracting outcome

                          Developer, General             Actual/expected
   Project name                                                                 % of total contract amounts paid to…      % of total contract amounts paid to…
                              contractor              construction completion
                                                                                Project goal (% hard   Project goal (%   Project outcome (%    Project outcome (%
                                                                                       costs)            soft costs)         hard costs)            soft costs)

   Fuller Station
                             GSA,GRES/R&H                     Sep-22                   20%                  20%               19.8%                  15%
    Apartments
  Good Shepherd
                              Caritas/Walsh                   Sep-23                   30%                  20%               33.8%                 28.4%
     Village

 Hillside Park A & B              RNW                         July-26                  20%                  20%

   Hillside Park C                RNW                         Feb-26                   20%                  20%

  El Nido (FKA Lake
                                Hacienda                      Oct-26                   25%                  25%
        Grove)

     Las Flores          CDP/Hacienda CDC/LMC                 May-24                   20%                  20%               34.0%                 68.4%

 Mercy Greenbrae            Mercy NW/Walsh                    Jun-24                   30%                  30%               32.5%                 18.7%

     Park Place           Truebeck Construction               Oct-25                   30%                  30%

     Shortstack                HomeWork
                                                              Jun-25                   30%                  30%
     Milwaukie           Development/Sister City

  Tukwila Springs              HACC/Walsh                     Jun-22                   20%                  20%               22.1%                   75%

                       Palindrome Properties Group,
       Vuela                                                  Jan-26                   35%                  30%
                           PacifiCap Construction




                                                                                                                                                    Page 28 of 98
Figure 4. Workforce diversity goals/outcomes (as applicable based on LIS and project)
                                                                                                             Workforce goals                 Workforce outcomes
                                                                            Workforce       Prevailing
                                                        Actual/expected
                              Developer, General                            tracking?         wage         % of total labor hours*        % of total labor hours* worked
      Project name                                       Construction
                                  contractor              completion                                             worked by…                             by…
                                                                                            BOLI, Davis
                                                                                Y/N                       POC      Women    Apprentices     POC      Women     Apprentices
                                                                                            Bacon, N/A
                                                                                               Davis
 Fuller Station Apartments       GSA,GRES/R&H                Sep-22              Y                        N/A       N/A        N/A         100%       3%          11%
                                                                                            Bacon/BOLI
                                                                                               Davis
  Good Shepherd Village           Caritas/Walsh              Sep-23              Y                        N/A       N/A        N/A         93%        2%          12%
                                                                                            Bacon/BOLI

     Hillside Park A & B              RNW                    July-26             Y          Davis Bacon   22%       9%         20%

       Hillside Park C                RNW                    Feb-26              Y          Davis Bacon   22%       9%         20%

  El Nido (FKA Lake Grove)          Hacienda                 Oct-26              Y             N/A                  35%

         Las Flores          CDP/Hacienda CDC/LMC           May-24               Y          Davis Bacon   N/A       N/A        N/A         100%       7%          7%

                                                                                                                                                      Not
     Mercy Greenbrae            Mercy NW/Walsh               Jun-24              Y             N/A        N/A       N/A        N/A         50%                   6.4%
                                                                                                                                                    tracked
                                 HACC/Truebeck
         Park Place                                          Oct-25              Y          Davis Bacon   N/A       N/A        N/A
                                  Construction
                                   HomeWork
   Shortstack Milwaukie                                      Jun-25              N              N/A       N/A       N/A        N/A
                             Development/Sister City

      Tukwila Springs              HACC/Walsh                Jun-22              N          Davis Bacon   N/A       N/A        N/A         38%        21%         30%

                              Palindrome Properties
           Vuela                 Group, PacifiCap            Jan-26              N             BOLI       N/A       N/A        N/A
                                   Construction

For projects that provided a minimum and maximum (or “stretch”) goal, please use the “minimum goal.”




                                                                                                                                                            Page 29 of 98
SECTION 6: ADVANCING EQUITY IN CONSTRUCTION
Please share progress on equitable contracting and workforce strategy updates in your jurisdiction. Please highlight any best
practices, lessons learned, or opportunities for improvement. Please address:
       a. Progress toward achieving equitable contracting goals
       b. Progress toward advancing workforce participation through workforce tracking
       c. Plans to expand local capacity to monitor and report on contracting and workforce outcomes

Hillside Park A, B & C
All three buildings expect to exceed the County’s MWESB participation goal and include a minimum participation goal of 30% for construction.
Building C is on track to exceed both hard and soft cost goals with 34% of contracts awarded to COBID firms and 27% awarded to professional
services contracts. In addition, Building A & B are tracking at 32.6% of planned construction contracts awarded to COBID firms and 23% awarded
to professional services contracts.

Hillside Park D & E
Hillside Park – Buildings D&E plans to achieve and/or exceed the County’s MWESB participation goals for affordable housing at over 30% for
construction and 20% for professional services goals. Walsh Construction, the projects’ general contractor, intends to achieve or exceed these
goals through partnerships with MWESB/SDVBE firms on design and engineering, early subcontractor engagement, and delineated construction
scopes and progress tracking. Walsh has consistently high participation with MWESB/SDVBE firms, who on average complete 34% of their
subcontracted work. By utilizing Walsh’s well-developed bid database and trusted community relationships with PBDG, NAMC, OAME, and
LatinORBuilt, big opportunities will be marketed in culturally specific publications and bid resources. In addition to reaching COBID participation
goals, the project has aspirational goals for Apprentice Level and Journey Level participations of a minimum of 22% of total apprentice hours, by
trade, worked by minorities and 9% of the total apprentice hours, by trade, worked by women. In addition, a minimum of 6% of total journey
level hours, by trade, will be worked by women.

Park Place
Park Place plans to exceed the County’s MWESB participation goals for affordable housing at 30% for construction and 20% for professional
services. The selected project contractor, Trube Construction, has a consistent track record of COBID reaching construction equity goals for
affordable housing projects. Truebeck’s Pacific Northwest office consistently prioritizes diversity, maintaining an internal COBID goal of 20%
regardless of client requirements. Recent projects, such as Timberview VIII and Chiles House, achieved 30% and 40% COBID participation,
respectively. This success reflects proactive engagement strategies, including mentorship programs, financial support options, and participation
in minority organizations like NAMC and OAME. By understanding trade partner challenges, such as cash flow constraints, they offer solutions
like twice-a-month billing and material procurement to ensure their continued success.




                                                                                                                                        Page 30 of 98
For the Park Place project, they will leverage existing COBID relationships, and a robust in-house database to identify and align COBID trade
partners with appropriate project scopes based on their expertise and capacity. Bid packaging will be carefully structured to encourage diverse
participation, creatively bundling larger scopes when necessary to engage multiple partners. Ongoing engagement through project kick-off
meetings and onsite DEI training will reinforce inclusivity and collaboration. Their internal diversity dashboard will track participation throughout
the project lifecycle, ensuring solicitation and achievement goals are met while fostering long-term growth and diversity within the industry.

Good Shepherd Village
Good Shepherd Village completed construction in mid-September of 2023. With contracting goals of both 20% hard and soft costs, Good
Shepherd Village (GSV) exceeded its goals with outcomes of 33.8% for hard costs and 28.4% for soft costs. Although workforce diversity goals
were not established for the Good Shepherd Village project, the percent of total labor hours worked by people of color was 93%, 2% by women,
and almost 12% for apprentices.

Early in the pre-construction phase, Good Shepherd Village’s ownership team conducted direct outreach to consultants listed in the COBID
database. They conducted individual informational interviews with certified firms to ascertain interest and availability and provided the
opportunity to ask direct questions and learn about the project prior to responding to proposals. The ownership team made a concerted effort
to communicate with MWESB subcontractors during the budgeting process and continued these efforts throughout the preconstruction period,
which allowed the project team to create realistic budgets that supported their equity goals.
Additionally, the ownership team allowed for the participation of MWESB subcontractors that met equity objectives, but were not yet certified.
This allowed the project to hire a woman-owned flooring company that was not initially certified but was able to become WBE certified during
their work on the project.

Another example of the project’s commitment to supporting MWESB businesses was demonstrated during construction when a minority-owned
landscaping subcontractor was unable to complete their scope. Rather than firing the subcontractor and negatively affecting the future viability
of their new business, the ownership team worked with the business on a subcontracting plan that allowed another subcontractor to finish the
scope. The cost overages were equitably split between the general contractor and subcontractor. This support for growing businesses allows
them to learn from early failures without resulting in their undoing.

Good Shepherd’s general contractor, Walsh Construction, attended multiple minority contracting group meetings to inform MWESB
subcontractors about available opportunities. In addition, the project team connected with the Professional Business Development Group,
Clackamas Workforce, and the North Clackamas Chamber to find local MWESB firms to work on the project.




                                                                                                                                         Page 31 of 98
Las Flores
Las Flores completed construction in May of 2024. With contracting goals of 20% for both hard and soft costs, the project exceeded its
contracting goals for COBID-certified firms with outcomes of 34% of hard costs contracts and 68.4% of soft cost contracts.

While workforce diversity goals were not established for the Las Flores project, final workforce tracking data shows the percent of total labor
hours worked is 100% by people of color, 7% by women, and 7% by apprentices.

LMC, the General Contractor on the Las Flores project, built relationships within the community to raise awareness and identify qualified
contractors and suppliers. This outreach included:

• Pre-bid Outreach: LMC Construction organized pre-bid outreach events in the community to engage potential contractors and suppliers. They
conducted information sessions and workshops to prepare interested firms for upcoming bid opportunities. By providing support and guidance
in the bidding process, LMC aimed to create an inclusive and competitive environment.
• Partnerships with Local Membership Groups: LMC collaborated with local membership groups, such as chambers of commerce or local
business associations, to leverage their resources and networking opportunities. These partnerships allowed LMC to tap into existing networks
of minority and women-owned businesses, fostering connections and promoting their involvement in the project.
• Utilization of LMC's Network: LMC leveraged its network of qualified DMWESB and Section 3 firms that had prior experience on similar
projects. This approach not only ensured the involvement of experienced contractors but also promoted diversity and inclusion within the
project's workforce and supplier base.
• Advertisement of Employment Opportunities: LMC actively advertised all employment opportunities related to the project through various
channels, including local newspapers, community groups, and apprenticeship programs. This approach aimed to attract a diverse pool of talent
from the local community and create job opportunities for underrepresented groups.
• Community Engagement: LMC partnered with community groups and actively participated in local community events. This involvement
helped increase awareness of the project and its benefits within the community. It also provided opportunities for direct engagement with local
businesses and residents.
• Participation in Industry Meetings: LMC attended meetings of industry organizations such as NAMCO, and OAME to announce the project to
their members. This outreach strategy helped LMC Construction connect with minority and women-owned businesses and communicate the
project's potential opportunities.

LMC Construction employed several strategies from their diversity plan to assist in meeting workforce goals. Some of these strategies included:
• Facilitating Sub-Tier Contracts: LMC fostered opportunities for smaller contracting firms by pairing them with larger firms. This collaborative
approach enabled smaller businesses to participate in projects and contribute to a more diverse contracting ecosystem.
• Prevailing Wage Support: LMC offered support and guidance to subcontractors in complying with prevailing wage requirements and reporting.
This assistance helped subcontractors navigate the complexities of wage regulations and promoting fair compensation for workers.




                                                                                                                                       Page 32 of 98
• Breaking Down Work Opportunities: LMC broke down project work into smaller parts for subcontracting. This approach created more
employment opportunities and increased the accessibility of projects to a wider range of contractors, including those from diverse backgrounds.
• On-the-Job Training: LMC Construction allowed on-the-job training, which included individuals with minimal previous work experience. This
inclusive approach not only promoted workforce diversity, but also provided opportunities for individuals to gain valuable experience and skills
in the construction industry.
• Enhancing Targeted Recruitment: LMC intensified their efforts to engage a more extensive and diverse audience through focused recruitment
strategies.
• Utilizing Accessible Advertising Channels: LMC advertised job openings through channels that were easily accessible to women and
apprentices, including community organizations, women's advocacy groups, and job placement centers.
• Participating in Specialized Job Fairs and Career Events: LMC actively attended job fairs and career events that specifically catered to women
and apprentices, allowing the general contractor to establish connections with potential candidates and promote opportunities within their
projects, including Las Flores.

Mercy Greenbrae
The project achieved 32.5% COBID participation of subcontracted hard costs but ended up just shy of the 20% soft cost goal for COBID
participation. Mercy Housing Northwest and Walsh Construction prioritized exceeding 30% COBID participation on the project starting at the
Concept Design Phase. Starting early ensured the COBID certified contractors were aware of the project and tracking it during estimating and
prior to competitive bidding. Early outreach proved successful for overall percentage of workforce participation (over 31%), and gave an
opportunity to a new siding subcontractor (JC Pro-Builders) who would not have otherwise would not have been competitive for the project. The
Marylhurst project was a large job for this subcontractor, who had previously worked primarily on residential projects in the past. Early
engagement during design ensured that the firm was well-versed about the project design, materials, and methods of construction so they could
competitively bid the job. They were not the lowest available bidder, but their price was very close and ultimately won them the job. This early
outreach to specific scopes can be replicated on future work to ensure high participation on future projects.

The project tracked slightly under its soft cost contracting goal, with 18/7% participation. The project team shared that without engaging a
certified architect, they found it difficult to reach the 20% contacting goal. Going forward, the project team will think critically about the
architect scope of work and seek opportunities to engage certified firms for owner-controlled soft cost scopes. Identifying certified firms for soft
cost scopes early in the development phase would help to ensure that the project could meaningfully achieve its 20% soft cost goal.

Shortstack Milwaukie
Although it can prove more difficult to meet contracting and workforce goals for smaller projects because the pool of subcontractors used on
smaller projects are not typically accustomed to hiring for jobs with contracting and workforce participation goals. The project is under
construction and committed to engaging at least 30% COBID-certified MWESB firms. The National Association of Minority Contractors Oregon
Chapter (NAMC-O) assisted with help creating the project’s outreach and representation plan. To date, over 70% of our current consultant




                                                                                                                                         Page 33 of 98
contract amounts (including development, architecture, engineering, civil, legal and others) are held with women-owned firms. The
development team consists of two woman-owned firms: HomeWork Development and Sister City. The project architect Works Progress
Architecture is a woman-owned business, as is the project civil engineer Vega and landscape architect Studio Wild.

Vuela
The project is on track to meet 30% COBID goals for hard costs and professional services. Palindrome, is active in affordable housing projects in
the region, and has developed best practices into its internal project procedures for contracting and workforce requirements. Palindrome
allocates some project funds to provide scholarships or related support to assist interested folks into workforce related programs and jobs. This
includes supporting apprenticeship programs, as well as supporting individuals, especially women, by providing situational support, such as
childcare. This approach has many benefits; not only does it make a positive contribution to the overall trades, but it provides broader support
and encouragement to the local workforce, in turn bolstering housing production support. Palindrome works closely with its construction
subsidiary, PacificCap to foster a consistent subcontractor pool with over 20 years of general contracting experience.

With over 20 years of general contracting experience, PacifiCap has become an expert in the niche of constructing affordable housing, with
particular experience in public-private partnerships. The company employs highly experienced, technically qualified project managers and job
superintendents who personally oversee and direct all aspects of every project. PacifiCap works with a team of loyal and reliable subcontractors
who have had relationships with the company for many years to further its COBID participation.

LCPtracker
In 2022, Metro provided HACC with $25,967 specifically to support the annual subscription costs of the contracting compliance and workforce
reporting software called LCPtracker. HACC utilized LCP tracker on Tukwila Springs, Fuller Station Apartments, Good Shepherd Village and Las
Flores. The funds Metro provided for the LCP tracker subscription was only enough to cover HACC’s initial bond projects. In response, HACC is
shifting the responsibility and costs of tracking goals and outcomes for newer projects to the ownership teams.

LCPtracker allowed HACC to track demographics for the projects’ workforce, with both the contractors and subcontractors on bond funded
projects and report on actual workforce demographics. By tracking specific demographics, this data can then be analyzed and used to develop
measures to increase participation for future projects.




                                                                                                                                       Page 34 of 98
SECTION 7: ADVANCING EQUITABLE HOUSING OPPORTUNITY, ACCESS, AND STABILITY
The Affordable Housing Bond Program is guided by principles that aim to help those left behind by the region’s housing market. This includes
communities of color, families with children, people with disabilities, seniors, veterans, and those at risk of homelessness or displacement. Each
local implementation strategy outlines commitments to affirmative marketing, low-barrier lease-up, culturally responsive resident services and
housing stability to those who have experienced displacement or are at risk of displacement.

Figure 5a: Plans/partnerships for affirmative marketing
Complete this table for all bond-funded projects in your portfolio
 Project                       List all affirmative marketing partners                                      # of affirmative marketing partners that
                                                                                                            are culturally specific organizations
 Tukwila Springs               Home Forward, NARA, CHA                                                                            2
 Fuller Station Apartments     Asian Health & Service Center, IRCO, NAYA, Urban League of Portland, El                            3
                               Programa Hispano Católico, Oregon Outreach, Impact NW, Independent
                               Living Resources, Clackamas County Social Services & CHA
 Good Shepherd Village         NARA, Asian Family Center, NAACP, JOIN, NW Pilot Project, Clackamas                               3
                               County Social Services & CHA
 Las Flores                    Hacienda CDC, NAYA, El Programa Hispano Católico, NHA, Urban League                               3
                               of Portland, Asian Health & Service Center, IRCO, Impact NW, Clackamas
                               County Social Services & CHA
 Mercy Greenbrae               Lake Oswego School District, YMCA of Great Portland, Clackamas                                    0
 Apartments                    Workforce Partnership, Northwest Family Services, Clackamas Children’s
                               Commission, and the Clackamas Children’s Center
 Hillside Park A & B           Impact NW, NHA, Community Vision, Unite Oregon                                                    0
 Hillside Park C               Impact NW, HACC, NAYA, Latino Network, Urban League, IRCO, and                                    2
                               Portland Homeless Family Solutions.
 Hillside Park D&E             Anticipated marketing partners include: NAYA, Northwest Family                                    3
                               Services, Impact NW, the Housing Authority of Clackamas County, Unite
                               Oregon, and Centro Cultural.
 El Nido (FKA Lake Grove)      New Narrative                                                                                     0
 Shortstack Milwaukie          Shortstack and Proud Ground                                                                       0
 Vuela                         Latino Network, Asian Health and Service Center, POIC +RAHS                                       2
 Park Place                    TBD                                                                                              TBD
 Redevelopment



                                                                                                                                         Page 35 of 98
Figure 5b: Plans/partnerships for culturally responsive services
Complete this table for all bond-funded projects in your portfolio
 Project                       List all partners and the culturally responsive services they will provide         # of service partners that are
                                                                                                                  culturally specific
                                                                                                                  organizations
 Tukwila Springs              NARA provides culturally specific supportive services for Native American                          1
                              residents. Home Forward prioritizes equity by engaging marginalized
                              communities in leasing, implementing inclusive tenant screening to reduce
                              barriers for communities of color, and providing culturally specific resources
                              and services.
 Fuller Station Apartments    Clackamas Women’s Services, Cornerstone Community Housing                                          0
                              JOIN provides bilingual and bicultural retention services in Spanish. Dev NW
                              supports youth housing placement with minimal barriers to entry while assisting
                              clients in overcoming rental and criminal history challenges.
 Good Shepherd Village        Catholic Charities of Oregon provides case management, resident services, and                      0
                              nutrition support. The VA provides case management for our VASH-holding
                              Veterans transitioning from long-term homelessness.
 Las Flores                   Hacienda CDC is a Latino-led Community Development Corporation that offers                         1
                              culturally responsive services including provision of translation and
                              interpretation services, referrals to legal services, digital literacy, financial
                              education, workforce development, safety and workers' rights for farmworkers
                              and their families, and assistance with school engagement and enrollment.
                              Hacienda CDC's Youth and Family Services provides culturally responsive
                              support to the households residing on site in order to bridge the gap between
                              property management and residents, reduce barriers to stable housing, and
                              increase the social capital of the community.
 Mercy Greenbrae              Mercy Housing NW, Mercy Housing Management Group                                                   0
 Apartments
 Hillside Park A & B          Impact NW, Community Vision, Unite Oregon                                                          1
 Hillside Park C              Impact NW will provide multilingual staff who make up 73% of the Housing and                       0
                              Safety Net (HSN) department. Their services are culturally responsive, trauma-
                              informed, and tailored to historically marginalized communities. HACC Resident
                              Services provides translation services and resources to promote Self-Sufficiency
                              Services Coordination that allow people to age in place.



                                                                                                                                       Page 36 of 98
 Hillside Park D&E                  Centro Cultural                                                                   1
 El Nido (FKA Lake Grove)           Hacienda CDC’s Youth and Family Services will be the primary Resident Service     1
                                    provider to this new community. As a Latino led organization our programs are
                                    intrinsically culturally-specific, but not exclusive. New Narrative will be the
                                    partner service provider for behavioral health services.
 Shortstack Milwaukie               Partners TBD                                                                      -
 Vuela                              Latino Network will provide outreach services during the predevelopment           1
                                    period to inform design and programming, referral services to the property
                                    management agent, and programming at the new apartment community.
 Park Place                         HACC Resident Services provides translation services and provides resources to    0
 Redevelopment                      promote Self-Sufficiency Services Coordination that allow people to age in
                                    place. IRCO will provide for consultation and lease-up services.


Figure 5c: Priority population checklist
Complete this table for all bond-funded projects in your portfolio
 Project                                     Includes designated units for (Y/N):                       Includes service partnerships with culturally
                                        Seniors/older      Multi-generation           Veterans                  specific organizations (Y/N)
                                           adults           households*
 Tukwila Springs                               Y                  N                       N                                  Y
 Fuller Station Apartments                     N                  Y                       N                                  N
 Good Shepherd Village                         N                  Y                       Y                                  Y
 Las Flores                                    N                  Y                       Y                                  Y
 Mercy Greenbrae                               N                  Y                       N                                  N
 Apartments
 Hillside Park A & B                           N                  Y                       N                                  N
 Hillside Park C                               N                  N                       N                                  N
 Hillside Park D&E                             N                  N                       N                                  N
 El Nido (FKA Lake Grove)                      N                  Y                       N                                  N
 Shortstack Milwaukie                          N                  N                       N                                  N
 Vuela                                         N                  Y                       N                                  Y
 Park Place Redevelopment                      N                  Y                       N                                  N
*includes units that are 3-bedroom or larger




                                                                                                                                           Page 37 of 98
Figure 6. Physical accessibility features
Complete this table for all bond-funded projects in your portfolio
                                                                 Number of ADA (Type A)   Universal design      Other accessibility features
         Project name            Number of ground floor units
                                                                         units                 (Y/N)                    (optional)
 Tukwila Springs                             48                           28                     Y
 Fuller Station Apartments                   10                           5                      Y
 Good Shepherd Village                       32                           8                      Y
 Las Flores Apartments                       57                           9                      Y
 Mercy Greenbrae                             23                           5                      Y
 Apartments
 Hillside Park A & B                         52                           10                     Y
 Hillside Park C                             19                           5                      Y
 Hillside Park D&E                           34                           8                      Y            The property goes beyond code by
                                                                                                             designing an additional 5% of units to
                                                                                                              comply with mobility requirements.
 El Nido (fka Lake Grove)                    17                           4                      Y
 Shortstack Milwaukie                  15 Townhomes                       0                      Y
 Vuela (fka Wilsonville TOD)                 13                           3                      Y
 Park Place Redevelopment                   224*                          20                     Y           *All homes have at least one bedroom
                                                                                                               on the ground floor. There will be 1
                                                                                                              three-bedroom and 1 four-bedroom
                                                                                                                 that are fully accessible with all
                                                                                                                 bedrooms on the ground floor.




                                                                                                                                        Page 38 of 98
SECTION 8: COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT TO INFORM PROJECT OUTCOMES
Jurisdictions prioritize racial equity by engaging people of color and historically marginalized communities in shaping project design and outcomes.
Please share a summary of community engagement efforts in 2024 (Figures 7 and 8). Please address:
     a. WHO was engaged
     b. HOW they were engaged
     c. WHAT themes came from the engagement, and
     d. WHAT changes were made in response to project design and/or resident services programming
If applicable, describe any partnerships used to support reaching community members.

Hillside Park
HACC and Related NW partnered with We All Rise and DDV Consulting Services on resident engagement for the Hillside Park redevelopment on
visioning, sustainability, and Resident Listening Sessions. Stakeholder interviews were held with the City of Milwaukie, Senior Citizen Council of
Clackamas County, the Latino Network, Ardenwald Johnson Creek Neighborhood Association, SE Uplift, Boys and Girls Club, Bike Milwaukie,
Clackamas County Housing Advisory Board, The Living Room, and Providence Milwaukie Hospital. Topics included resident involvement and
engagement preferences, visioning for the redevelopment, and resident feedback on community design. Four small stakeholder meetings, nine
one-on-one interviews with stakeholder groups, two focus groups, and two general public forums were conducted.

Themes from the meeting included resident concern about the change from a lower-density detached single family existing Hillside Park
community to a multifamily apartment, the importance of prioritizing mobility in the new community, providing better programming and social
events, and community resilience and emergency response. Design elements that were incorporated based on community feedback include the
provisions of a community resilience hub, enhanced accessibility and mobility features including providing two elevators in each building, and
providing clearly delineated private, outdoor and community spaces.

Park Place Redevelopment
HACC was awarded a 2040 Planning and Equitable Development Grant from Metro that was used to fund the resident and community
engagement and concept design series for the Park Place redevelopment. To ensure resident insights informed the design process, HACC formed
a Community Advisory Committee (CAC) made up of HACC residents living in the Park Place and adjacent Oregon City View Manor communities.
This committee has been actively collaborating with HACC and the design team, providing valuable feedback on the redevelopment, and
amplifying the voices of historically marginalized groups.

The Community Advisory Committee (CAC) participated in five sessions with the design team. In these meetings, the CAC offered their feedback
on the cottage cluster configuration, site design, and amenities. To ensure that all resident voices were heard, two surveys were sent out to all
Clackamas Heights residents with translations provided in Russian and Spanish for greater accessibility. The spring series wrapped up with an




                                                                                                                                        Page 39 of 98
interactive, in-person Open House, where attendees explored summary boards showcasing the project’s progress, learned about the selected
site plan, and enjoyed a guided tour of the property.

In fall of 2024, HACC presented the schematic design of Park Place to solicit resident feedback as the project design was refined. Residents
reviewed and commented in partnership with the project architect and development team on preferred floorplan layout concepts, community
amenities, and cottage cluster layouts. Feedback that informed project programming included highlighting the importance of providing in-units
washer and dryer hookups, providing dishwasher in all units, considering the demographics of seniors, families, and individuals when considering
cottage cluster layouts, and providing a variety of outdoor and indoor amenity options.

Figure 7a. WHO WAS ENGAGED: Summary of community engagement demographics
Complete this table only for community engagement activities that happened in 2024.
                                                                                      Of those reporting demographics…
                                                If yes, how   % people   % people    % older     % limited         %      % existing    % people
                                   Were
   Project or                                       many      of color   with low     adults      English     immigrant   tenants in   who have
                   Total       demographics
  engagement                                    voluntarily              incomes    (over 60)   proficiency      s and     building    experience
                participants     tracked?
     event                                       reported                                                      refugees                homelessn
                                   (Y/N)
                                              demographics?                                                                                ess

 Park Place                    Y              21              19%        100%       42%         9.5%          9.5%        100%         50%
 Community
               21
 Advisory
 Committee
 “We All Rise”                 Y              17              27.1%      100%       75%         30%           30%         90%          50%
               17
 Hillside Park


Figure 7b: COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT PARTHERSHIPS: If applicable, describe any partnerships used to support reaching community members.
Complete this table only for community engagement activities that happened in 2024.
 Project                       List culturally specific organizations that supported     List all other partners that supported engagement
                               engagement and what each partner did                      and what each partner did
 Hillside Park                 We All Rise Focus Groups and Targeted Interviews with     DDV Consulting Services- provided compassionate
                               existing residents and participants referred from program support for residents during relocation process.
                               partners.




                                                                                                                                       Page 40 of 98
Figure 8: COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT THEMES AND RESPONSE
Complete this table only for community engagement activities that happened in 2024 (add rows as needed).
 Project                       Engagement activity or event    Themes from feedback             Changes made to the project in response
                                                                                                             to the feedback
 Park Place                    Community Advisory              Importance of considering        Importance of providing individual
                               Committee (3 sessions)          family, seniors, or individual   washer/dryers, locating amenities near
                                                               needs on floor plan, cottage     family-sized units, considering noise
                                                               cluster layouts.                 impacts for units serving older residents.




SECTION 9: INITIAL APPLICATION AND LEASING OUTCOMES
For projects that are currently leasing or have completed the initial leasing process, please share any progress, lessons learned or best practices
related to application and leasing strategies. For each example, please include:
    a. The specific marketing strategies and partnerships the project used to support the lease up process
    b. How the project reduced application barriers
    c. Any challenges you faced and how you addressed them or plan to address them in the future


Good Shepherd Village
Good Shepherd Village was the first regulated affordable housing development within the city of Happy Valley, providing stable, affordable
housing in an amenity-rich area serving disadvantaged households.
The lease-up for Good Shepherd Village was completed in 2024 and is 100% occupied. Regular meetings between HACC, Catholic Charities
Resident Services, Quantum Residential, and the Caritas Housing development team have been critical to a successful leasing process. This close
collaboration between all partners has helped streamline communication and ensure that tenants, especially those exiting homelessness,
receive the support they need throughout the application process. Weekly monitoring of progress towards monthly move-in goals has helped
the team address roadblocks and keep the lease-up on track. The leasing team also established clear procedures and timelines for outreach in
order to ensure tenants receive adequate communication and time to assemble documentation, while also moving through the waitlists
efficiently.




                                                                                                                                          Page 41 of 98
Las Flores (FKA Maple)
The Las Flores project incorporated several best practices throughout the leasing and referral process, particularly in the integration of
Permanent Supportive Housing (PSH), Veterans Affairs Supportive Housing (VASH), and Project-Based Vouchers (PBV) partners. From the start,
regular collaboration between these partners was a priority. Monthly leasing kick-off meetings were held to review the Tenant Selection Plan
(TSP) criteria, building and unit phasing, lease and application materials, and referral timelines. These meetings included representatives from
the NHA, VASH, and HACC, ensuring that all three referral agencies were aligned and actively engaged in the process.

The teams worked closely together to address any file corrections needed for PSH clients and to manage pre-application appeals when a
potential denial was identified, but there was a strong likelihood of a successful appeal. As the move-in dates approached for the first building,
leasing meetings shifted to a weekly schedule, starting 60 days prior to initial move-ins. This shift ensured continued progress, particularly
around contact attempts with the waitlist and successful referrals from PBV, VASH, and PSH agencies. These weekly check-ins, along with
tracking documents showing the status of applicants, continued until all households had moved in.

In addition, site staff were responsible for completing the PBV intake paperwork, which helped streamline processing times for HACC. While this
added an additional workload for site staff and required extra management resources, increasing payroll costs, the efficiency gains were clear.
Paperwork processing through the county was faster, approvals were expedited, and delays typically associated with reasonable
accommodation requests, denials, and appeals were minimized, as management pre-screened all items according to HACC's criteria.

The biggest lesson learned was around outreach efforts for the Agricultural Workforce Housing Tax Credit. The project team worked closely with
local farms, farmers markets, and organizations like the Farmworker Housing Development Center and other service providers in Clackamas
County who serve the agricultural worker community. Regular contact with these groups helped ensure that marketing efforts were targeted
effectively, and resources reached the intended audience.

Mercy Greenbrae Apartments
Mercy Housing Management Group formed partnerships with several organizations, including Clackamas Women's Services, The
Father's Heart, Clackamas County Social Services, Northwest Housing Alternatives, Lake Oswego School District and Catholic Charities
of Oregon. Referral agreements with each of these organizations supported lease up of the 40-unit set aside for households who are
homeless or at risk of homelessness.

Marketing efforts for the 60 units set aside for households earning 60% of AMI or less were focused on both in-person meetings with
local business owners, and online marketing through Apartments.com and Zillow. Mary's Woods, a large retirement community
adjacent to the property, was also engaged several times, including at an information session with their HR staff. All marketing
materials and contact information for site staff were posted on the property's website and made available to the general public.




                                                                                                                                         Page 42 of 98
Mercy Housing Management prioritizes lowering barriers to housing applications. Tax Credit financed properties require strict and
specific application criteria. Mercy Housing Management staff both understand the process thoroughly and have extensive
experience assisting residents through it. Key strategies included:

   •   Taking application fees and deposits as pledges, allowing applications to proceed through the process.

   •   Making available translated marketing and application materials.

   •   Expanding staff hours on-site, where possible, to ensure residents could meet with staff and accommodate their schedules.

   •   Close collaborations with prospective residents and their households, employers, banks, and government agencies to procure
       all required documentation for completing the lengthy applications.

The biggest challenges faced during lease-up at Mercy Greenbrae were related to identifying households who were interested in
living in the secluded location. More outreach to local employers early in the marketing process would have been helpful in getting
ahead of this process. Another difficulty was ensuring that the many households who came to the property with referral
relationships had adequate assistance throughout the application process. Support from referring organizations was sometimes less
hands-on than needed. Mercy Housing Northwest staff provided additional support, however, more proactive involvement from
referring organizations would have been beneficial. Finally, moving through the Housing Authority's RLRA process took longer than
anticipated. Staff turnover, both within Mercy Housing and HACC, resulted in a slower and more iterative process than anticipated.
In the future, early pre-leasing and coordination between Agency and site staff will help reduce inconsistencies and streamline
reviews.




                                                                                                                          Page 43 of 98
Housing Bond Progress Report for Washington County | 2024
This progress report summarizes how local jurisdictions are carrying out their Affordable Housing Bond strategies. Each year, jurisdictions share
progress reports with Metro, which are then reviewed by the Affordable Housing Bond Community Oversight Committee. Metro staff then create
a yearly report summarizing progress across all implementing areas.

Please review and confirm the information in each figure and let us know of (including highlight) any changes.

SECTION 1: UNIT PRODUCTION AND FUNDING
This section provides a high-level overview of the Affordable Housing Bond projects and units in your jurisdiction, along with plans to leverage
SHS funding for rental assistance and/or services.

Figure 1. Production progress and resources committed


                                                                                                                                                        Construction
                                                                     Number of BOND ELIGIBLE units
                                                                                                                                                           start
                                                                                                                                        Status                            Completion
                                Metro Bond                                                                                                              (anticipated or
           Project                                             (excludes manager units and non-eligible units)                                              actual)
                                  Funds
                                                                                                                    Number of       Pre-construction,
                                                                               Family sized (2+
                                                 Total units   30% AMI units                       PSH units     occupants (as of     construction,       Month/Year       Month/Year
                                                                                    BRs)
                                                                                                                    Dec-2024)           complete

  Alongside Senior Housing      $    6,323,691      57              23                0               4                               Complete              Jul-22             Sep-23
  Cedar Rising (Aloha Family)   $   10,230,000      81              33               50               0                               Complete             Apr-22              Dec-23
      Altura (Goldcrest)        $   12,000,000      74              14               45               0                               Complete             Sep-23              Aug-24
    Heartwood Commons           $    9,283,000      54              54                0              54                               Complete             Dec-21              Mar-23
       Opal Apartments          $    6,149,000      54              28                9               0                               Complete             Jun-22              Mar-24
                                                                                                                                         In
      Plambeck Gardens          $   14,700,000      116             47               62              16                                                    Apr-23              Feb-25
                                                                                                                                    Construction
       Plaza Los Amigos         $   13,670,523      112             26               72               0                               Complete              Jul-22             Mar-24
         Terrace Glen           $   17,484,000      144             51               74               3                               Complete             Jan-21              June-23
   The Valfre at Avenida 26     $    3,792,088      36              8                30               0                               Complete             Sep-21              June-22




                                                                                                                                                               Page 44 of 98
        Viewfinder          $   11,583,000      81            34            56             28                        Complete        Jul-20             Dec-21
                                                                                                                         In
     Woodland Hearth        $    9,450,000      63            26            40             22                                        Dec-24             Apr-26
                                                                                                                    Construction
    Total committed or
                            $ 114,665,302      872           344            438            127
        underway
     LIS commitment         $118,135,532       812           333            406           100
    % of commitment
                                 97%           107%          103%          108%           127%
        complete
                                               Goal         Goal           Goal           Goal
     Remaining for LIS      $ 3,470,230
                                             Exceeded     Exceeded       Exceeded       Exceeded



SECTION 2: LOCAL IMPLEMENTATION STRATEGIES UPDATE
Please share how the development plan in your LIS is going. Please highlight any best practices, lessons learned, or
opportunities for improvement. Please address:
        a. Did you conduct any competitive selection processes in 2024? If so, what was the outcome? There was no NOFA in 2024.
        b. Do you have any projects that you feel are at risk and/or have potential funding gaps?
        c. Please describe the approach and timelines for achieving remaining unit production targets (if applicable), including any priorities for
           remaining unit production targets, such as homeownership or supportive housing.
        d. How have local jurisdictions’ policies, regulations or incentives helped or hindered development of specific bond-funded projects?


SECTION 3: PROJECT HIGHLIGHTS
This section is intended to provide a brief overview of each project in the pipeline—and some of the noteworthy features.

Please update any necessary information in the project summaries provided in 2023 (included below) and add a summary of each
new 2024 project in your portfolio, along with an image of the project. Be sure to describe:
       a. Whom the project intends to serve.
       b. Project team and partnerships
       c. Noteworthy features or highlights (e.g., community space, free wi-fi and project amenities)
       d. How projects are incorporating sustainability, climate resilience and AC/cooling strategies to keep people safe




                                                                                                                                        Page 45 of 98
       e. Anything else worth highlighting

Your 2023 report response:


                      Viewfinder - Community Development Partners &
                      Housing Authority of Washington County - 81 units -
                      Tigard
                      Population to be served: Individuals and Families; 8
                      units set-aside for Veterans
                      Leveraged Funding Sources: 4% LIHTC, SDC Exemption
                      Service Partnerships: Project Homeless Connect,
                      Cornerstone Community Housing & Veterans
                      Administration
  Completed
                      Development Team: Bremik Construction & Scott
                      Edwards Architecture
                      Project Highlights: 20 units of PSH RLRA vouchers were
                      added to the project in collaboration with the
                      Supportive Housing Services Program. Community
                      room and outdoor courtyard on second floor;
                      playground onsite. Building features art by three local
                      artists. All units have air conditioning. Building is
                      equipped with solar power.




                                                                                Page 46 of 98
Valfre at Avenida 26 – DCM Communities & Housing
Authority of Washington County - 36 units – Forest
Grove
Population to be served: Individuals and Families
Leveraged Funding Sources: 4% LIHTC, Washington
County Housing Production Opportunity Fund
Service Partnerships: Transitioning to Centro Cultural
Development Team: LMC Construction & Carleton Hart
Architecture
Project Highlights: All units have air conditioning.
Project built on previous cement mixing plant,
providing important infill development. Community
space and playground onsite.

Terrace Glen – Related NW & Housing Authority of
Washington County - 144 units – Tigard
Population to be served: Individuals and Families; 3
PSH units
Leveraged Funding Sources: 4% LIHTC, Metro Transit
Oriented Development, SDC Exemption
Service Partnerships: HomePlate Youth Services,
EngAge, & IRCO
Development Team: Walsh Construction & C2K
Architects
Project Highlights: All units have air conditioning.
Project includes 3 4-bedroom units. Community room
and playground onsite.




                                                         Page 47 of 98
Heartwood Commons – Housing Authority of
Washington County - 54 units – unincorporated
Washington County
Population to be served: Individuals – all PSH units
Leveraged Funding Sources: Housing Production
Opportunity Fund (Wa. Co.), Housing Authority of
Washington County Local Development Fund
Service Partnerships: CPAH, , Sequoia Mental Health
Development Team: GSI Builders, Inc., Ink Built
Architecture
Project Highlights: Motel conversion project.
Washington County’s first all PSH project. All units have
air conditioning. In process of starting a Phase 2 rehab
and upgrade for major systems using remainder of
Metro Affordable Housing Bonds

Cedar Rising – BRIDGE Housing - 82 units –
unincorporated Washington County
Population to be served: Individuals and Families
Leveraged Funding Sources: 4% LIHTC, Local Innovation
and Fast Track (LIFT) Funding, Metro Transit Oriented
Development funds, Washington County Housing
Production Opportunity Fund
Service Partnerships: Impact NW
Development Team: LMC Construction & Scott
Edwards Architecture
Project Highlights: Units range in size from studio to 3-
bedroom. Community room, outdoor play area, BBQs,




                                                            Page 48 of 98
and raised garden beds onsite. All units have air
conditioning.




Alongside – Northwest Housing Alternatives - 58 units
– Tigard

Population to be served: Seniors

Leveraged Funding Sources: 4% LIHTC, HOME (Wa. Co.)

Service Partnerships: Veterans Administration, SAGE
Metro Portland, DAVS Washington County

Development Team: Walsh Construction & SERA
Architects

Project Highlights: Located directly adjacent to the
Tigard Senior Center. Provides 4 units of Permanent
Supportive Housing for senior veterans. Located with
pedestrian access to Fanno Creek Trail.




                                                        Page 49 of 98
Altura– BRIDGE Housing - 75 units – Beaverton
Population to be served: Individuals and Families
Leveraged Funding Sources: 4% LIHTC, SDC Exemption,
Housing Production Opportunity Fund (Wa. Co.), City
of Beaverton
Service Partnerships: Impact NW
Development Team: Colas Construction & Salazar
Architects
Project Highlights: Located in high opportunity area
(South Cooper Mountain). Community room and                Building images © Lara Swimmer/Esto. All rights reserved.
playground onsite. All units have air conditioning.



Plaza Los Amigos - REACH CDC & Bienestar - 113 units
– Cornelius
Population to be served: Individuals and Families
Leveraged Funding Sources: 4% LIHTC, Weatherization
funds, Metro Transit Oriented Development Funds,
Wa. Co. Housing Production Opportunity Funds,
American Rescue Plan Act (ARPA) funds, Energy Trust
of Oregon, PGE.
Service Partnerships: Bienestar Promotores Program
Development Team: LMC Construction & Ankrom
Moisan Architects
Project Highlights: Solar power array onsite. Units
range in size from 1 to 3-bedrooms. Site features futsal
court, community room, community garden and
pedestrian connection to local park.



                                                                                                                 Page 50 of 98
Opal - Home First Development & Christ United
Methodist Church - 54 units – unincorporated
Washington County
Population to be served: Seniors (emphasis on
LGBTQIA+ community)
Leveraged Funding Sources: 4% LIHTC
Service Partnerships: Bienestar, SAGE, Friendly House
Development Team: Beaudin Construction & Doug
Circosta Architects
Project Highlights: Senior living targeting LGBTQ+ in
Cedar Mill walkable neighborhood.




                                                        Page 51 of 98
               Plambeck Gardens – Community Partners for
               Affordable Housing - 116 units – Tualatin
               Population to be served: Individuals and Families
               Leveraged Funding Sources: 4% LIHTC, Washington
               County Housing Production Opportunity Fund, City of
               Tualatin, HOME (Wa. Co.), ARPA,

   Under       Service Partnerships: Centro Cultural/WorkSystems,
               Community Action, Lifeworks NW, Neighborhood
Construction   Health Center
               Development Team: LMC Construction & Carleton Hart
               Architecture
               Project Highlights: Project includes 6 4-bedroom units.
               Community room onsite. Air conditioning provided in
               units.

               Woodland Hearth – Community Partners for
               Affordable Housing - 63 units – Tigard

               Population to be served: Individuals and Families

               Leveraged Funding Sources: 4% LIHTC, Metro Housing
               Bond, City of Tigard Urban Renewal funds.

               Service Partnerships: Community Action, HAKI, Native
               American Rehabilitation Association (NARA).

               Development Team: LMC Construction & Carleton Hart
               Architecture

               Project Highlights: High percentage of family sized
               units, especially 3- & 4-bedroom units; 22 PSH units.




                                                                         Page 52 of 98
                       Community room onsite. Air conditioning will be
                       provided in units.




                       Aloha 209th Development- the Housing Authority of
                       Washington County- Approximately 63 units for
                       families and individuals- Aloha (unincorporated
                       Washington County).

     Pre-    This will be the final Metro Housing Bond project in
             Washington County’s LIP jurisdiction. Metro’s Site
 Development Acquisition team acquired the property in January
                       2024 and is working with HAWC for them to develop
                       the property. The HAWC Board of Directors approved
                       the project’s predevelopment budget and partnership
                       formation on February 6, 2024.




SECTION 4: PERMANENT SUPPORTIVE HOUSING
Permanent supportive housing (PSH) is defined as: a type of housing program for people with disabilities and extremely low incomes who have
long or multiple histories of homelessness and other significant barriers to housing stability. PSH provides permanent housing, rent assistance
and intensive yet voluntary services, with no time limits.
This section confirms PSH unit commitments in your jurisdiction. Please confirm and update the information in Figure 2.




                                                                                                                                       Page 53 of 98
Figure 2. Permanent Supportive Housing Commitments
Complete and/or update this table for all bond-funded projects in your portfolio

                                                                                                                     # of PSH units using      # of PSH units using
                              Total      PSH                                       Service Partners for the
         Project                                      PSH Target Population                                           SHS funded rental            SHS funded
                              Units      Units                                            PSH Units
                                                                                                                          assistance                 services
                                      0
 Viewfinder              81           28         Veterans (8 VASH Units),       Project Homeless Connect,        20                            20
                                                 individuals, families          Cornerstone Partners, VA
 Heartwood Commons       54           54         Individuals                    CPAH, Sequoia Mental             54                            54
                                                                                Health
 Terrace Glen            144          3          Youth                          HOME Plate, IRCO                 0                             0
 Alongside               58           4          Veterans (VASH), Seniors       VA                               0                             0
 Plambeck Gardens        116          16         Families, Individuals          Centro                           0                             8
                                                                                Cultural/Worksystems,
                                                                                Community Action,
                                                                                Lifeworks NW,
 Woodland Hearth         63             22       Families, Individuals          HAKI, NAYA, Community            0
                                                                                Action




SECTION 5: CONTRACTING AND WORKFORCE OUTCOMES UPDATE
Local implementation strategies prioritize racial equity by setting contracting goals for COBID-certified firms and tracking workforce participation
in the construction of Metro bond projects. Please review and confirm the information in Figures 3 and 4 and let us know of any changes.

Figure 3. Equitable contracting goals and outcomes
                                                                                          Contracting goals                       Contracting outcome
                       Developer, General        Actual/expected construction      % of total contract amounts paid
   Project name                                                                                                            % of total contract amounts paid to…
                           contractor                     completion                              to…
                                                                                   Project goal (%   Project goal (%      Project outcome (%       Project outcome (%
                                                                                     hard costs)       soft costs)            hard costs)               soft costs)
  Alongside Senior
                           NHA/ Walsh                          Sep-23                   20%               20%                  22.9%                    25.0%
      Housing




                                                                                                                                                      Page 54 of 98
 Cedar Rising (Aloha
                                BRIDGE/ LMC                           Dec-23                       20%                20%                24.9%
      Family)
  Altura (Goldcrest)           BRIDGE/ COLAS                          Aug-24                       20%                20%                38.8%
    Heartwood
                                 HAWC/ GSI                           March-23                      20%                20%                21.6%                  76.3%
    Commons
  Opal Apartments            Home First/ Beaudin                      Mar-24                       20%                20%                19.7%
  Plambeck Gardens               CPAH/ LMC                             Oct-24                      20%                20%

  Plaza Los Amigos              REACH/ LMC                            Mar-24                       20%                20%                31.2%
    Terrace Glen             Related NW/ Walsh                        June-23                      20%                20%                31.2%
    The Valfre at
                                 DCM/ LMC                             June-22                      20%                NA                 33.1%
     Avenida 26
     Viewfinder                 CDP/ Bremik                           Dec-21                       20%                20%                21.8%                  26.0%

  Woodland Hearth                  CPAH                                Apr-26                      30%                20%

For projects that provided a minimum and maximum (or “stretch”) goal, please use the “minimum goal.”




Figure 4. Workforce diversity goals/outcomes (as applicable based on LIS and project)
                                                                                                                      Workforce goals             Workforce outcomes
                                                                                Workforce         Prevailing
   Project             Developer, General             Actual/expected           tracking?           wage          % of total labor hours*          % of total labor hours*
    name                   contractor              Construction completion                                              worked by…                       worked by…
                                                                                                  BOLI, Davis
                                                                                   Y/N                          POC        Women   Apprentices   POC    Women      Apprentices
                                                                                                  Bacon, N/A
  Alongside
    Senior                 NHA/ Walsh                      Sep-23                   Y            Davis Bacon                                     45%     4%             12%
   Housing
    Cedar
    Rising
                          BRIDGE/ LMC                      Dec-23                  N                                                             64%     0%             6%
    (Aloha
   Family)
    Altura
                         BRIDGE/ COLAS                     Aug-24                  N
 (Goldcrest)




                                                                                                                                                              Page 55 of 98
 Heartwood
                        HAWC/ GSI                       Mar-23                     N                   BOLI
  Commons
     Opal
                    Home First/ Beaudin                 Mar-24                     N             Davis Bacon
 Apartments
  Plambeck
                        CPAH/ LMC                       Feb-25                     N
   Gardens
   Plaza Los
                        REACH/ LMC                      Mar-24                      Y            Davis Bacon              55%     3%           9%
    Amigos
    Terrace
                    Related NW/ Walsh                   June-23                    N
     Glen
  The Valfre
 at Avenida             DCM/ LMC                        June-22                    N
      26
 Viewfinder             CDP/ Bremik                     Dec-21                      Y            Davis Bacon              42%     3%          18%
  Woodland
                           CPAH                         Apr-26                     N                   BOLI
   Hearth

For projects that provided a minimum and maximum (or “stretch”) goal, please use the “minimum goal.”




SECTION 6: ADVANCING EQUITY IN CONSTRUCTION
Please share progress on equitable contracting and workforce strategies in your jurisdiction. Please highlight any best practices,
lessons learned, or opportunities for improvement. Please address:
       a. Progress toward achieving equitable contracting goals
       Washington County projects met the equitable contracting goals established in the LIS and required for Metro Concept and Final
       Endorsement process. This success is a result of close collaboration between the project’s owner/developer and general contractor. To
       give one example from 2024, Plaza Los Amigos was completed in March 2024 and exceeded equitable contacting goals with 31.2% of
       project hard costs paid to COBID certified subcontractors. This goal was accomplished by the project owner/developer team,
       Bienestar/REACH and LMC Construction the General Contractor.
       b. Progress toward advancing workforce participation through workforce tracking
       The County did not set workforce tracking goals in its LIS, however, in response to the desire to at least have some workforce outcomes,
       the County asked partners on projects that triggered Davis-Bacon to provide workforce outcomes since the data on those projects is



                                                                                                                                       Page 56 of 98
       already being tracked. One project was completed in 2024 that tracked workforce participation, Plaza Los Amigos, with outcomes of 55%
       total labor hours by persons of color labor, 3% total labor hours by women, and 9% total labor hours by apprentices.
       c. Plans to expand local capacity to monitor and report on contracting and workforce outcomes
       Washington County will require workforce tracking on the two remaining projects in the Regional Affordable Housing Bond pipeline -
       Woodland Hearth and Aloha 209th Metro Site Acquisition. In addition, the County has used the Metro Housing Bond workforce tracking
       model to emulate these systems for County-wide construction procurement. The County is implementing a system-wide workforce
       tracking process, and the Metro Housing Bond projects were a key test case that resulted in lessons-learned and successes that
       encouraged County procurement to utilize these systems for all Public Works projects in the County.


Your 2023 report:
       a. Progress toward achieving equitable contracting goals

           Washington County projects have met the equitable contracting goals established in the LIS and required for Metro Concept and
           Final Endorsement process. This success was a result of close collaboration with project teams, especially the project’s general
           contractors. To give one example, Alongside was completed this fall and exceeded equitable contacting goals with 22.9% of project
           hard cost and 25% of project soft costs paid to COBID certified subcontractors. This was accomplished by the project sponsor, NHA,
           doing targeted bid requests to COBID certified firms, with personal follow up phone calls and emails to try and get as many engaged
           in the project bidding as possible. Vetting of contractor is completed to assess that they are knowledgeable of the scope of work,
           and that they can complete the project before contracting with them. In addition, Washington County as lead developer exceed
           COBID goals on hard costs for Heartwood Commons and substantially exceeded soft cost goals. This shows the commitment the
           County has to promoting workforce participation not only as a funder, but also a developer on affordable housing.

       b. Progress toward advancing workforce participation through workforce tracking

           Washington County negotiated with the final project to be funded through a NOFA, Woodland Hearth, to track workforce goals and
           outcomes in response to questions from Metro staff during the 2023 annual reporting process. The County did not set workforce
           tracking goals in its LIS, however in response to the desire to at least have some workforce outcomes, the County asked partners on
           projects that triggered Davis-Bacon to provide workforce tracking outcomes since the data on those projects is recoverable even
           after a project is completed.

       c. Plans to expand local capacity to monitor and report on contracting and workforce outcomes




                                                                                                                                    Page 57 of 98
            Washington County will require workforce tracking on the two remaining projects it’s pipeline that have not closed- Woodland
            Hearth and Aloha 209th Metro Site Acquisition. In addition, the County has used the Metro Housing Bond workforce tracking model
            to emulate these systems for County-wide construction procurement. The County is implementing a system-wide workforce tracking
            process, and the Metro Housing Bond projects were a key test case to allow for lessons-learned and successes that encouraged
            County procurement to utilize these systems for all Public Works projects in the County.


SECTION 7: ADVANCING EQUITABLE HOUSING OPPORTUNITY, ACCESS, AND STABILITY
The Affordable Housing Bond Program is guided by principles that aim to help those left behind by the region’s housing market. This includes
communities of color, families with children, people with disabilities, seniors, veterans, and those at risk of homelessness or displacement. Each
local implementation strategy outlines commitments to affirmative marketing, low-barrier lease-up, culturally responsive resident services and
housing stability to those who have experienced displacement or are at risk of displacement.

Figure 5a: Plans/partnerships for affirmative marketing
Complete this table for all bond-funded projects in your portfolio
 Project                       List all affirmative marketing partners                                          # of affirmative marketing
                                                                                                                partners that are culturally
                                                                                                                specific organizations
 Heartwood Commons             CPAH and Sequoia                                                                 2
 Cedar Rising                  Hacienda CDC, Latino Network, Centro Cultural                                    3
 Alongside                     NHA, VA, constituencies of the Coalition of Communities of Color                 3
 Opal Apartments               Friendly House                                                                   1
 Plaza Los Amigos              Bienestar, Centro Cultural, Community Action Agency, Open Door, Virginia         3
                               Garcia
 Plambeck Gardens              Unite Oregon, Native American Rehabilitation Association (NARA), Centro          4
                               Cultural/WorkSystems, Community Action
 Terrace Glen                  IRCO, HomePlate                                                                  2
 Altura (Goldcrest)            Hacienda CDC, Latino Network, Centro Cultural                                    3
 The Valfre at Avienda 26      Bienestar, Sequoia Mental Health                                                 1
 Viewfinder                    VA, Hacienda CDC, NAYA, El Programa Hispano Catolico, Urban League of            7
                               Portland, Asian Health & Service Center, IRCO Asian Family Center, Impact
                               NW, Oregon Outreach
 Woodland Hearth               HAKI, NARA, Community Action                                                     2



                                                                                                                                         Page 58 of 98
Figure 5b: Plans/partnerships for culturally responsive services
Complete this table for all bond-funded projects in your portfolio
 Project                       List all partners and the culturally responsive services they will provide      # of service partners that are
                                                                                                               culturally specific organizations
 Heartwood Commons            CPAH – residents services via a contract with Washington County SHS              2
                              division includes outreach, engagement, intake and assessment; Sequoia –
                              PSH wrap around services via contract with Washington County SHS division
 Cedar Rising                 Impact NW – homelessness prevention agency that also provides adult              1
                              education, services coordination, case management, outreach and
                              engagement
 Alongside                    Tigard Senior Center – senior activities located adjacent to Alongside, Meals    4
                              on Wheels – senior meals, VA – veterans supportive services, NHA – Senior
                              services/programs
 Opal Apartments              Friendly House/SAGE - case management and outreach services to LGBTQ+            1
                              seniors
 Plaza Los Amigos             Bienestar Promotores program                                                     1
 Plambeck Gardens             Centro Cultural/WorkSystems – employment related services, NARA – health         4
                              and wellness activities for American Indians and Alaska Natives,
                              Neighborhood Health Center -youth health services, Community Action –
                              PSH services, Lifeworks NW – direct referral connection if there are residents
                              who need or are interested in behavioral health services
 Terrace Glen                 HomePlate – services for homeless young adults aged 18-24 for 3 PSH units,       3
                              EngAGE – economic stability, promoting health lifestyles, enriched art
                              programs for seniors and multigenerational households
                              IRCO – serves communities of color; provides services to immigrants and
                              refugees and conducts occasional events
 Altura (Goldcrest)           Impact NW – homelessness prevention agency that also provides adult              1
                              education, services coordination, case management, outreach and
                              engagement
 The Valfre at Avienda 26     In process of transitioning to Centro Cultural as the general services partner   1
 Viewfinder                   Project Homeless Connect – intensive case management services for 20 PSH         2
                              households; Cornerstone Community Housing – comprehensive resident
                              services, VA - veterans supportive services for 8 VASH units



                                                                                                                                       Page 59 of 98
 Woodland Hearth                Native American Rehabilitation Association (NARA), Humanity Assistance       3
                                Kindness Intercultural Community Services (HAKI), Community Action


Figure 5c: Priority population checklist NEW
Complete this table for all bond-funded projects in your portfolio
 Project                                Includes designated units for (Y/N):                     Includes service partnerships with culturally
                        Seniors/older    Multi-generation       Veterans       N/NE Preference           specific organizations (Y/N)
                           adults          households                              Policy
 Heartwood          N                   N                   N
 Commons
 Cedar Rising       N                   N                   N
 Alongside          Y                   N                   Y                                    Y
 Opal               Y                   N                   N                                    Y
 Apartments
 Plaza Los          N                   N                   N
 Amigos
 Plambeck           N                   N                   N
 Gardens
 Terrace Glen       N                   N                   N
 Altura             N                   N                   N
 (Goldcrest)
 The Valfre at      N                   N                   N
 Avienda 26
 Viewfinder         N                   N                   Y                                    Y
 Woodland           N                   N                   N
 Hearth

Figure 6. Physical accessibility features
Complete this table for all bond-funded projects in your portfolio
                                                     Number of       Number of      Universal        Other accessibility features (optional)
                 Project name                       ground floor     ADA (Type       design
                                                       units          A) units       (Y/N)




                                                                                                                                       Page 60 of 98
 Heartwood Commons                                14                 2             N              Increasing number of ADA units with the Phase 2
                                                                                                  renovations.
 Cedar Rising                                     15                 2             N
 Alongside                                        10                 5             Y              All units have ADA dimensions, FF&E and
                                                                                                  parameters although all but five units have
                                                                                                  standard kitchen dimensions to provide more
                                                                                                  storage
 Opal Apartments                                  0                  3             Y
 Plaza Los Amigos                                 6                  6             Y
 Plambeck Gardens                                 26                 6             Y
 Terrace Glen                                     31                 8             Y
 Altura (Goldcrest)                               15                 2             N
 The Valfre at Avienda 26                         17                 2             N
 Viewfinder                                       3                  5             Y
 Woodland Hearth                                  11                 5             Y



SECTION 8: COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT TO INFORM PROJECT OUTCOMES
Jurisdictions prioritize racial equity by engaging people of color and historically marginalized communities in shaping project design and outcomes.

Please share a summary of community engagement efforts in 2024 (Figures 7 and 8). Please address:
     a. WHO was engaged
     b. WHAT activities were done
     c. WHAT themes came from the engagement, and
     d. WHAT changes were made in response to project design and/or resident services programming
If applicable, describe any partnerships used to support reaching community members.

Figure 7a: Community engagement partnerships NEW
Complete this table only for community engagement activities that happened in 2024 (add rows as needed). No projects conducted engagement
activities in 2024.
 Project                       List culturally specific organizations that supported   List all other partners that supported engagement
                               engagement and what each partner did                    and what each partner did




                                                                                                                                         Page 61 of 98
Figure 7b. WHO WAS ENGAGED: Summary of community engagement demographics
Complete this table only for community engagement activities that happened in 2024 (add rows as needed). NA
                                                                                          Of those reporting demographics…
                                                 If yes, how     % people   % people    % older     % limited         %      % existing    % people
                                    Were
   Project or                                        many        of color   with low     adults      English     immigrant   tenants in   who have
                    Total       demographics
  engagement                                     voluntarily                incomes    (over 60)   proficiency      s and     building    experience
                 participants     tracked?
     event                                        reported                                                        refugees                homelessn
                                    (Y/N)
                                               demographics?                                                                                  ess




Figure 8: Community engagement themes and response (add rows as needed)
Complete this table only for community engagement activities that happened in 2024 (add rows as needed). NA
 Project                       Engagement activity or event    Themes from feedback             Changes made to the project in response
                                                                                                to the feedback




SECTION 9: INITIAL APPLICATION AND LEASING OUTCOMES
For projects that are currently leasing or have completed the initial leasing process, please share any progress, lessons learned or best practices
related to application and leasing strategies. For each example, please include:



                                                                                                                                          Page 62 of 98
   a. The specific marketing strategies and partnerships the project used to support the lease up process
   b. How the project reduced application barriers
   c. Any challenges you faced and how you addressed them or plan to address them in the future


VIEWFINDER/COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT PARTNERS
Viewfinder completed its initial lease-up in spring 2022, and the property at that time included a different set of preferences based
on the partnership with Good Neighbor Center at that time. The introduction of the formal PSH program through Washington
County in 2024 streamlined the referral process for PSH households through use of the Community Connect coordinated access
system. A substantial part of reduction in barriers came through the County’s structuring of SHS services, requiring SHS services
partners to be involved from the beginning of the application process. The consistency of having one contact for both property
management and referring entities is helpful for cutting down on communication and coordination time, and getting households
into housing at a faster pace.

PLAZA LOS AMIGOS/BIENESTAR
   a.      The specific marketing strategies and partnerships the project used to support the lease up process

   Bienestar informed us that they were pleased with the partnership with Centro Cultural and Open Door because they were able
   to house many of their people who were living in shelters. Because they engaged with these groups at such an early stage, they
   were able to give vital information on what the requirements were going to be for their folks. Centro’s sent a representative to
   join weekly lease-up meetings. Finally, after listening to partners, they made sure to hold “application opening” on a day that fit
   community and time.

   b.      How the project reduced application barriers

   Credit was not a factor. Bienestar allows pets, only major crimes were a factor of denial, no application fee was applied to clients
   and Centro and Bienestar helped with first month’s rent and/or security deposit.


PLAMBECK GARDENS


                                                                                                                             Page 63 of 98
a.     The specific marketing strategies and partnerships the project used to support the lease up process

CPAH's outreach, marketing, and lease-up processes intentionally reach into communities of color. CPAH has existing partnerships
with UniteOregon, Momentum Alliance, the Immigrant and Refugee Community Organization, Islamic Social Service, and the Native
American Rehabilitation Association, NW. CPAH is working with its property management company to reach out to those agencies
and ensure that they have access to applications for this community. CPAH’s Executive Director, Rachael Duke, meets regularly with
many culturally specific agencies related to equitable development planning along the SW Corridor. Plambeck Gardens residents will
have access to the terminus of the SW Light Rail, and those partners are updated on current lease-up information. Additionally, part
of CPAH’s partnership with UniteOregon is focused on outreach to the Tualatin community so that the organization can penetrate
more deeply into communities of color who live in the area already. CPAH’s partnership with Centro Cultural will assist us in
marketing to their clients who may need housing.

b.     How the project reduced application barriers

CPAH is working with Community Action to fill the 16 permanent supportive housing units. CPAH continues to use low-barrier
criteria for these supported units. This reduces or eliminates the impact of rental history and credit, along with crimes connected to
homelessness and low-level crimes that are not against other people and that do not impact the safety of other residents. We are
comfortable with this because households will be connected to Community Action and other service providers.

For those households who are not in permanent supportive housing, CPAH is still providing relaxation around screening criteria,
especially regarding credit, rental, and legal histories that do not involve crimes against people. CPAH is also working with our
property management company to ensure that if someone is denied, they can go through a hearings process. Past crimes that
involve violence, and the manufacturing and distribution of drugs, as well as arson, are a reason for denial; these are crimes that
have a high impact on other residents. Again, all denied applicants have access to a hearing, although some applicants who commit
crimes that are prohibited by statute will not be successful applicants.

CPAH is marketing Plambeck Gardens to communities of color through outreach to agencies CPAH already works with, as well as
new partners, and through additional outreach contracted to UniteOregon; CPAH is using low-barrier screening criteria, CPAH will
review the appeals of denials and will ensure that reasonable accommodation is a priority for those denials that are related to a




                                                                                                                            Page 64 of 98
disability. CPAH has some bilingual staff and can ensure that all language needs are addressed either by our staff or by community
partners. While CPAH is working with agencies throughout Washington County, our on-the-ground outreach is focused on those who
live in the community.

c.       Any challenges you faced and how you addressed them or plan to address them in the future

Currently in the pre-leasing phase.




Your 2023 report:
   •      Make sure public information on office hours and location is complete and up-to-date. Specifically, some referrals were not aware
          that project’s leasing offices were typically open on weekends.
   •      Work with referral organizations to make sure they understand LIHTC related tenant requirements and help educate them if not.
          Repeat this step as needed when new staff from outreach organizations get involved.
   •      Support leasing staff in creating processes to ensure prospects are quickly contacted regardless of referral source (e.g., email, phone,
          text, walk-in, website).
   •      The level of interest from some referral sources is hyper location specific. By conducting outreach to a wide group of organizations,
          project teams have been able to successfully reach a diverse tenant population despite lower interest from certain groups.

Terrace Glen
 Race/Ethnicity                                Number of Residents     Percent
 Hispanic                                      33                      23%
 White, Non-Hispanic                           63                      43%
 Black or African American                     18                      12%
 American Indian or Alaska Na�ve               8                       6%
 Asian                                         17                      12%
 Na�ve Hawaiian or Other Paciﬁc Islander       6                       4%
 Total                                                                 100%




                                                                                                                                      Page 65 of 98
Referral sources included: IRCO, HomePlate, HAWC, Family Promise of Tuala�n Valley, SAACO, Refugee Care Collec�ve, Transi�on Projects,
Resident Referrals, Portland Public Schools, Impact Northwest, Family Resource Navigator, Community Vision, and Catholic Chari�es.




                                                                                                                                 Page 66 of 98
Housing Bond Progress Report for City of Beaverton | 2024
This progress report summarizes how local jurisdictions are carrying out their Affordable Housing Bond strategies. Each year, jurisdictions share
progress reports with Metro, which are then reviewed by the Affordable Housing Bond Community Oversight Committee. Metro staff then create
a yearly report summarizing progress across all implementing areas.

Please review and confirm the information in each figure and let us know of (including highlight) any changes.

SECTION 1: UNIT PRODUCTION AND FUNDING
This section provides a high-level overview of the affordable housing bond projects and units in your jurisdiction

Figure 1. Production progress and resources committed
                                                                                                                                                       Construction
                                                                   Number of BOND ELIGIBLE units
                                                                                                                                                          start
                                                                                                                                       Status                             Completion
                              Metro Bond
                                                                                                                                                       (anticipated or
         Project            Funds (excludes                   (excludes manager units and non-eligible units)                                              actual)
                             SAP funding)
                                                                                                                   Number of       Pre-construction,
                                                                               Family sized (2+
                                                Total units   30% AMI units                        PSH units    occupants (as of     construction,       Month/Year        Month/Year
                                                                                    BRs)
                                                                                                                   Dec-2024)           complete



  Amity Orchards (Scholls
                            $     9,000,000        135             17                79               0                            Construction            Jul-22           May-25
    Ferry Apartments)


     Elmonica Station       $     8,888,934        81              33                33               0                            Construction           Jan-25            Jun-26

        Mary Ann            $     3,000,000        54              11                29               0              117             Complete             Jun-20            Sep-21

                                                                                                                                       Pre-
       Meadowlark           $    10,500,000        104             68                 0               30                                                  Aug-25            Dec-26
                                                                                                                                   construction

   Total committed or
                            $    31,388,934        374            129               141
       underway
     LIS commitment         $ 31,587,595          218             89                109




                                                                                                                                                          Page 67 of 98
    % of commitment
                                99%              171%          137%           129%
        complete
                                                Goal           Goal          Goal
    Remaining for LIS       $     198,661
                                              Exceeded       Exceeded      Exceeded



SECTION 2: LOCAL IMPLEMENTATION STRATEGIES UPDATE
Please share how the development plan in your LIS is going. Please highlight any best practices, lessons learned, or opportunities
for improvement. Please address:
       a. Did you conduct any competitive selection processes in 2024? If so, what was the outcome?
       b. Do you have any projects that you feel are at risk and/or have potential funding gaps?
       c. Please describe the approach and timelines for achieving remaining unit production targets (if applicable), including any
            priorities for remaining unit production targets, such as homeownership or supportive housing.
       d. How have local jurisdictions’ policies, regulations or incentives helped or hindered development of specific bond-funded projects?
       Last year we completed the project solicitation process with the selection of Community Partners for Affordable Housing (CPAH) for the
       city’s senior housing project. All projects are either complete (The Mary Ann), in construction (Amity Orchards, Elmonica), or in
       predevelopment (Meadowlark – senior housing). For multiple reasons, it took four years for Elmonica to break ground, and with
       additional city and state funding REACH was able to close the funding gap and begin construction. The Meadowlark project is mixed-use
       with ground floor commercial. The commercial space will be occupied by Community Action of Oregon for their Head Start program.
       Through the city’s lobbying efforts at the federal level, we were able to secure a $3 million appropriation for the commercial space
       improvements. Congress was expected to vote on their budget earlier this year, unfortunately that vote has been held up and expected
       to happen this spring. We hope the $3 million appropriation remains in the budget when that happens. CPAH is ready to submit their
       funding request once Oregon Housing and Community Services releases their Notice of Funding Availability. Once successful, the goal is
       for the project to be fully funded by this summer.
       The city continues to partner with Unite Oregon for community engagement efforts for project and unit leasing feedback.

SECTION 3: PROJECT HIGHLIGHTS
This section is intended to provide a brief overview of each project in the pipeline—and some of the noteworthy features.

Please update any information in the project summaries provided in 2023 (below) and add a summary of each new project in your
portfolio, along with an image of the project. Be sure to describe:




                                                                                                                                   Page 68 of 98
       a.   Whom the project intends to serve.
       b.   Project team and partnerships
       c.   Noteworthy features or highlights (e.g., community space, free wi-fi and project amenities)
       d.   How projects are incorporating sustainability, climate resilience and AC/cooling strategies to keep people safe
       e.   Anything else worth highlighting

The Mary Ann was completed and opened to the public in fall of 2021, and it serves very low-income families with children with
incomes at or below 60% of the (AMI) with 20% of the homes set aside for households at or below 30% AMI. Onsite programs and
services to residents are provided through a partnership with Bienestar. As part of their work, Bienestar provides culturally specific,
bilingual services to the Latinx and low-income community of Washington County. The building is owned and managed by REACH.

The Mary Ann features 39 parking spaces, bike racks in the garage and wall hung bike racks in the apartments, laundry facilities, and
a community room that opens to a large courtyard. The Mary Ann’s community room is available at no cost to community members.
The city has used this facility for community engagement purposes. Residents also benefit from proximity to transit options like the
MAX light rail and WES community rail, multiple shopping opportunities, grocery stores, Beaverton City Library, post office,
restaurants, services, parks, and across the street from Beaverton High School. The nearby Beaverton High School is going through a
2- year major remodel. Although construction activities at the high school have a livable impact on The Mary Ann residents, kids
living in the apartments will greatly benefit, enjoying top of the line facilities once renovations are complete.




                                                                                                                              Page 69 of 98
Amity Orchards began construction in summer of 2022. Shortly after beginning construction the project experienced a
$10million funding gap associated with higher interest rates, labor costs, and higher than expected infrastructure costs.
Nonetheless, construction continued as Wishcamper Development Partners (WDP) sought ways in which to bridge the gap.
Eventually, WDP was able to fill the gap through OHCS and investor funding. Amity Orchards is made up of three buildings, one
of which is set aside for seniors. One of the buildings has began leasing through Guardian, WDP’s property management
partner. The second building is expected to be completed in March 2025, and the third building expected to be completed in
May 2025. WDP contracted with Unite Oregon to assist in outreach and education as they prepared for lease up.




Elmonica: On June 1, 2021, City of Beaverton Council approved the selection of REACH CDC as the developer for the Elmonica project and
requested Metro provide concept approval of the project. Metro provided such approval on December 16, 2021. Finally, on January 2025
REACH was able to break ground and begin construction. The selected proposal is an 81-unit mix of studio, one-bedroom, two-bedroom,
and three-bedroom units. The design is done in a way to promote multi-generational living with the studio units next to the three-
bedroom units. The nearby amenities for Elmonica include:
   • Public schools serving the site include Beaver Acres Elementary School, 5 Oaks Middle School, and Aloha High School.
   • Parks such as the Waterhouse Powerline Park, Parr Park, Tualatin Hills Park, Vendla Park, and Tualatin Hills Nature Park with the
       immediate vicinity.
   • The site is centrally located with multiple and diverse grocery stores within less than 2 miles.



                                                                                                                            Page 70 of 98
   •    Major employers in the general surrounding area include Nike, Intel, Tektronix, Cascade Microtech, Columbia Sportswear,
        Providence St. Vincent Hospital, and other high-tech companies.
    • The site is located less than 1,000ft from the Elmonica light rail station. The nearby bus routes include the #67 on 158th, #59 on
        Walker, and #52 on 185th.
Colas Construction (COLAS), the largest Black-owned construction firm in the Northwest, is the general contractor selected for this
project. As is the case with The Mary Ann, Bienestar will support outreach, marketing, lease-up, and deliver programing to the project. The
building will utilize trauma-informed and universal design standards including accessible Type A units, hearing impaired units, multi-
lingual signage, and maximize natural light in common spaces.

There were multiple challenges to getting to break ground on the project:
   • The site’s location required permit approval from the city of Beaverton and Washington county.
   • The property is located at the corner of SW Baseline and 170th, due to its dimensions access to the property is challenging.
   • REACH purchased the undeveloped adjacent property, which in turn sold to a private developer. The idea was to leverage both
       sites for the benefit of access to the property. The private developer began construction in the summer 2024.
   • PGE electric poles being installed in the right of way without proper notification have required the project to be redesigned
   • Multiple project redesigns were needed to accommodate the partnership with the private developer and county/city
       permitting/zoning requirements.
   • These delays led to a funding gap which was covered by OHCS, Washington County HOME funds and City of Beaverton American
       Rescue Plan Act (ARPA) funds.




                                                                                                                                Page 71 of 98
Meadowlark (Senior Housing on 5 th ): Meadowlark is strategically located in a central, high amenity area. Owned by the city,
the Beaverton community center, the proposed site for Meadowlark, is 1.37 acres and located at the southeast corner of SW
Hall Boulevard and SW 5th street, across the street from Beaverton city park. it is a block south of the Beaverton city library
and approximately four blocks north of the Elsie Stuhr Community Center (senior center). The Beaverton farmer’s market is
two blocks north and old town commercial businesses are a few blocks away.
The site is directly served with high-frequency bus service including bus route 76 with a stop immediately adjacent on SW 5th
street. The site is within a half mile walk of two non-high frequency bus routes, 88 and 78. All these bus routes go to the
Beaverton Transit Center, less than a mile away, where riders may transfer to MAX and WES light rail lines. The site is zoned
regional center-old town (RC-BC) which is intended to provide a mix of housing, jobs, and services at a scale that acknowledges
and complements historic development patterns.
On May 5, 2023, CPAH was the selected developer, their proposal includes 104 units, 68 of which will be restricted at 30% AMI
or below, and 30 of which will be designated as PSH units geared for chronically homeless seniors (see table below). CPAH’s
partnerships for outreach, leasing assistance, resident services, and wrap-around services include Bienestar, Native American
Rehabilitation Association Northwest (NARA NW), and the Urban League.
 Unit size (no. of bedrooms)   No. of units    AMI %      PSH     PBV    Square feet/unit      Gross monthly rent/unit
 1-bedroom                              36      60%                                                            $1,198
 1-bedroom                              60      30%         22     19                                             599
 Studio                                   8     30%          8                                                    559
 Total                                 104                  30     19


Meadowlark is a mixed-used project, with the ground floor commercial space being utilized by Community Action of Oregon’s
Head Start program. The need for an educational day care facility for children is so high that the city lobbied successfully
federal elected officials for a direct $3milion appropriation from Congress for the Head Start space. With the change in the
administration, the Congressional budget approval has been delayed to later this spring. It is the city’s hope that the budget is
approved with the requested $3million. If we are unsuccessful, CPAH and Community Action will have to identify other funding
sources.
CPAH has started its permitting process by submitting a complete application to the city. CPAH will be ready to submit a very
competitive and complete application once OHCS opens its Notice of Funds Availability. The project is in line to begin
construction in the fall of 2025.



                                                                                                                         Page 72 of 98
Page 73 of 98
SECTION 4: PERMANENT SUPPORTIVE HOUSING
Permanent supportive housing (PSH) is defined as: a type of housing program for people with disabilities and extremely low incomes who have
long or multiple histories of homelessness and other significant barriers to housing stability. PSH provides permanent housing, rent assistance
and intensive yet voluntary services, with no time limits.
This section confirms PSH unit commitments in your jurisdiction. Please confirm and update the information in Figure 2.

Figure 2: Permanent supportive housing commitments
Complete and/or update this table for all bond-funded projects in your portfolio
 Project             Total units           PSH units          PSH target              Service partners     # of PSH units using   # of PSH units
                                                              population              for the PSH units    SHS funded rental      using SHS funded
                                                                                                           assistance             services
 Senior housing on 5th   104               30                   Seniors 55+           Nara, Bienestar
 (Meadowlark)


While the city did not commit to creating Permanent Supportive Housing (PSH) units through the Metro Bond Program, staff made
every attempt to promote them in our solicitation process. That attempt proved to be successful with Meadowlark as CPAH’s proposal
includes 30 designated PSH units. The final unit make up will depend on OCHS funding.




SECTION 5: CONTRACTING AND WORKFORCE OUTCOMES UPDATE
Local implementation strategies prioritize racial equity by setting contracting goals for COBID-certified firms and tracking workforce participation
in the construction of Metro bond projects. Please review and confirm the information in Figures 3 and 4 and let us know of any changes.



                                                                                                                                          Page 74 of 98
Figure 3. Equitable contracting goals and outcomes

                                                                                                    Contracting goals                               Contracting outcome

                        Developer, General            Actual/expected construction
  Project name                                                                             % of total contract amounts paid to…               % of total contract amounts paid to…
                            contractor                         completion
                                                                                             Project goal (%         Project goal (%      Project outcome (%      Project outcome (%
                                                                                               hard costs)             soft costs)            hard costs)              soft costs)


 Amity Orchards
  (Scholls Ferry         Wishcamper/COLAS                          May-25                         20%                     20%                       TBD                  TBD
  Apartments)

     Elmonica
                         REACH CDC/COLAS                           Jun-26                         30%                     30%                       TBD                  TBD
      Station
  The Mary Ann              REACH/Walsh                            Sep-21                         20%                     20%                     27.5%                 22.6%
   Meadowlark
                      CPAH/LMC Construction –
 (Senior Housing                                                   Dec-26                         30%                     30%                      TBD                   TBD
                       ALMAR Impact Builders
     on 5th)

For projects that provided a minimum and maximum (or “stretch”) goal, please use the “minimum goal.”

Figure 4. Workforce diversity goals/outcomes (as applicable based on LIS and project)
                                                                                                                 Workforce goals                   Workforce outcomes
                                                                         Workforce        Prevailing
                                                 Actual/expected
    Project          Developer, General                                  tracking?          wage               % of total labor hours*             % of total labor hours*
                                                  Construction
     name                contractor                completion                                                        worked by…                          worked by…
                                                                                          BOLI, Davis
                                                                             Y/N                           POC       Women      Apprentices      POC      Women    Apprentices
                                                                                          Bacon, N/A
      Amity
    Orchards
                      Wishcamper/COLAS                May-25                  Y
  (Scholls Ferry
  Apartments)
    Elmonica
                      REACH CDC/COLAS                 Jun-26                  y          Davis Bacon
     Station
 The Mary Ann            REACH/Walsh                  Sep-21                  Y                                                                  38%       2%         12%




                                                                                                                                                                         Page 75 of 98
  Meadowlark
    (Senior                                                                                  Davis
                             CPAH                     Dec-26                  Y
  Housing on                                                                              Bacon/BOLI
      5th)

For projects that provided a minimum and maximum (or “stretch”) goal, please use the “minimum goal.”



SECTION 6: ADVANCING EQUITY IN CONSTRUCTION
Please share progress on equitable contracting and workforce strategies in your jurisdiction. Please highlight any best practices,
lessons learned, or opportunities for improvement. Please address:
       a. Progress toward achieving equitable contracting goals
       b. Progress toward advancing workforce participation through workforce tracking
       c. Plans to expand local capacity to monitor and report on contracting and workforce outcomes

The city strives to have a workforce which represents the racial and ethnic makeup of the community it serves and as stewards of the Metro
Affordable Housing Bond, we continue to further this work through ongoing outreach efforts with community partners and the
MWESBDV/COBID community. The city is a member of LatinoBuilt, Professional Development Business Group (PDBG), and OAME. These
partnerships strengthen the city’s relationships with developers, general contractors, subcontractors, and suppliers. Additionally, these
relationships assist the city in addressing identified challenges in the earlier project phase, such as outreach fatigue/trust issues with
government entities, casual meet and greets that don’t result in meaningful connections, and a lack of knowledge about the city’s commitment
to MWESB hiring. After each project award, the successful developer is asked to attend a trade association event with their general contractor to
discuss their project schedule with perspective subcontractors.

While the city did not commit to a specific workforce or apprentice performance, we do want to track this data as it will inform capacity and
areas of employment and contracting opportunities. To that end, the city tracks the demographics and hours worked by each apprentice and
combines that with labor hours to express the percentage of apprenticeship hours on each project. Reports produced from the Mary Ann show
that 11.88% of hours spent on the project were apprentice hours. We will be tracking this information on all housing projects.

Lastly, the city continues to develop and implement a web-based software COBID tracking system. This MWESB database stores progress at all
phases of construction to facilitate ongoing communication between the city, developer, and general contractor. The information captured on
each project includes the estimate and actual costs of professional services, suppliers, and subcontractors, in addition to labor and
apprenticeship hours spent on each site. The labor and apprenticeship hours include race and ethnicity, gender, and the specific trade of each
employee. These reports provide insight into where the project stands in real time with MWESB percentages and promotes our ability to
successfully implement equitable contracting goals and strategies in listed in our LIS.



                                                                                                                                     Page 76 of 98
SECTION 7: ADVANCING EQUITABLE HOUSING OPPORTUNITY, ACCESS, AND STABILITY
The Affordable Housing Bond Program is guided by principles that aim to help those left behind by the region’s housing market. This includes
communities of color, families with children, people with disabilities, seniors, veterans, and those at risk of homelessness or displacement. Each
local implementation strategy outlines commitments to affirmative marketing, low-barrier lease-up, culturally responsive resident services and
housing stability to those who have experienced displacement or are at risk of displacement.

Figure 5a: Plans/partnerships for affirmative marketing
Complete this table for all bond-funded projects in your portfolio
 Project                       List all affirmative marketing partners                                            # of affirmative marketing
                                                                                                                  partners that are culturally
                                                                                                                  specific organizations
 Amity Orchards                Guardian, Unite Oregon                                                             1
 Elmonica Station              Bienestar                                                                          1
 The Mary Ann                  Bienestar                                                                          1
 Meadowlark (Senior            Bienestar, NARA, Urban League                                                      3
 Housing on 5th)



Figure 5b: Plans/partnerships for culturally responsive services
Complete this table for all bond-funded projects in your portfolio
 Project                       List all partners and the culturally responsive services they will provide         # of service partners that are
                                                                                                                  culturally specific organizations
                               Guardian Property Management – Some key culturally responsive services             1
                               they offer include multilingual support, culturally sensitive tenant assistance,
                               and partnerships with social services and nonprofits. They promote inclusive
                               property management by ensuring compliance with fair housing laws and
                               preventing discrimination. Their focus also includes providing accessible
 Amity Orchards
                               housing, diverse hiring practices, and training staff to work with diverse
                               populations.

                               Unite Oregon - offers a wide range of services for immigrants, refugees, and
                               marginalized communities, including immigration legal assistance and




                                                                                                                                          Page 77 of 98
                         multilingual support to ensure access to rights. They provide leadership
                         programs, civic engagement, job training, financial literacy, and affordable
                         housing advocacy. Additionally, they promote health equity, mental health
                         support, and healthcare navigation.

                         Bienestar – culturally responsive services to low-income Latinx families and   1
                         other underserved communities including affordable housing, resident
Elmonica Station         services and empowerment, health & wellness programs, youth & family
                         services, economic empowerment and community building and leadership
                         development
                         Bienestar - culturally responsive services to low-income Latinx families and   1
                         other underserved communities including affordable housing, resident
The Mary Ann – project
                         services and empowerment, health & wellness programs, youth & family
complete
                         services, economic empowerment and community building and leadership
                         development
                         Bienestar - culturally responsive services to low-income Latinx families and   3
                         other underserved communities including affordable housing, resident
                         services and empowerment, health & wellness programs, youth & family
                         services, economic empowerment and community building and leadership
                         development

                         Native American Rehabilitation Association (NARA) - provides culturally
                         responsive services to Native Americans, Alaska Natives, and other
                         underserved populations. Thye promote the physical, mental, and spiritual
 Senior Housing on 5th
                         health of Native people while recognizing the unique cultural and historical
(Meadowlark)
                         experiences of these communities. Key culturally responsive services they
                         provide include healthcare, mental health, and social services including
                         housing case management and community and cultural activities.

                         Urban League – provides a range of culturally responsive Services aimed at
                         empowering African Americans and other underserved communities. Their
                         services are varied, but specific to this project include senior services
                         including Elders in Action- social activities/health education, Care
                         Coordination – access to housing and healthcare, and Intergenerational




                                                                                                            Page 78 of 98
                                      Programs – creating opportunities for seniors to engage with youth to share
                                      cultural knowledge and foster community connections.

                                      Community Action Organization is a major service provider at the county,
                                      proving rent assistance, home repair, early childhood education, among
                                      many other services. Community Action will be running their Head Start
                                      program at the site.


Figure 5c: Priority population checklist
Complete this table for all bond-funded projects in your portfolio
 Project                                 Includes designated units for (Y/N):                           Includes service partnerships with culturally
                       Seniors/older adults           Multi-generation                Veterans                  specific organizations (Y/N)
                                                        households
 Amity Orchards        Seniors/Families           N                          N                         Y – Unite Oregon
 Elmonica              Families                   Y                          N                         Y – Bienestar
 Station
 The Mary Ann          Families                   N                          N                         Y – Bienestar
 Meadowlark            Seniors                    N                          N                         Y – Bienestar
 (Senior Housing                                                                                       Native American Rehabilitation Association
 on 5th)                                                                                               Urban League



Figure 6. Physical accessibility features
Complete this table for all bond-funded projects in your portfolio
                                                                                 Universal              Other accessibility features (optional)
                                      Number of ground     Number of ADA
       Project name                                                               design
                                         floor units        (Type A) units
                                                                                  (Y/N)
 Amity Orchards                   None                                       Y
 Elmonica Station                 None                                       Y
 The Mary Ann                     4                                          Y
 Senior Housing on 5th
                                  12                                         Y
 (Meadowlark)




                                                                                                                                                  Page 79 of 98
SECTION 8: COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT TO INFORM PROJECT OUTCOMES
Jurisdictions prioritize racial equity by engaging people of color and historically marginalized communities in shaping project design and outcomes.

Please share a summary of community engagement efforts in 2024 (Figures 7 and 8). Please address:
    a) WHO was engaged
    b) HOW they were engaged
    c) WHAT themes came from the engagement, and
    d) WHAT changes were made in response to project design and/or resident services programming

Jurisdictions are committed to prioritizing racial equity by involving people of color and historically marginalized communities
in shaping project design and outcomes. This section highlights the community engagement efforts that have played a critical
role in informing the development of various projects in 2024.

Guardian Leasing Company, working on behalf of Amity Orchards Apartments, held several community engagement events,
including two focus groups focused on resident services. These sessions provided valuable insights for Guardian to better
understand the needs of future tenants for a comfortable living experience. Some suggestions have already informed the hiring
of a resident services manager, while others will be addressed as the new staff settles in. The other events focused on the Amity
Orchards application process and details regarding these sessions can be found below in Section 9: INITIAL APPLICAION AND
LEASING OUTCOMES of this report. The * indicate that although the numbers were not tracked per se please note that Unite
Oregon focusses recruitment on BIPOC and under-represented communities. Since there were interpreters for 4 different
languages, I am confident that the % are accurate.

For Elmonica Station, community engagement efforts were largely documented in the previous year, as the project closed in
December. However, the developer has continued to provide progress updates to the community.

For the Senior Housing Project, most of the outreach took place last year during the initial site development phase. This year’s
efforts focused on providing updates to community members and gathering input on specific aspects of the project that may
impact neighboring buildings or organizations.




                                                                                                                                        Page 80 of 98
Although each project is at a different stage of development, they all share a commitment to conducting due diligence by
continuously gathering community feedback and engaging the community in every aspect of the process.




Figure 7a. WHO WAS ENGAGED: Summary of community engagement demographics
Complete this table only for community engagement activities that happened in 2024 (add rows as needed)
                                                                                        Of those reporting demographics…
                                                If yes, how   % people   % people    % older     % limited         %       % existing    % people
                                   Were
   Project or                                       many      of color   with low     adults      English     immigrant    tenants in   who have
                   Total       demographics
  engagement                                    voluntarily              incomes    (over 60)   proficiency      s and      building    experience
                participants     tracked?
     event                                       reported                                                      refugees                 homelessn
                                   (Y/N)
                                              demographics?                                                                                 ess

 Amity
 Orchards
 Focus Grp 1                   N              0               80%        0          0           0             0            0            0
                5
 9/11
 Focus Grp 2                   N              0               86%        0          0           0             0            0            0
                7
 9/12
 Community                     N              0               90%*       0          0           0             0            0            0
                10
 Event 10/5
  Community                    N              0               95%*       0          0           0             0            0            0
                32
 Event 10/26
 Elmonica
 Station
 HTAG
 Meeting        5              Y              5               40%        20%        20%         0             0            0            20%
 3/24
 HTAG
 Meeting        4              Y              4               50%        25%        25%         0             0            0            25%
 10/24




                                                                                                                                        Page 81 of 98
 The Mary
Ann -
project
complete
Senior
Housing on
5th
 St. Cecilia
Church -            N
               10
Presentation
1/24
HTAG
Meeting        6    Y   6   50%   16%   16%   0   0   0   16%
1/24
Beaverton
Chamber             N
               4
Meeting
2/24
Vose/Nac
Meeting        30   N
4/24
HTAG
Meeting        5    Y   5   40%   20%   20%   0   0   0   20%
4/24
Vose Nac
Meeting        23   N
5/54
St. Cecilia
Church -            N
               4
Presentation
12/24




                                                          Page 82 of 98
Figure 7b: COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT PARTHERSHIPS: If applicable, describe any partnerships used to support reaching community members.
Complete this table only for community engagement activities that happened in 2024 (add rows as needed).
 Project                       List culturally specific organizations that supported   List all other partners that supported engagement
                               engagement and what each partner did                    and what each partner did
 Amity Orchards                Unite Oregon - conducted four events, two focus         Guardian Property Management – played
                               groups on resident services (12 participants) and two secondary role in supporting the community
                               events focused on the Amity Orchards application        engagement efforts led by Unite Oregon. Described
                               process                                                 to the left.
 Elmonica Station              REACH – 2 presentations to HTAG for City of Beaverton
 The Mary Ann – project        NA                                                      NA
 completed

 Senior Housing on 5th       CPAH/DCM - Held 2 presentations with St. Cecilia, 2 with
 (Meadowlark)                VOSE/NAC, 2 with HTAG, and 1 with Beaverton Chamber


Figure 8: COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT THEMES AND RESPONSE
Complete this table only for community engagement activities that happened in 2024 (add rows as needed).
 Project                       Engagement activity or event    Themes from feedback               Changes made to the project in response
                                                                                                                to the feedback
 Amity Orchards                a) Two focus groups on          * Diversity of resident services   * A Spanish-speaking resident services
                               resident services               staff; characteristics of resident staff was hired but unable to start; a
                                                               staff reflective of tenants;       search for a similar candidate is
                                                               resident staff not Spanish         underway
                                                               speaking;

                                                              **Dedicated community space       **Individual study areas and meeting
                                                                                                space located on the first floor

                                                              ***Tenant voice & leadership      *** Unite Oregon will help coordinate
                                                                                                this when buildings are closer to capacity

                                                              **** Work with popular            **** These will be discussed with
                                                              knowledge tenants;                resident staff when hired



                                                                                                                                    Page 83 of 98
                                                          resources/services on site;
                                                          providers hosting coffee events

                                                          These sessions were focused on
                        b) Two community events           providing support to
                        focused on application process-   underserved communities for
                                                          the application process. More
                                                          information below on this
                                                          process.

Elmonica Station        N/A                               N/A                                N/A
The Mary Ann –project   N/A                               N/A                                N/A
completed
Senior Housing on 5th   a) Cecilia School Presentation    Received Input on commercial       Relationship building; ideas for
(Meadowlark)            (2)                               space as substance use clinic      commercial space use, still to be
                                                          and power undergrounding           determined; received letter of support
                                                          plans                              for utility undergrounding plan allowing
                                                                                             project to proceed

                        b) Beaverton Chamber Meeting      Potential business interest in     Potential partner organization for
                                                          commercial space                   western commercial space use, still to be
                                                                                             determined

                        c) Vose/NAC Meeting (2)
                                                          Potential partnerships             Potential collaboration opportunities
                                                                                             with the library, still to be determined
                        d) HTAG Presentation
                                                          Received input on project          Input on importance of senior housing
                                                          overall, including naming of the   and positive responses to the name
                                                          building                           Meadowlark, which will be the name


SECTION 9: INITIAL APPLICATION AND LEASING OUTCOMES



                                                                                                                                Page 84 of 98
For projects that are currently leasing or have completed the initial leasing process, please share any progress, lessons learned or best practices
related to application and leasing strategies. For each example, please include:
    a) The specific marketing strategies and partnerships the project used to support the lease up process
    b) How the project reduced application barriers
    c) Any challenges you faced and how you addressed them or plan to address them in the future


Wishcamper Development contracted with Unite Oregon to support the lease up process for the period of April – October in 2024 for
multicultural community outreach and engagement for Amity Orchards Housing Project prior to finalizing the leasing process. Unite Oregon’s
services are designed with a deep understanding of the cultural, linguistic, and systemic challenges faced by immigrants, refugees, and
communities of color. Their holistic, community-driven approach aims to build power, equity, and opportunity for marginalized groups across
Oregon.

They conducted four events: two focus groups on resident services (12 participants) and two events focused on the Amity Orchards application
process (42 participants). The first two events, focusing on resident services, are described in more detail in the section above, Figure 8:
COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT THEMES AND RESPONSE.

The latter two events focusing on the application process helped reduce application barriers in several ways.

    -   With a representative from guardian (the leasing company) clarifying requirements and breaking down the application process the
        potential applicants better understand what was expected minimizing common errors. This made the process less daunting, especially
        for those unfamiliar with housing policies or overwhelmed by technical details. . In addition, she helped participants to navigate to the
        website on their cell phones further helping to simplify the process and reduce the digital divide.
    -   Having the representative reviewing the process helped to demystify the process by addressing common misconceptions and translating
        complex terms into simple language. Providing precise, information in real time helped correct these misconceptions and encourage
        more people to apply and making the process feel accessible and less intimidating
    -   Unite staff ensured that language and accessibility support were present during the events for a more inclusive application process.
        Outreach materials were produced in seven languages and during the events interpretation was provided in Spanish, Somali, French, and
        Dari. These steps helped to break down significant barriers to understanding the content and provided avenues for meaningful
        interaction.

 These events also allowed for networking opportunities where applicants were able to connect to services to build their support systems. Unite
invited Lutheran Community Services and Resolutions Northwest to introduce their services to the group.



                                                                                                                                          Page 85 of 98
Guardian is currently in the early stages of the lease-up process, making it too soon to identify or assess lessons learned. However, as the
process progresses, procedures will be reviewed to ensure that all barriers are removed, making affordable housing accessible to everyone.




                                                                                                                                      Page 86 of 98
Housing Bond Progress Report for City of Hillsboro | 2024
This progress report summarizes how local jurisdictions are carrying out their Affordable Housing Bond strategies. Each year, jurisdictions share
progress reports with Metro, which are then reviewed by the Affordable Housing Bond Community Oversight Committee. Metro staff then create
a yearly report summarizing progress across all implementing areas.

Please review and confirm the information in each figure and let us know of (including highlight) any changes.

SECTION 1: UNIT PRODUCTION AND FUNDING
This section provides a high-level overview of the Affordable Housing Bond projects and units in your jurisdiction

Figure 1. Production progress and resources committed
                                                                                                                                                       Construction
                                                                    Number of BOND ELIGIBLE units
                                                                                                                                                          start
                                                                                                                                       Status                            Completion
                              Metro Bond                                                                                                               (anticipated or
    Project                                                   (excludes manager units and non-eligible units)                                              actual)
                                Funds
                                                                                                                   Number of       Pre-construction,
                                                                             Family sized (2+
                                               Total units   30% AMI units                       PSH units      occupants (as of     construction,       Month/Year         Month/Year
                                                                                  BRs)
                                                                                                                   Dec-2024)           complete


       Nueva Esperanza        $ 16,940,731        149             60              105                                356             Complete             Mar-24             Aug-24

                                                                                                                                        In
         The Dolores           $ 8,750,000        66              30               46               12                                                    Nov-24             Mar-26
                                                                                                                                   Construction
     Total committed or
                              $ 25,690,731        215             90              151
         underway
      LIS commitment          $ 41,240,081       284             117              142
      % of commitment
                                  62%            76%             77%             106%
          complete
                                                                                Goal
      Remaining for LIS       $ 15,549,350        69             27
                                                                              Exceeded




                                                                                                                                                            Page 87 of 98
SECTION 2: LOCAL IMPLEMENTATION STRATEGIES UPDATE
Please share how the development plan in your LIS is going. Please highlight any best practices, lessons learned, or
opportunities for improvement. Please address:
        a. Did you conduct any competitive selection processes in 2024? If so, what was the outcome?

There were no competitive selection processes in calendar year 2024 for Hillsboro. As described in the following sections, a solicitation process
for Hillsboro’s third and final bond-funded project will be forthcoming in early 2025.

        b. Do you have any projects that you feel are at risk and/or have potential funding gaps?

No projects are at risk at this time due to funding gaps.

        c. Please describe the approach and timelines for achieving remaining unit production targets (if applicable), including any priorities for
           remaining unit production targets, such as homeownership or supportive housing.

In partnership with TriMet, Hillsboro will release a Request for Proposals (RFP) in the first quarter of 2025 for affordable housing development at
a site abutting the Willow Creek Park & Ride. The project selected through this RFP will be Hillsboro’s third and final affordable housing project
funded with proceeds from the 2018 bond. TriMet will offer the 2.89-acre property at a discounted price and Hillsboro will dedicate its
remaining allocation of bond funding for the selected project, subject to City and Metro approvals.

The selected project will deliver a minimum of 110 rental apartments and will enable Hillsboro to meet and exceed its total housing production
goals by over 40 units. The project will include a minimum of 33 units at 30% Area Median Income (AMI), which will enable Hillsboro to meet
and slightly exceed its target for deeply affordable units. While Hillsboro’s target for family-size, two-plus bedroom units is already exceeded,
the project will also include a minimum of 20 units added to this total. Permanent Supportive Housing (PSH) will be listed as a preference within
the RFP and therefore it is likely the project will also include integrated PSH units.

Developer/project selection is anticipated by July 2025, with Concept Endorsement considered by the City and Metro shortly thereafter. The
project would be anticipated to complete land use and entitlements, assemble financing, receive final approvals, achieve financial closing and
begin construction by late 2026 or early 2027.




                                                                                                                                        Page 88 of 98
        d. How have local jurisdictions’ policies, regulations or incentives helped or hindered development of specific bond-funded projects?

Hillsboro’s local incentives for affordable housing development have mainly focused on identifying and contributing publicly owned land for
projects, gap financing through Metro bond proceeds, and granting property tax exemptions. Offering government owned land for affordable
housing makes a large impact in catalyzing projects and helping development feasibility. Especially given that affordable housing developers
have largely not successfully purchased sites in Hillsboro over the past 5 years, bringing forward publicly owned land for affordable housing has
been critical to Hillsboro’s implementation. Starting with the City’s contribution of 6-acres for the Nueva Esperanza project, continuing with
Metro’s Site Acquisition Program purchase and conveyance of a 2-acre site in Tanasbourne for the Dolores, and now with TriMet offering a
nearly 3-acre property at Willow Creek – all three of Hillsboro’s bond-funded projects will be at sites contributed and conveyed by public
entities. In total, over 10 acres of publicly sourced property will be utilized for affordable housing associated with Hillsboro’s bond
implementation.

One regulation area that has been somewhat of a hindrance to bond-funded projects is the zoning code – specifically the limited by-right density
allowances associated with Hillsboro’s multifamily residential zones. Unless development occurs in certain downtown or transit station planning
areas, Hillsboro’s density allowances within typical medium-and high-density multifamily zones can be constraining in terms of possible project
size and unit yield. The property for Nueva Esperanza needed to be rezoned to allow for residential development at all, and density bonuses
stemming from State Senate Bill 8 needed to be applied to both the Dolores and Willow Creek sites to achieve adequate and appropriately sized
unit yield. Hillsboro is now conducting a Community Development Code audit where these types of issues are being identified and addressed to
alleviate constraints and promote increased housing production and yield.

SECTION 3: PROJECT HIGHLIGHTS
This section is intended to provide a brief overview of each project in the pipeline—and some of the noteworthy features.

Please update any information in the project summaries provided in 2023 (below) and add a summary of each new project in your
portfolio, along with an image of the project. Be sure to describe:
        a. Whom the project intends to serve.
        b. Project team and partnerships
        c. Noteworthy features or highlights (e.g., community space, free wi-fi and project amenities)
        d. How projects are incorporating sustainability, climate resilience and AC/cooling strategies to keep people safe
        e. Anything else worth highlighting




                                                                                                                                       Page 89 of 98
Your 2023 report response:

Nueva Esperanza
Completed and leased up in late 2023/early 2024, Nueva Esperanza provides 149 new affordable homes and one unrestricted manager’s unit
across 12 residential buildings and one central community building. Units serve households earning 30-60% of AMI. With 105 units of 2
bedrooms or more, the project focuses serving low and very-low-income families of color, particularly Latinx, Somali and other immigrant
communities. The project features 46 three-bedroom units and 4 four-bedroom units for larger families.

With amenities such as boot washing stations to sliding separators for kitchen spaces, the Nueva Esperanza project team of Bienestar, Housing
Development Center (HDC), Scott | Edwards Architecture, and LMC Construction designed Nueva Esperanza with cultural specificity and to be
responsive to communities of color.




The Nueva Esperanza development team has focused on elements that enhance community building and support individual needs. The design
elements that have been incorporated into the project, which enhance livability and accessibility, include:
• Community courtyards located within each cluster of residential buildings. Front doors open onto courtyards with areas to sit or to gather.
Each courtyard provides a play area, a barbecue and picnic tables, walking paths, lighting and a distinct character.
• Type A (accessible) units located within various buildings across the site with ADA parking as close to the designated unit as possible.
• The project includes flats as well as townhouse units which allows for diversity in accessibility.
• Two-bedroom units include a bathroom with a lavatory separated from a toilet/bathtub.
• Three- and four-bedroom units include one bathroom with a bath and one bathroom with a shower.




                                                                                                                                    Page 90 of 98
• Blocking is provided in all bathrooms that will allow for future grab bars if the need arises.
• Kitchens include generous pantry units that enhance livability and reach space.
• Packaged Thermal Heat Pumps (PTHPs) in the living space of each unit for heating and cooling, and unit ports in bedroom windows.

Nueva Esperanza is located on property contributed and conveyed by the City of Hillsboro, directly adjacent to the 53rd Ave Parks and Recreation
Campus which includes soccer fields, basketball and tennis courts, an indoor state-of-the-art community center and an all-inclusive playground,
amongst other amenities. Another noteworthy feature of the project is that the City of Hillsboro has provided municipal broadband service to
residents, absorbing the costs of utility installation at the site. This allows residents of Nueva Esperanza to access high-speed internet from the
City utility at a significantly reduced monthly cost.

Dolores
The Dolores, currently in construction, is a 3-story, elevator-served affordable housing project on NE Walker Rd. in Hillsboro. Named after labor
activist Dolores Huerta, it provides 66 affordable units that will serve households making between 30% AMI and 60% AMI. A total of 30 units will
be provided at 30% of Area Median Income (AMI). The project features 46 family-size units of two-bedrooms or more, comprising nearly 70% of
the project, and includes 26 three-bedroom units and 3 four-bedroom units. The project will house low and very low-income families,
particularly Latinx and communities of color. The Dolores dedicates 12 units to Permanent Supportive Housing, which will receive case
management services through New Narrative.




Hacienda CDC is the project’s developer, owner, and resident services provider with Access Architecture, LMC Construction and Cascade
Property Management completing the project team. Amenities at the Dolores include a community room, bike room, laundry rooms on each
floor, exterior courtyard with covered seating, playground, community garden and property management and resident services offices.

Dolores will be designed to meet Enterprise Green Communities standards through specific strategies for the building envelope, energy, water,
and indoor air quality. The team will use highly efficient systems, including LED lighting, occupancy sensor controls, in-unit energy recovery



                                                                                                                                        Page 91 of 98
ventilation, mini-splits, and energy efficient appliances. Low flow water-saving fixtures are incorporated to save water and energy. To achieve
additional energy savings, the project will include a highly efficient central hot water production system. Dolores will house a robust roof-top
solar array and 10% of the on-site parking spaces will be EV ready. The project will include 100% outside air heat recovery ventilation, use
interior materials that do not contain added urea-formaldehyde, and finishes, adhesives, and other materials will have zero or low Volatile
Organic Compounds. The Dolores will include mini-split HVAC systems in all units and community spaces. These systems were selected to
provide programmable heating and cooling and air circulation without exposing residents to outside noise and pollutants.


SECTION 4: PERMANENT SUPPORTIVE HOUSING
Permanent supportive housing (PSH) is defined as: a type of housing program for people with disabilities and extremely low incomes who have
long or multiple histories of homelessness and other significant barriers to housing stability. PSH provides permanent housing, rent assistance
and intensive yet voluntary services, with no time limits.
This section confirms PSH unit commitments in your jurisdiction. Please confirm and update the information in Figure 2.

Figure 2: Permanent supportive housing commitments
Complete and/or update this table for all bond-funded projects in your portfolio
 Project             Total units           PSH units          PSH target              Service partners     # of PSH units using   # of PSH units
                                                              population              for the PSH units    SHS funded rental      using SHS funded
                                                                                                           assistance             services
 Nueva Esperanza      149                  0
 The Dolores          67                   12                   Individuals and       New Narrative        12                     12
                                                                families exiting
                                                                homelessness




SECTION 5: CONTRACTING AND WORKFORCE OUTCOMES UPDATE
Local implementation strategies prioritize racial equity by setting contracting goals for COBID-certified firms and tracking workforce participation
in the construction of Metro bond projects. Please review and confirm the information in Figures 3 and 4 and let us know of any changes.

Figure 3. Equitable contracting goals and outcomes




                                                                                                                                          Page 92 of 98
                                                                                                       Contracting goals                      Contracting outcome
                          Developer, General            Actual/expected construction
   Project name                                                                               % of total contract amounts paid
                              contractor                         completion                                                          % of total contract amounts paid to…
                                                                                                             to…
                                                                                              Project goal (%    Project goal (%    Project outcome (%      Project outcome (%
                                                                                                hard costs)        soft costs)          hard costs)              soft costs)

  Nueva Esperanza             Bienestar/HDC                          Aug-24                        20%                 20%                   35%                   N/A

     The Dolores              Hacienda CDC                           Mar-26                        20%                 50%                   TBD                   TBD

For projects that provided a minimum and maximum (or “stretch”) goal, please use the “minimum goal.”

Figure 4. Workforce diversity goals/outcomes (as applicable based on LIS and project)
                                                                                                                       Workforce goals              Workforce outcomes
                                                                              Workforce         Prevailing
                                                   Actual/expected
   Project          Developer, General                                        tracking?           wage             % of total labor hours*           % of total labor hours*
                                                    Construction
    name                contractor                   completion
                                                                                                                         worked by…                        worked by…
                                                                                                 BOLI, Davis
                                                                                 Y/N                             POC       Women   Apprentices     POC    Women      Apprentices
                                                                                                 Bacon, N/A
    Nueva
                       Bienestar/HDC                   Aug-24                     N
  Esperanza
    The
                       Hacienda CDC                    Mar-26                     Y                                    25%
   Dolores

For projects that provided a minimum and maximum (or “stretch”) goal, please use the “minimum goal.”




SECTION 6: ADVANCING EQUITY IN CONSTRUCTION
Please share updates of progress on equitable contracting and workforce strategies in your jurisdiction. Please highlight any best
practices, lessons learned, or opportunities for improvement. Please address:
       a. Progress toward achieving equitable contracting goals
       b. Progress toward advancing workforce participation through workforce tracking




                                                                                                                                                                Page 93 of 98
        c. Plans to expand local capacity to monitor and report on contracting and workforce outcomes

Your 2023 report:
Hillsboro’s LIS currently calls for a contracting goal for each bond-funded project such that 20% of total project costs are paid to MWESB-DV,
COBID-certified businesses. Hillsboro’s equitable contracting goal, based on total project costs, may increase construction contracting dollars to
certified firms, depending on soft cost utilization.

Nueva Esperanza’s total project cost is $53.6 Million. Bienestar and HDC committed to working to achieve the 20% goal of these total costs
based only on tracking hard costs. Therefore a 29% hard cost goal applied. At the end of 2023, Nueva Esperanza achieved 35% of hard cost
payments to COBID-certified contractors, equaling $12.1 Million paid to 11 certified businesses and exceeding the project’s hard cost goal. This
utilization constitutes 23% of total project costs and therefore also exceeds the 20% LIS goal. Due to both jurisdictional and developer capacity
constraints, workforce tracking was not a requirement for the Nueva Esperanza project.

With the Dolores project, in addition to COBID-contracting, the Hacienda development team is also tracking both COBID-utilization and workforce
participation including Persons of Color, Women and Apprentice hours. The project is continuing to make progress to meet its MWESB goal for
construction and soft costs contracting. LMC’s multifaceted solicitation of COBID and MWESB subcontractors throughout the bidding process, as
well as their long-established relationships with these companies, has ensured the project will meet its goal. For Dolores, LMC published bid
invitations in the Daily Journal of Commerce, The Skanner, El Latino de Hoy New, Asian Report and Contracts & Careers. They also published bid
invites with the NAMC, OAME, PBDG, Latino Built and Oregon Native American Chamber of Commerce groups. To reach the contracting goals,
LMC outreached to subcontractors on COBID certified lists and followed up with phone calls and emails. There was also targeted COBID outreach
done by the project manager. They are currently projected at 32.05% of the hard cost goal. To help ensure workforce participation, the
subcontractors are required to submit monthly utilization ,reports as well as apprentice hours performed by each trade.

Several years ago, Hillsboro hired a Supplier Diversity Coordinator who assists with tracking and reporting contracting and workforce outcomes.

SECTION 7: ADVANCING EQUITABLE HOUSING OPPORTUNITY, ACCESS, AND STABILITY
The Affordable Housing Bond Program is guided by principles that aim to help those left behind by the region’s housing market. This includes
communities of color, families with children, people with disabilities, seniors, veterans, and those at risk of homelessness or displacement. Each
local implementation strategy outlines commitments to affirmative marketing, low-barrier lease-up, culturally responsive resident services and
housing stability to those who have experienced displacement or are at risk of displacement.

Figure 5a: Plans/partnerships for affirmative marketing
Complete this table for all bond-funded projects in your portfolio




                                                                                                                                         Page 94 of 98
 Project                      List all affirmative marketing partners                                          # of affirmative marketing
                                                                                                               partners that are culturally
                                                                                                               specific organizations
 Nueva Esperanza              Centro Cultural, Bienestar’s internal teams (through rental counseling and       3
                              SHS), Family Promise, Community Action Agency, Open Door and Somali
                              Empowerment Circle
 Dolores                      Hacienda, as a culturally specific provider, will assist property manager with   TBD
                              affirmative marketing efforts in conjunction with the lease up process.
                              Hacienda and property management will also work to identify additional
                              partners to partner with for affirmative marketing at 50% construction when
                              lease up meetings begin.


Figure 5b: Plans/partnerships for culturally responsive services
Complete this table for all bond-funded projects in your portfolio
 Project                       List all partners and the culturally responsive services they will provide      # of service partners that are
                                                                                                               culturally specific organizations
 Nueva Esperanza              Bienestar, Somali Empowerment Circle, Adelante Mujeres, Afghan                   7
                              Community Center, Hidaya Woman's Resource, Centro de Prosperidad,
                              Islamic Social Services, Open Door Housing Works, Community Action

                              The groups listed above provided culturally responsive services to Nueva
                              Esperanza residents including resident services, community engagement
                              feedback, resident referrals, move in deposit and rent assistance, home
                              furniture, caseworkers and social services and other basic resident needs.

 Dolores                      Hacienda CDC will provide culturally responsive resident services to the         TBD
                              property. This will include a bilingual resident services coordinator who will
                              act as liaison between property management and tenants, as well as
                              assisting residents identify local resources. More detail on resident services
                              will be provided after construction completion and lease up (in next year’s
                              report).




                                                                                                                                       Page 95 of 98
Figure 5c: Priority population checklist
Complete this table for all bond-funded projects in your portfolio
 Project                                 Includes designated units for (Y/N):                          Includes service partnerships with culturally
                      Seniors/older adults        Multi-generation                 Veterans                    specific organizations (Y/N)
                                                    households
 Nueva Esperanza    N                        N                            N                           N
 Dolores            N                        N                            N                           N


Figure 6. Physical accessibility features
Complete this table for all bond-funded projects in your portfolio
                          Number of                                                              Other accessibility features (optional)
                                         Number of ADA     Universal design
     Project name        ground floor
                                          (Type A) units        (Y/N)
                            units
 Nueva Esperanza        52               8                 Y                    Other accessibility features (optional)
 Dolores                17               4                 Y                    Other accessibility features (optional)



SECTION 8: COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT TO INFORM PROJECT OUTCOMES
Jurisdictions prioritize racial equity by engaging people of color and historically marginalized communities in shaping project design and outcomes.

Please share a summary of community engagement efforts in 2024 (Figures 7 and 8). Please address:
    a. WHO was engaged
    b. HOW they were engaged
    c. WHAT themes came from the engagement, and
    d. WHAT changes were made in response to project design and/or resident services programming

Both projects largely completed Community Engagement activities in prior years. For the Dolores, Hacienda and LMC have been in close contact
with neighbors throughout 2024 and with the HOA adjacent to the site. The team has provided regular updates to construction start, early and
late workdays, as well as changes to any traffic patterns and possible after-hours noise. Neighbors have provided feedback about preferred
communication for changes in construction workdays, noise and project progress, which LMC has updated to provide greater clarity in
communication. Hacienda intends to coordinate site tours with focus and advisory groups who worked with the project team during the design
phases. They will also be invited to the building opening event.




                                                                                                                                           Page 96 of 98
Figure 7a. WHO WAS ENGAGED: Summary of community engagement demographics
Complete this table only for community engagement activities that happened in 2024 (add rows as needed)
                                                                                      Of those reporting demographics…
                                                If yes, how   % people   % people    % older     % limited         %      % existing    % people
                                   Were
   Project or                                       many      of color   with low     adults      English     immigrant   tenants in   who have
                   Total       demographics
  engagement                                    voluntarily              incomes    (over 60)   proficiency      s and     building    experience
                participants     tracked?
     event                                       reported                                                      refugees                homelessn
                                   (Y/N)
                                              demographics?                                                                                ess




Figure 7b: COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT PARTNERSHIPS: If applicable, describe any partnerships used to support reaching community members.
Complete this table only for community engagement activities that happened in 2024 (add rows as needed).
 Project                       List culturally specific organizations that supported   List all other partners that supported engagement
                               engagement and what each partner did                    and what each partner did



Figure 8: COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT THEMES AND RESPONSE
Complete this table only for community engagement activities that happened in 2024 (add rows as needed).
 Project                       Engagement activity or event    Themes from feedback             Changes made to the project in response
                                                                                                          to the feedback




                                                                                                                                       Page 97 of 98
SECTION 9: INITIAL APPLICATION AND LEASING OUTCOMES
For projects that are currently leasing or have completed the initial leasing process, please share any progress, lessons learned or best practices
related to application and leasing strategies. For each example, please include:
    a. The specific marketing strategies and partnerships the project used to support the lease up process
    b. How the project reduced application barriers
    c. Any challenges you faced and how you addressed them or plan to address them in the future

Your 2023 report:

The Nueva Esperanza project was leased-up by the end of calendar year 2023. Best practices from the Nueva Esperanza team included helping
applicants early in the process understand the different unit set asides (for income levels and rent amounts) and explaining the annual income
limits that qualify someone for a 30% vs 60% AMI unit. This was helpful because it helped the applicant to understand and decide if they can
afford the rent or not for the designated unit. Another best practice was to make the required deposit payment amounts very clear to the
approved applicants and to encourage them to save or seek assistance, so they were ready for move in. Screening barriers that were removed
included credit standards and amount of monthly income needed in order to move-in (only required 1.5 times the rent amount). Bienestar also
included a pet policy to allow residents to have certain pets. A pet policy was something Bienestar did not have in place before Nueva
Esperanza.




                                                                                                                                          Page 98 of 98
Housing Communications Monthly Report – February 2025
The Housing Department’s Communications team is working on several stories across Metro news,
social media, paid community media, email marketing and earned media.

Email marketing
The March external newsletter is set to release next week and will feature the Metro housing-funded
projects’ openings and groundbreakings that have been celebrated in February and March.

Earned media
The Housing Department in February celebrated the opening of the SHS-funded Oak Street Sheter
and the groundbreaking of the affordable housing bond-funded Jade Apartments. Both events were
well covered by at least 5 different local media outlets. Click these links to see stories on print,
television and radio.

Also in February, The Oregonian ran its ﬁrst article in a periodic series about what SHS pays for and
how it’s working. The series is intended to lead up to the potential SHS reform ballot measure in
November. Housing Comms met with the reporter several times ahead of the launch of this series
to emphasize the importance of voters becoming aware of SHS programming. Housing Comms is
working with the reporter on upcoming installations in this series.

Housing comms also provided information on background to reporters and assisted Central
Comms on a number of articles covering Multnomah County’s homeless services budget shortfall.

Marketing and Public Education
A postcard reminding voters of the SHS tax is being printed and will be sent out to all voters in the
region in late March/early April. It contains information on eligibility, links to pay, and information on
the success of the tax thus far.

A set of slides that highlight the affordable housing bond and supportive housing services will
continue to be displayed in local independent theaters throughout the coming months.

The Housing Department’s “Home is everything” public awareness campaign continued in
February. It features digital ads across the internet and on Oregonlive.com. These ads link back to a
page on the Metro website that contains information about Housing Department programs. The
CTR for performance display ads in February was .72% and for local site ads on Oregonlive.com
was .15%. During the month of February, this campaign resulted in 789,837 impressions and
2,976 total clicks. These results were not as optimal of January, but still above benchmark.

Social media
The communications team published social media content on two SHS-funded projects: the
opening of the Oak Street Village shelter and the start of construction of the Hillsboro Year-Round
Shelter. There was also a piece on the groundbreakings of the Jade Apartments and M. Carter
Commons, to which the housing bond and transit-oriented development funds contributed. The
housing communications staff also worked with Metro central communications to ensure that
inclement weather and emergency shelter information from the region’s counties were passed
along.

Up and coming
In March, we will be launching a public education campaign with Tri-Met and also displaying
informational banners at local bond-funded sites throughout the region.
The following materials were received
         during the meeting.
Metro affordable housing bond oversight committee meeting |
March 17, 2025
Agenda

• Welcome and introductions
• Conflict of interest declarations
• Public comment
• AHBOC Program Updates
• Jurisdiction Presentations: Clackamas, Washington, Beaverton, and
 Hillsboro
• Next steps
• Adjourn
Conflict of Interest
Public Comment
Jurisdiction Presentations
Presentation Overview

• Jurisdiction presentations (15 mins)
   o Production progress summary
   o 2-3 examples of projects that reached milestones in 2024, such as
     starting construction, completing construction, or completed
     leasing.
   o Overall lessons learned on the Metro AHB
   o Clarifying questions (5 minutes)
• Panel Q&A with all jurisdictions
• Committee discussion and reflection on themes
Break
    Next Steps


• April 16 – Key Findings & Report Highlights from staff
• May 21 – Finalize committee findings and
  recommendations
• June and beyond dates TBD
  00:39:53 Jay Tomlinson (They/Them): Can someone explain what Cobid outcomes means?
  00:41:33 Alison Wicks, Metro (she/her):         Certification Office for Business Inclusion and Diversity (COBID)
  00:42:51 Alison Wicks, Metro (she/her):         All implementing partners established a minimum goal of awarding 20% of
  project contracts to minority- or women- owned and/or emerging small businesses (MWESB) certified by the state
  Certification Office for Business Inclusion and Diversity (COBID).
  01:17:10 Jay Tomlinson (They/Them): Converted to permeant loan?
  01:20:37 Andrea Sanchez: The permanent loan is like a mortgage that has a 30 year loan term.
  01:21:28 Alison Wicks, Metro (she/her):         From Jill Chen: Benefit is usually a fixed-rate, lower interest permanent
  loan instead of a construction loan which has variable rate and are usually higher interest rates
  01:26:35 Sandi Saunders (she/her) | Metro: From Clayton Woullard: What is the exact nature of that legislation?
  01:35:50 Sandi Saunders (she/her) | Metro: From Lisa Varon: Insurance still needs to be underwritten by industry
  standards. Multiple incidents at a property does impact the property's insurance rating and future insurance rates.
  01:40:29 Jeff Petrillo: Lumber Tariffs are currently on hold. Not saying lumber tariffs are a non-issue, but they are
  not yet in effect. April 2nd is the target date for possible new tariffs including lumber.
  01:42:35 Jay Tomlinson (They/Them): I can just put my question here so we don't push our break back. How was the
  contaminated ground water handled? Did you clean the water or was there a barrier placed or? How are we protecting
  residents and others from that?
  01:44:31 Noah Goldman he/him: Could Washington County Housing Authority apply for an exemption to the
  AMI/MFI figures through Moving to Work program?
  01:45:09 Sandi Saunders (she/her) | Metro: From Melisa Dailey: If I recall correctly, they site was considered "clean"
  after the contaminated soils removal.
  01:46:03 Sandi Saunders (she/her) | Metro: From Melisa Dailey: For Opal, almost the soils were dug down to
  something like 15-20 feet and disposed of.
  01:52:34 Alison Wicks, Metro (she/her):         Following up on Jeff's question about Shortstack Milwaukie developer:
  Shortstack Developer LLC (Homework Development and Sister City)
  02:09:42 Sandi Saunders (she/her) | Metro: From Jeff Petrillo: Some context on lumber prices. Lumber future prices
  have already risen over 33% since the fall of 2024--mostly in anticipation of US tariffs. Here is a chart showing the
  increase. https://app.box.com/s/hfopgifv93ktczkigogm0fo30dsmtj4z
  02:10:18 Jeff Petrillo: Thanks Sandi
  02:18:03 Clayton Woullard: What does "deeply" affordable housing mean in Hillsboro?
  02:18:21 Andrea Sanchez: 30% AMI or below
  02:20:12 Andrea Sanchez: 2024 30% Area Median Income (AMI) limits for a household of one, two, three, and four
  are $24,780, $28,320, $31,860, and $35,400 respectively.
  02:24:03 Sandi Saunders (she/her) | Metro: From Brandy Penner: This is a table I use a lot when looking at AMI. It's
  from the Portland Housing Bureau but applies to the metro area. https://www.portland.gov/phb/income-rent-and-utility-
  limits
  Click on the 2024 Income and Rent Limits link
  02:24:33 Jeff Petrillo: who is the developer?
  02:25:05 Andrea Sanchez: The developer for Willow Creek has not been selected. RFP is currently out.
  02:26:13 Clayton Woullard: How many units would be deeply affordable?
  02:27:54 Jay Tomlinson (They/Them): There's the possibility that Willow Creek will exceed these amounts?
  02:28:47 Alison Wicks, Metro (she/her):         RFP is Request for Proposals
  02:45:36 Sandi Saunders (she/her) | Metro: From Sushmita Poddar: Washington County is quite a transit desert.
  just like Clackamas
  02:54:59 Sushmita Poddar (She) Atfalati Lands: That is such a good comment Noah
  02:58:49 Jay Tomlinson (They/Them): I would caution calling these populations "needy". They are high need because
  they have not had enough access throughout their lives, causing those needs to compound and become more complex.
  They're needs are a result of societal failings, they are not responsible for their own neediness. Just a comment on
  wording
  03:00:18 Sushmita Poddar (She) Atfalati Lands: Uplifting what Jay just wrote. How we describe community identity
  vs circumstance is important




file:///C/Users/saunderss/Downloads/GMT20250317-220023_RecordingnewChat.txt[3/18/2025 11:04:54 AM]
