                                                                                     OMB Approval No. 2577-0169
                                                                                                 (exp. 04/30/2026)




                    U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
                             Office of Public and Indian Housing

                 SECTION 8 PROJECT-BASED VOUCHER PROGRAM

                    HOUSING ASSISTANCE PAYMENTS CONTRACT
                     NEW CONSTRUCTION OR REHABILITATION

                                    PART 2 OF HAP CONTRACT


OMB Burden Statement. The public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average |
hour. This form is required to establish terms between a PHA and owner to provide housing assistance. This contract
allows a PHA to enter into a HAP contract with the owner to provide housing assistance payments for eligible families.
Assurances of confidentiality are not provided under this collection. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or
any other aspect of this collection of information, including suggestions to reduce this burden, to the Office of Public
and Indian Housing, US. Department of Housing and Urban Development, Washington, DC 20410. HUD may not
conduct and sponsor, and a person is not required to respond to, a collection of information unless the collection
displays a valid control number.



2.        DEFINITIONS

          Agreement. Agreement to enter into HAP Contract between the owner and the
          PHA. The HAP contract was entered into following new construction or
          rehabilitation of the contract units by the owner pursuant to an Agreement.

          Contract units. The housing units covered by this HAP contract. The contract
          units are described in Exhibit A.

          Controlling interest.          In the context of PHA-owned units (see definition below),
          controlling interest means:

          (a) Holding more than 50 percent of the stock of any corporation; or

          (b) Having the power to appoint more than 50 percent of the members of the
          board of directors of a non-stock corporation (such as a non-profit corporation); or

          (c) Where more than 50 percent of the members of the board of directors of any
          corporation also serve as directors, officers, or employees of the PHA; or

          (d) Holding more than 50 percent of all managing member interests in an LLC; or

          (e) Holding more than 50 percent of all general partner interests in a partnership;
          or

                                                                                Project-Based Voucher Program
                                                                   HAP    Contract for New Construction/Rehab
 Previous editions are obsolete
                                                                                  HUD 52530A Page - 1 of Part 2
                                                                                                      (04/2023)
                                                                  OMB Approval No. 2577-0169
                                                                              (exp. 04/30/2026)

        (f) Having equivalent levels of control in other ownership structures.

       Family. The persons approved by the PHA to reside in a contract unit with
       assistance under the program.

       HAP contract. This housing assistance payments contract between the PHA and
       the owner. The contract consists of Part 1, Part 2, and the contract exhibits (listed
       in section 1.c of the HAP contract).

       Household. The family and any PHA-approved live-in aide.

       Housing assistance payment. The monthly assistance payment by the PHA for a
       contract unit, which includes: (1) a payment to the owner for rent to the owner
       under the family’s lease minus the tenant rent; and (2) an additional payment to or
       on behalf of the family if the utility allowance exceeds total tenant payment.

       Housing quality standards (HQS). The HUD minimum quality standards for
       dwelling units occupied by families receiving project-based voucher program
       assistance.

       HUD. U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development.

       HUD requirements. HUD requirements which apply to the project-based
       voucher program. HUD requirements are issued by HUD headquarters, as
       regulations, Federal Register notices or other binding program directives.

       Newly constructed housing. Housing units that do not exist on the proposal
       selection date and are developed after the date of selection pursuant to an
       Agreement between the PHA and owner for use under the project-based voucher
       program.

       Owner. Any person or entity who has the legal right to lease or sublease a unit to
       a participant.

       PHA. Public Housing Agency. The agency that has entered into the HAP contract
       with the owner. The agency is a public housing agency as defined in the United
        States Housing Act of 1937 (42 U.S.C. 1437a(b)(6)).

       PHA-owned units. A unit is “owned by a PHA” if the unit is in a project that is:

       (a) Owned by the PHA (which includes a PHA having a “controlling interest” in
       the entity that owns the unit; see definition above);

        (b) Owned by an entity wholly controlled by the PHA; or


                                                              Project-Based Voucher Program
                                                   HAP   Contract for New Construction/Rehab
Previous editions are obsolete
                                                               HUD 52530A Page - 2 of Part 2
                                                                                   (04/2023)
                                                                        OMB Approval No. 2577-0169
                                                                                    (exp. 04/30/2026)

        (c) Owned by a limited liability company (LLC) or limited partnership in which
        the PHA (or an entity wholly controlled by the PHA) holds a controlling interest
        in the managing member or general partner.

        Premises. The building or complex in which a contract unit is located, including
        common areas or grounds.

        Principal or interested party. This term includes a management agent and other
        persons or entities participating in project management, and the officers and
        principal members, shareholders, investors, and other parties having a substantial
        interest in the HAP contract, or in any proceeds or benefits arising from the HAP
        contract.

        Program. The project-based voucher program (see authorization for project-
        based assistance at 42 U.S.C. 1437f(0)(13)).

        Proposal selection date. The date the PHA gives written notice of proposal
        selection to the owner whose proposal is selected in accordance with the criteria
        established in the PHA’s administrative plan.

        Rehabilitated housing. Housing units that exist on the proposal selection date but
        do not substantially comply with the HQS on that date and are developed pursuant
        to an Agreement between the PHA and owner for use under the project-based
        voucher program.

        Rent to owner. The total monthly rent payable to the owner under the lease for a
        contract unit. Rent to owner includes payment for any housing services,
        maintenance and utilities to be provided by the owner in accordance with the
        lease.

        Tenant. The person or persons (other than a live-in aide) who executes the lease
        as a lessee of the dwelling unit.

        Tenant rent. The portion of the rent to owner payable by the family, as
        determined by the PHA in accordance with HUD requirements. The PHA is not
        responsible for paying any part of the tenant rent.



3.      PURPOSE

        a.        This is   a HAP   contract between the PHA     and the owner.

        b.        The purpose of the HAP contract is to provide housing assistance
                  payments for eligible families who lease contract units that comply with

                                                                    Project-Based Voucher Program
                                                       HAP     Contract for New Construction/Rehab
 Previous editions are obsolete
                                                                     HUD 52530A Page - 3 of Part 2
                                                                                         (04/2023)
                                                                        OMB Approval No. 2577-0169
                                                                                    (exp. 04/30/2026)

                  the HUD HQS from the owner.

                  The PHA must make housing assistance payments to the owner in
                  accordance with the HAP contract for contract units leased and occupied
                  by eligible families during the HAP contract term. HUD provides funds to
                  the PHA to make housing assistance payments to owners for eligible
                  families.

4.      RENT TO OWNER; HOUSING ASSISTANCE PAYMENTS

        a.        Amount      of initial rent to owner

                  The initial rent to owner for each contract unit is stated in Exhibit A,
                  which is attached to and made a part of the HAP contract. At the
                  beginning of the HAP contract term, and until rent to owner is adjusted in
                  accordance with section 5 of the HAP contract, the rent to owner for each
                  bedroom size (number of bedrooms) shall be the initial rent to owner
                  amount listed in Exhibit A.

                  Place a check mark here | if the PHA has elected not to reduce rents
                  below the initial rent to owner.

                  HUD rent requirements

                  Notwithstanding any other provision of the HAP contract, the rent to
                  owner may in no event exceed the amount authorized in accordance with
                  HUD requirements. The PHA has the right to reduce the rent to owner, at
                  any time, to correct any errors in establishing or adjusting the rent to
                  owner in accordance with HUD requirements. The PHA may recover any
                  overpayment from the owner.

                  PHA payment to owner

                  1.       Each month the PHA must make a housing assistance payment to
                           the owner for a unit under lease to and occupied by an eligible
                           family in accordance with the HAP contract.

                  2.       The monthly housing assistance payment to the owner for a
                           contract unit is equal to the amount by which the rent to owner
                           exceeds the tenant rent.

                  3.       Payment of the tenant rent is the responsibility of the family. The
                           PHA is not responsible for paying any part of the tenant rent, or for
                           paying any other claim by the owner against a family. The PHA is
                           responsible only for making housing assistance payments to the

                                                                    Project-Based Voucher Program
                                                         HAP   Contract for New Construction/Rehab
 Previous editions are obsolete
                                                                     HUD 52530A Page - 4 of Part 2
                                                                                         (04/2023)
                                                                     OMB Approval No. 2577-0169
                                                                                 (exp. 04/30/2026)

                           owner on behalf of a family in accordance with the HAP contract.

                           The owner will be paid the housing assistance payment under the
                           HAP contract on or about the first day of the month for which
                           payment is due, unless the owner and the PHA agree on a later
                           date.

                           To receive housing assistance payments in accordance with the
                           HAP contract, the owner must comply with all the provisions of
                           the HAP contract. Unless the owner complies with all the
                           provisions of the HAP contract, the owner does not have a right to
                           receive housing assistance payments.

                           If the PHA determines that the owner is not entitled to the payment
                           or any part of it, the PHA, in addition to other remedies, may
                           deduct the amount of the overpayment from any amounts due the
                           owner, including amounts due under any other housing assistance
                           payments contract.

                           The owner will notify the PHA promptly of any change of
                           circumstances that would affect the amount of the monthly housing
                           assistance payment, and will return any payment that does not
                           conform to the changed circumstances.

        d.        Termination of assistance for family

                  The PHA may terminate housing assistance for a family under the HAP
                  contract in accordance with HUD requirements. The PHA must notify the
                  owner in writing of its decision to terminate housing assistance for the
                  family in such case.



5.      ADJUSTMENT                OF RENT TO OWNER

        a.        PHA determination of adjusted rent

                  1.       At each annual anniversary during the term of the HAP contract,
                           the PHA shall adjust the amount of rent to owner, upon request to
                           the PHA by the owner, in accordance with law and HUD
                           requirements. In addition, the PHA shall adjust the rent to owner
                           when there is a ten percent decrease in the published, applicable
                           Fair Market Rent in accordance with 24 CFR 983.302. However, if
                           the PHA has elected within the HAP contract not to reduce rents


                                                                 Project-Based Voucher Program
                                                      HAP   Contract for New Construction/Rehab
 Previous editions are obsolete
                                                                  HUD 52530A Page - 5 of Part 2
                                                                                      (04/2023)
                                                                      OMB Approval No. 2577-0169
                                                                                  (exp. 04/30/2026)

                           below the initial rent to owner, the rent to owner shall not be
                           reduced below the initial rent to owner except in those cases
                           described in 24 CFR 983.302(c)(2).

                  2.       The adjustment of rent to owner shall always be determined in
                           accordance with all HUD requirements. The amount of the rent to
                           owner may be adjusted up or down, in the amount defined by the
                           PHA in accordance with HUD requirements.

        b.        Reasonable rent

                  The rent to owner for each contract unit, as adjusted by the PHA in
                  accordance with 24 CFR 983.303, may at no time exceed the reasonable
                  rent charged for comparable units in the private unassisted market, except
                  in cases where the PHA has elected within the HAP contract not to reduce
                  rents below the initial rent to owner. The reasonable rent shall be
                  determined by the PHA in accordance with HUD requirements.

        Cc.       No special adjustments

                  The PHA will not make any special adjustments of the rent to owner.

        d.        Owner compliance with HAP contract

                  The PHA shall not approve, and the owner shall not receive, any increase
                  of rent to owner unless all contract units are in accordance with the HQS,
                  and the owner has complied with the terms of the assisted leases and the
                  HAP contract.

        e.        Notice of rent adjustment

                  Rent to owner shall be adjusted by written notice by the PHA to the owner
                  in accordance with this section. Such notice constitutes an amendment of
                  the rents specified in Exhibit A.

6.      OWNER          RESPONSIBILITY

        The owner is responsible for:

        a.        Performing all management and rental functions for the contract units.

        b.        Maintaining the units in accordance with HQS.

        C.        Complying with equal opportunity requirements.



                                                                  Project-Based Voucher Program
                                                       HAP   Contract for New Construction/Rehab
 Previous editions are obsolete
                                                                   HUD 52530A Page - 6 of Part 2
                                                                                       (04/2023)
                                                                     OMB Approval No. 2577-0169
                                                                                 (exp. 04/30/2026)

        d.        Enforcing tenant obligations under the lease.

        e.        Paying for utilities and housing services (unless paid by the family under
                  the lease).

        f.        Collecting from the tenant:

                  1.       Any security deposit;

                  2.       The tenant rent; and

                  3.       Any charge for unit damage by the family.

7.      OWNER          CERTIFICATION

        The owner certifies that at all times during the term of the HAP contract:

        a. All contract units are in good and tenantable condition. The owner is
                maintaining the premises and all contract units in accordance with the
                HQS.

        b.        The owner is providing all the services, maintenance and utilities as
                  agreed to under the HAP contract and the leases with assisted families.

        C.        Each contract unit for which the owner is receiving housing assistance
                  payments is leased to an eligible family referred by the PHA, and the lease
                  is in accordance with the HAP contract and HUD requirements.

        d.        To the best of the owner’s knowledge, the members of the family reside in
                  each contract unit for which the owner is receiving housing assistance
                  payments, and the unit is the family’s only residence.

        e.        The owner (including a principal or other interested party) is not the
                  parent, child, grandparent, grandchild, sister, or brother of any member of
                  a family residing in a contract unit unless the PHA has determined that
                  approving leasing of the unit would provide a reasonable accommodation
                  for a family member who is a person with disabilities.

        f.        The amount of the housing assistance payment is the correct amount due
                  under the HAP contract.

        g.        The rent to owner for each contract unit does not exceed rents charged by
                  the owner for other comparable unassisted units.

        h.        Except for the housing assistance payment and the tenant rent as provided

                                                                  Project-Based Voucher Program
                                                      HAP   Contract for New Construction/Rehab
 Previous editions are obsolete
                                                                   HUD 52530A Page - 7 of Part 2
                                                                                       (04/2023)
                                                                      OMB Approval No. 2577-0169
                                                                                  (exp. 04/30/2026)

                  under the HAP contract, the owner has not received and will not receive
                  any payments or other consideration (from the family, the PHA, HUD, or
                  any other public or private source) for rental of the contract unit.

                  The family does not own, or have any interest in the contract unit. If the
                  owner is a cooperative, the family may be a member of the cooperative.

8.       CONDITION OF UNITS

        a.        Owner maintenance and operation

                  The owner must maintain and operate the contract units and premises to
                  provide decent, safe and sanitary housing in accordance with the HQS,
                  including performance of ordinary and extraordinary maintenance. The
                  owner must provide all the services, maintenance and utilities set forth in
                  Exhibits B and C, and in the lease with each assisted family.

                  PHA inspections

                  1.       The PHA must inspect each contract unit before execution of the
                           HAP contract. The PHA may not enter into a HAP contract
                           covering a unit until the unit fully complies with the HQS.

                  2.       Before providing assistance to a new family in a contract unit, the
                           PHA must inspect the unit. The PHA may not provide assistance
                           on behalf of the family until the unit fully complies with the HQS.

                  3,       At least biennially during the term of the HAP contract, the PHA
                           must inspect a random sample, consisting of at least 20 percent of
                           the contract units in each building, to determine if the contract
                           units and the premises are maintained in accordance with the HQS.
                           Turnover inspections pursuant to paragraph 2 of this section are
                           not counted toward meeting this biennial inspection requirement.

                  4.       If more than 20 percent of the sample of inspected contract units in
                           a building fail the initial inspection, the PHA must reinspect 100
                           percent of the contract units in the building.

                  5.       The PHA must inspect contract units whenever needed to
                           determine that the contract units comply with the HQS and that the
                           owner is providing maintenance, utilities, and other services in
                           accordance with the HAP contract. The PHA must take into
                           account complaints and any other information that comes to its
                           attention in scheduling inspections.


                                                                  Project-Based Voucher Program
                                                       HAP   Contract for New Construction/Rehab
 Previous editions are obsolete
                                                                   HUD 52530A Page - 8 of Part 2
                                                                                       (04/2023)
                                                                       OMB Approval No. 2577-0169
                                                                                   (exp. 04/30/2026)




        Cc.       Violation of the housing quality standards

                  1.       If the PHA determines a contract unit is not in accordance with the
                           HQS, the PHA may exercise any of its remedies under the HAP
                           contract for all or any contract units. Such remedies include
                           termination, suspension or reduction of housing assistance
                           payments, and termination of the HAP contract.

                           The PHA may exercise any such contractual remedy respecting a
                           contract unit even if the family continues to occupy the unit.

                           The PHA shall not make any housing assistance for a dwelling unit
                           that fails to meet the HQS, unless the owner corrects the defect
                           within the period specified by the PHA and the PHA verifies the
                           correction. If a defect is life threatening, the owner must correct
                           the defect within no more than 24 hours. For other defects, the
                           owner must correct the defect within no more than 30 calendar
                           days (or any PHA-approved extension).

        d.        Maintenance and replacement—owner’s standard practice

                  Maintenance and replacement (including redecoration) must be in
                  accordance with the standard practice for the building concerned as
                  established by the owner.

9.      LEASING CONTRACT               UNITS

        a.        Selection of tenants

                  1.       During the term of the HAP contract, the owner must lease all
                           contract units to eligible families selected and referred by the PHA
                           from the PHA waiting list. (See 24 CFR 983.251.)

                           The owner is responsible for adopting written tenant selection
                           procedures that are consistent with the purpose of improving
                           housing opportunities for very low-income families and reasonably
                           related to program eligibility and an applicant’s ability to perform
                           the lease obligations.

                           Consistent with HUD requirements, and Federal civil rights and
                           fair housing requirements, the owner may apply its own
                           nondiscriminatory tenant selection procedures in determining
                           whether to admit a family referred by the PHA for occupancy of a

                                                                   Project-Based Voucher Program
                                                        HAP   Contract for New Construction/Rehab
 Previous editions are obsolete
                                                                    HUD 52530A Page - 9 of Part 2
                                                                                        (04/2023)
                                                                     OMB Approval No. 2577-0169
                                                                                 (exp. 04/30/2026)

                          contract unit. The owner may refer families to the PHA for
                          placement on the PBV waiting list.

                 4.       The owner must promptly notify in writing any rejected applicant
                          of the grounds for rejection.

                 5.       The PHA must determine family eligibility in accordance with
                          HUD requirements.

                 6.       The contract unit leased to each family must be appropriate for the
                          size of the family under the PHA’s subsidy standards.

                 7.       If a contract unit was occupied by an eligible family at the time the
                          unit was selected by the PHA, or is so occupied on the effective
                          date of the HAP contract, the owner must offer the family the
                          opportunity to lease the same or another appropriately-sized
                          contract unit with assistance under the HAP contract.

                 8.       The owner is responsible for screening and selecting tenants from
                          the families referred by the PHA from its waiting list.

       b.        Vacancies

                 1.       The owner must promptly notify the PHA of any vacancy ina
                          contract unit. After receiving the owner notice, the PHA shall
                          make every reasonable effort to refer a sufficient number of
                          families for owner to fill the vacancy..

                 2.       The owner must rent vacant contract units to eligible families on
                          the PHA waiting list referred by the PHA.

                 3.       The PHA and the owner must make reasonable, good faith efforts
                          to minimize the likelihood and length of any vacancy.

                 4.       If any contract units have been vacant for a period of 120 or more
                          days since owner notice of vacancy (and notwithstanding the
                          reasonable good faith efforts of the PHA to fill such vacancies), the
                          PHA may give notice to the owner amending the HAP contract to
                          reduce the number of contract units by subtracting the number of
                          contract units (by number of bedrooms) that have been vacant for
                          such period.




                                                                 Project-Based Voucher Program
                                                      HAP   Contract for New Construction/Rehab
Previous editions are obsolete
                                                                 HUD 52530A Page - 10 of Part 2
                                                                                      (04/2023)
                                                                      OMB Approval No. 2577-0169
                                                                                  (exp. 04/30/2026)

10.     TENANCY

        a.        Lease

                  The lease between the owner and each assisted family must be in
                  accordance with HUD requirements. In all cases, the lease must include
                  the HUD-required tenancy addendum. The tenancy addendum must
                  include, word-for-word, all provisions required by HUD.

                  Termination of tenancy

                  1.       The owner may only terminate the tenancy in accordance with the
                           lease and HUD requirements.

                           The owner must give the PHA a copy of any owner eviction notice
                           to the tenant at the same time that the owner gives notice to the
                           tenant. Owner eviction notice means a notice to vacate, or a
                           complaint or other initial pleading used to commence an eviction
                           action under State or local law.



                  Family payment

                  1.       The portion of the monthly rent to owner payable by the family
                           (“tenant rent’) will be determined by the PHA in accordance with
                           HUD requirements. The amount of the tenant rent is subject to
                           change during the term of the HAP contract. Any changes in the
                           amount of the tenant rent will be effective on the date stated in a
                           notice by the PHA to the family and the owner.

                           The amount of the tenant rent as determined by the PHA is the
                           maximum amount the owner may charge the family for rent of a
                           contract unit, including all housing services, maintenance and
                           utilities to be provided by the owner in accordance with the HAP
                           contract and the lease.

                           The owner may not demand or accept any rent payment from the
                           tenant in excess of the tenant rent as determined by the PHA. The
                           owner must immediately return any excess rent payment to the
                           tenant.

                           The family is not responsible for payment of the portion of the
                           contract rent covered by the housing assistance payment under the
                           HAP contract. The owner may not terminate the tenancy of an

                                                                  Project-Based Voucher Program
                                                       HAP   Contract for New Construction/Rehab
 Previous editions are obsolete
                                                                  HUD 52530A Page - 11 of Part 2
                                                                                       (04/2023)
                                                                     OMB Approval No. 2577-0169
                                                                                 (exp. 04/30/2026)

                          assisted family for nonpayment of the PHA housing assistance
                          payment.

                          The PHA is responsible only for making the housing assistance
                          payments to the owner on behalf of the family in accordance with
                          the HAP contract. The PHA is not responsible for paying the
                          tenant rent, or any other claim by the owner.

       d.        Other owner charges

                 1.       Except as provided in paragraph 2, the owner may not require the
                          tenant or family members to pay charges for meals or supportive
                          services. Nonpayment of such charges is not grounds for
                          termination of tenancy.

                          In assisted living developments receiving project-based voucher
                          assistance, owners may charge tenants, family members, or both
                          for meals or supportive services. These charges may not be
                          included in the rent to owner, nor may the value of meals and
                          supportive services be included in the calculation of reasonable
                          rent. Non-payment of such charges is grounds for termination of
                          the lease by the owner in an assisted living development.

                          The owner may not charge the tenant or family members extra
                          amounts for items customarily included in rent in the locality or
                          provided at no additional cost to the unsubsidized tenant in the
                          premises.

       e.        Security deposit

                 1.       The owner may collect a security deposit from the family.

                 2.       The owner must comply with HUD and PHA requirements, which
                          may change from time to time, regarding security deposits from a
                          tenant.

                          The PHA may prohibit security deposits in excess of private
                          market practice, or in excess of amounts charged by the owner to
                          unassisted families.

                          When the family moves out of the contract unit, the owner, subject
                          to State and local law, may use the security deposit, including any
                          interest on the deposit, in accordance with the lease, as
                          reimbursement for any unpaid tenant rent, damages to the unit or


                                                                 Project-Based Voucher Program
                                                      HAP   Contract for New Construction/Rehab
Previous editions are obsolete
                                                                 HUD 52530A Page - 12 of Part 2
                                                                                      (04/2023)
                                                                       OMB Approval No. 2577-0169
                                                                                   (exp. 04/30/2026)

                           other amounts which the family owes under the lease. The owner
                           must give the family a written list of all items charged against the
                           security deposit and the amount of each item. After deducting the
                           amount used as re1mbursement to the owner, the owner must
                           promptly refund the full amount of the balance to the family.

                  5.       If the security deposit is not sufficient to cover amounts the family
                           owes under the lease, the owner may seek to collect the balance
                           from the family. However, the PHA has no liability or
                           responsibility for payment of any amount owed by the family to
                           the owner.

11.     FAMILY RIGHT TO MOVE

                  The family may terminate its lease at any time after the first year of
                  occupancy. The family must give the owner advance written notice of
                  intent to vacate (with a copy to the PHA) in accordance with the lease. If
                  the family has elected to terminate the lease in this manner, the PHA must
                  offer the family the opportunity for tenant-based rental assistance in
                  accordance with HUD requirements.

                  Before providing notice to terminate the lease under paragraph a, the
                  family must first contact the PHA to request tenant-based rental assistance
                  if the family wishes to move with continued assistance. If tenant-based
                  rental assistance is not immediately available upon lease termination, the
                  PHA shall give the family priority to receive the next available
                  opportunity for tenant-based rental assistance.

12.     OVERCROWDED,              UNDER-OCCUPIED, AND ACCESSIBLE UNITS

        The PHA subsidy standards determine the appropriate unit size for the family size
        and composition. The PHA and owner must comply with the requirements in 24
        CFR 983.260. If the PHA determines that a family is occupying a wrong-size
        unit, or a unit with accessibility features that the family does not require, and the
        unit is needed by a family that requires the accessibility features, the PHA must
        promptly notify the family and the owner of this determination, and of the PHA’s
        offer of continued assistance in another unit.       24 CFR 983.260(a).

13.     PROHIBITION OF DISCRIMINATION

                  The owner may not refuse to lease contract units to, or otherwise
                  discriminate against any person or family in leasing of a contract unit,
                  because of race, color, religion, sex (including sexual orientation and
                  gender identity), national origin, disability, age or familial status.


                                                                   Project-Based Voucher Program
                                                       HAP    Contract for New Construction/Rehab
 Previous editions are obsolete
                                                                   HUD 52530A Page - 13 of Part 2
                                                                                        (04/2023)
                                                                     OMB Approval No. 2577-0169
                                                                                 (exp. 04/30/2026)

                  The owner must comply with the following requirements: The Fair
                  Housing Act (42 U.S.C. 3601-19) and implementing regulations at 24
                  CFR part 100 et seg.; Executive Order 11063, as amended by Executive
                  Order 12259 (3 CFR, 1959-1963 Comp., p. 652 and 3 CFR, 1980 Comp.,
                  p. 307) (Equal Opportunity in Housing Programs) and implementing
                  regulations at 24 CFR part 107; title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964
                  (42 U.S.C. 2000d-2000d-4) (Nondiscrimination in Federally Assisted
                  Programs) and implementing regulations at 24 CFR part 1; the Age
                  Discrimination Act of 1975 (42 U.S.C. 6101-6107) and implementing
                  regulations at 24 CFR part 146; section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of
                  1973 (29 U.S.C. 794) and implementing regulations at 24 CFR part 8; title
                  II of the Americans with Disabilities Act, 42 U.S.C. 12101 et seg. ; 28
                  CFR part 35; Executive Order 11246, as amended by Executive Orders 113
                  75, 11478, 12086, and 12107 (3 CFR, 1964-1965 Comp., p. 339; 3 CFR,
                  1966-1970 Comp., p. 684; 3 CFR, 1966-1970 Comp., p. 803; 3 CFR, 1978
                  Comp., p. 230; and 3 CFR, 1978 Comp., p. 264, respectively) (Equal
                  Employment Opportunity Programs) and implementing regulations at 41
                  CFR chapter 60; Executive Order 11625, as amended by Executive Order
                  12007 (3 CFR, 1971-1975 Comp., p. 616 and 3 CFR, 1977 Comp., p. 139)
                  (Minority Business Enterprises); Executive Order 12432 (3 CFR, 1983
                  Comp., p. 198) (Minority Business Enterprise Development); and
                  Executive Order 12138, as amended by Executive Order 12608 (3 CFR,
                  1977 Comp., p. 393 and 3 CFR, 1987 Comp., p. 245) (Women’s Business
                  Enterprise).



                  The owner must comply with HUD’s Equal Access to HUD-assisted or -
                  insured housing rule (24 CFR 5.105(a)(2)).

                  The owner must comply with the Violence Against Women Act, as
                  amended, and HUD’s implementing regulation at 24 CFR part 5, Subpart
                  L, and program regulations.

                  The PHA and the owner must cooperate with HUD in the conducting of
                  compliance reviews and complaint investigations pursuant to all
                  applicable civil rights statutes, Executive Orders, and all related rules and
                  regulations.

14.     PHA DEFAULT AND HUD REMEDIES

        If HUD determines that the PHA has failed to comply with the HAP contract, or
        has failed to take appropriate action to HUD’s satisfaction or as directed by HUD,
        for enforcement of the PHA’s rights under the HAP contract, HUD may assume

                                                                 Project-Based Voucher Program
                                                      HAP   Contract for New Construction/Rehab
 Previous editions are obsolete
                                                                 HUD 52530A Page - 14 of Part 2
                                                                                      (04/2023)
                                                                      OMB Approval No. 2577-0169
                                                                                  (exp. 04/30/2026)

        the PHA’s rights and obligations under the HAP contract, and may perform the
        obligations and enforce the rights of the PHA under the HAP contract.

15.     OWNER DEFAULT AND PHA REMEDIES

        a.        Owner default

                  Any of the following is a default by the owner under the HAP contract:

                  1.       The owner has failed to comply with any obligation under the HAP
                           contract, including the owner’s obligations to maintain all contract
                           units in accordance with the housing quality standards.

                           The owner has violated any obligation under any other housing
                           assistance payments contract under Section 8 of the United States
                           Housing Act of 1937 (42 U.S.C. 1437f).

                           The owner has committed any fraud or made any false statement to
                           the PHA or HUD in connection with the HAP contract.

                           The owner has committed fraud, bribery or any other corrupt or
                           criminal act in connection with any Federal housing assistance
                           program.

                           If the property where the contract units are located is subject to a
                           lien or security interest securing a HUD loan or a mortgage insured
                           by HUD and:

                           1.     The owner has failed to comply with the regulations for the
                                  applicable mortgage insurance or loan program, with the
                                  mortgage or mortgage note, or with the regulatory
                                  agreement; or

                           ii.    The owner has committed fraud, bribery or any other
                                  corrupt or criminal act in connection with the HUD loan or
                                  HUD-insured mortgage.

                  6.       The owner has engaged in any drug-related criminal activity or any
                           violent criminal activity.

        b.        PHA remedies

                  1.       If the PHA determines that a breach has occurred, the PHA may
                           exercise any of its rights or remedies under the HAP contract.


                                                                  Project-Based Voucher Program
                                                       HAP   Contract for New Construction/Rehab
 Previous editions are obsolete
                                                                  HUD 52530A Page - 15 of Part 2
                                                                                       (04/2023)
                                                                     OMB Approval No. 2577-0169
                                                                                 (exp. 04/30/2026)

                  2.       The PHA must notify the owner in writing of such determination.
                           The notice by the PHA to the owner may require the owner to take
                           corrective action (as verified by the PHA) by a time prescribed in
                           the notice.

                  3.       The PHA’s rights and remedies under the HAP contract include
                           recovery of overpayments, termination or reduction of housing
                           assistance payments, and termination of the HAP contract.

                  PHA remedy is not waived

                  The PHA’s exercise or non-exercise of any remedy for owner breach of
                  the HAP contract is not a waiver of the right to exercise that remedy or
                  any other right or remedy at any time.

16.     OWNER DUTY TO PROVIDE INFORMATION AND ACCESS
        REQUIRED BY HUD OR PHA

        a.        Required information

                  The owner must prepare and furnish any information pertinent to the HAP
                  contract as may reasonably be required from time to time by the PHA or
                  HUD. The owner shall furnish such information in the form and manner
                  required by the PHA or HUD.

                  PHA and HUD access to premises

                  The owner must permit the PHA or HUD or any of their authorized
                  representatives to have access to the premises during normal business
                  hours and, for the purpose of audit and examination, to have access to any
                  books, documents, papers and records of the owner to the extent necessary
                  to determine compliance with the HAP contract, including the verification
                  of information pertinent to the housing assistance payments or the HAP
                  contract.

17.     PHA AND OWNER             RELATION TO THIRD PARTIES

        a.        Injury because of owner action or failure to act

                  The PHA has no responsibility for or liability to any person injured as a
                  result of the owner’s action or failure to act in connection with the
                  implementation of the HAP contract, or as a result of any other action or
                  failure to act by the owner.



                                                                 Project-Based Voucher Program
                                                      HAP   Contract for New Construction/Rehab
 Previous editions are obsolete
                                                                 HUD 52530A Page - 16 of Part 2
                                                                                      (04/2023)
                                                                      OMB Approval No. 2577-0169
                                                                                  (exp. 04/30/2026)

                  Legal relationship

                  The owner is not the agent of the PHA. The HAP contract does not create
                  or affect any relationship between the PHA and any lender to the owner or
                  any suppliers, employees, contractors or subcontractors used by the owner
                  in connection with the implementation of the HAP contract.

                  Exclusion of third-party claims

                  Nothing in the HAP contract shall be construed as creating any right of a
                  family or other third party (other than HUD) to enforce any provision of
                  the HAP contract, or to assert any claim against HUD, the PHA or the
                  owner under the HAP contract.

                  Exclusion of owner claims against HUD

                  Nothing in the HAP contract shall be construed as creating any right of the
                  owner to assert any claim against HUD.

18.     PHA-OWNED            UNITS

        Notwithstanding Section 17 of this HAP contract, a PHA may own units assisted
        under the project-based voucher program, subject to the special requirements in
        24 CFR 983.59 regarding PHA-owned units.

19.      CONFLICT OF INTEREST

        a.        Interest of members, officers, or employees of PHA, members of local
                  governing body, or other public officials

                  1.       No present or former member or officer of the PHA (except tenant-
                           commissioners), no employee of the PHA who formulates policy
                           or influences decisions with respect to the housing choice voucher
                           program or project-based voucher program, and no public official
                           or member of a governing body or State or local legislator who
                           exercises functions or responsibilities with respect to these
                           programs, shall have any direct or indirect interest, during his or
                           her tenure or for one year thereafter, in the HAP contract.

                  2.       HUD may waive this provision for good cause.

                  Disclosure

                  The owner has disclosed to the PHA any interest that would be a violation
                  of the HAP contract. The owner must fully and promptly update such

                                                                  Project-Based Voucher Program
                                                       HAP   Contract for New Construction/Rehab
 Previous editions are obsolete
                                                                  HUD 52530A Page - 17 of Part 2
                                                                                       (04/2023)
                                                                      OMB Approval No. 2577-0169
                                                                                  (exp. 04/30/2026)

                  disclosures.

                  Interest of member of or delegate to Congress

                  No member of or delegate to the Congress of the United States of America
                  or resident-commissioner shall be admitted to any share or part of this
                  HAP Contract or to any benefits arising from the contract.

20.     EXCLUSION FROM FEDERAL PROGRAMS

        a.        Federal requirements

                  The owner must comply with and is subject to requirements of 2 CFR part
                  2424.

                  Disclosure

                  The owner certifies that:

                  1.       The owner has disclosed to the PHA the identity of the owner and
                           any principal or interested party.

                           Neither the owner nor any principal or interested party is listed on
                           the U.S. General Services Administration list of parties excluded
                           from Federal procurement and nonprocurement programs; and
                           none of such parties are debarred, suspended, subject to a limited
                           denial of participation or otherwise excluded under 2 CFR part
                           2424,

21.     TRANSFER OF THE CONTRACT                    OR PROPERTY

        a.        When consent is required

                  1.       The owner agrees that neither the HAP contract nor the property
                           may be transferred without the advance written consent of the PHA
                           in accordance with HUD requirements.

                           “Transfer” includes:

                           a.     Any sale or assignment or other transfer of ownership, in
                                  any form, of the HAP contract or the property;

                           b.     The transfer of any right to receive housing assistance
                                  payments that may be payable pursuant to the HAP
                                  contract;

                                                                  Project-Based Voucher Program
                                                       HAP   Contract for New Construction/Rehab
 Previous editions are obsolete
                                                                  HUD 52530A Page - 18 of Part 2
                                                                                       (04/2023)
                                                                       OMB Approval No. 2577-0169
                                                                                   (exp. 04/30/2026)

                          C.      The creation of a security interest in the HAP contract or
                                  the property;

                          d.      Foreclosure or other execution on a security interest; or

                          e.      A creditor’s lien, or transfer in bankruptcy.

                 3.       If the owner is a corporation, partnership, trust or joint venture, the
                          owner is not required to obtain advance consent of the PHA
                          pursuant to paragraph a for transfer of a passive and non-
                          controlling interest in the ownership entity (such as a stock transfer
                          or transfer of the interest of a limited partner), if any interests so
                          transferred cumulatively represent less than half the beneficial
                          interest in the HAP contract or the property. The owner must
                          obtain advance consent pursuant to paragraph a for transfer of any
                          interest of a general partner.

       b.        Transferee assumption of HAP contract

                 No transferee (including the holder of a security interest, the security
                 holder’s transferee or successor in interest, or the transferee upon exercise
                 of a security interest) shall have any right to receive any payment of
                 housing assistance payments pursuant to the HAP contract, or to exercise
                 any rights or remedies under the HAP contract, unless the PHA has
                 consented in advance, in writing to such transfer, and the transferee has
                 agreed in writing, in a form acceptable to the PHA in accordance with
                 HUD requirements, to assume the obligations of the owner under the HAP
                 contract, and to comply with all the terms of the HAP contract.

       c.        Effect of consent to transfer

                 1.       The creation or transfer of any security interest in the HAP
                          contract is limited to amounts payable under the HAP contract in
                          accordance with the terms of the HAP contract.

                 2.       The PHA’s consent to transfer of the HAP contract or the property
                          does not to change the terms of the HAP contract in any way, and
                          does not change the rights or obligations of the PHA or the owner
                          under the HAP contract.

                 3.       The PHA’s consent to transfer of the HAP contract or the property
                          to any transferee does not constitute consent to any further
                          transfers of the HAP contract or the property, including further
                          transfers to any successors or assigns of an approved transferee.


                                                                   Project-Based Voucher Program
                                                        HAP   Contract for New Construction/Rehab
Previous editions are obsolete
                                                                   HUD 52530A Page - 19 of Part 2
                                                                                        (04/2023)
                                                                      OMB Approval No. 2577-0169
                                                                                  (exp. 04/30/2026)

                  When transfer is prohibited

                  The PHA will not consent to the transfer if any transferee, or any principal
                  or interested party is debarred, suspended subject to a limited denial of
                  participation, or otherwise excluded under 2 CFR part 2424, or is listed on
                  the U.S. General Services Administration list of parties excluded from
                  Federal procurement or nonprocurement programs.

22.     SUBSIDY LAYERING

        a.        Owner     disclosure

                  The owner must disclose to the PHA, in accordance with HUD
                  requirements, information regarding any related assistance from the
                  Federal Government, a State, or a unit of general local government, or any
                  agency or instrumentality thereof, that is made available or is expected to
                  be made available with respect to the contract units. Such related
                  assistance includes, but is not limited to, any loan, grant, guarantee,
                  insurance, payment, rebate, subsidy, credit, tax benefit, or any other form
                  of direct or indirect assistance.

                  Limit of payments

                  Housing assistance payments under the HAP contract must be no more
                  than is necessary, as determined in accordance with HUD requirements, to
                  provide affordable housing after taking account of such related assistance.
                  The PHA will adjust in accordance with HUD requirements the amount of
                  the housing assistance payments to the owner to compensate in whole or
                  in part for such related assistance.

23.     OWNER LOBBYING CERTIFICATIONS

        a.        The owner certifies, to the best of owner’s knowledge and belief, that:

                  1.       No Federally appropriated funds have been paid or will be paid, by
                           or on behalf of the owner, to any person for influencing or
                           attempting to influence an officer or employee of any agency, a
                           Member of Congress, an officer or employee of Congress, or an
                           employee of a Member of Congress in connection with the
                           awarding of the HAP contract, or the extension, continuation,
                           renewal, amendment, or modification of the HAP contract.

                  2.       If any funds other than Federally appropriated funds have been
                           paid or will be paid to any person for influencing or attempting to


                                                                  Project-Based Voucher Program
                                                       HAP   Contract for New Construction/Rehab
 Previous editions are obsolete
                                                                  HUD 52530A Page - 20 of Part 2
                                                                                       (04/2023)
                                                                     OMB Approval No. 2577-0169
                                                                                 (exp. 04/30/2026)

                           influence an officer or employee of any agency, a Member of
                           Congress, an officer or employee of Congress, or an employee of a
                           Member of Congress in connection with the HAP contract, the
                           owner must complete and submit Standard Form-LLL, “Disclosure
                           Form to Report Lobbying,” in accordance with its instructions.

        b.        This certification by the owner is a prerequisite for making or entering into
                  this transaction imposed by 31 U.S.C. 1352.

24.     TERMINATION OF HAP CONTRACT                     FOR WRONGFUL           SELECTION
        OF CONTRACT UNITS

        The HAP contract may be terminated upon at least 30 days notice to the owner by
        the PHA or HUD if the PHA or HUD determines that the contract units were not
        eligible for selection in conformity with HUD requirements.

25.     NOTICES AND OWNER               CERTIFICATIONS

        a.        Where the owner is required to give any notice to the PHA pursuant to the
                  HAP contract or any other provision of law, such notice must be in writing
                  and must be given in the form and manner required by the PHA.

        b.        Any certification or warranty by the owner pursuant to the HAP contract
                  shall be deemed a material representation of fact upon which reliance was
                  placed when this transaction was made or entered into.

26.     NOTICE OF TERMINATION OR EXPIRATION WITHOUT
        EXTENSION

        a.        An owner must provide notice to the PHA, and to the affected tenants, not
                  less than 1 year prior to the termination or expiration without extension of
                  a HAP contract.

        b.        An owner who fails to provide such notice must permit tenants to remain
                  in their units for the required notice period with no increase in the tenant
                  portion of the rent. During this time period, an owner may not evict a
                  tenant as a result of the owner’s inability to collect an increased tenant
                  portion of rent. With PHA agreement, an owner may extend the
                  terminating contract for a period of time sufficient to give tenants 1
                  years’s advance notice.

27.     FAMILY’S RIGHT TO REMAIN

        Upon termination or expiration of the contract without extension, each family
        assisted under the contract may elect to use its assistance to remain in the project

                                                                 Project-Based Voucher Program
                                                      HAP   Contract for New Construction/Rehab
 Previous editions are obsolete
                                                                 HUD 52530A Page - 21 of Part 2
                                                                                      (04/2023)
                                                                   OMB Approval No. 2577-0169
                                                                               (exp. 04/30/2026)

        if the family’s unit complies with the inspection requirements under section
        8(0)(8) (42 U.S.C. 1437f(0)(8) of the U.S. Housing Act of 1937 (“the 1937
        Act’’)), the rent for the unit is reasonable as required by section 8(0)(10)(A) of the
        1937 Act, and the family pays its required share of the rent and the amount, if
        any, by which the unit rent Gncluding the amount allowed for tenant-paid utilities)
        exceeds the applicable payment standard.

28.     ENTIRE AGREEMENT;             INTERPRETATION

        a.        The HAP contract, including the exhibits, is the entire agreement between
                  the PHA and the owner.

        b.        The HAP contract must be interpreted and implemented in accordance
                  with all statutory requirements, and with all HUD requirements, including
                  amendments or changes in HUD requirements during the term of the HAP
                  contract. The owner agrees to comply with all such laws and HUD
                  requirements. Any regulatory citation specifically included in this HAP
                  contract is subject to any subsequent revision of such citation.




                                                               Project-Based Voucher Program
                                                    HAP   Contract for New Construction/Rehab
 Previous editions are obsolete
                                                               HUD 52530A Page - 22 of Part 2
                                                                                    (04/2023)
