                                                                      |
                                                          |

                                                            iss
                                                                     ,
                                                          a




                                                                      4
                                                          h———_———




                                                                     —ay
                                                                          oe
                                                                |
                                                                          ||
                                                             /


                                                                     =
                                                                          TY}
                                                                           >
                                                                                rs)
                                                                     %S




@ LEAD THE WAY   PHA GOVERNANCE
                 FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT
                                              AND

                 A Training for Board Members and Staff
ER
A




       Ah | PROCUREMENT   PRACTICES AT PUBLIC HOUSING AGENCIES
A
EE




       Table of Contents
A
EE




       Procurement Regulations And AGeNncCy...............cccccccssssssececccssesscecceeeeeees
I




                                                                                                                             aa
A




          Procurement             Policies and         Procedures
A EE




       Roles and RESPONSIDIIities ................cccsccccsssscccssscccsssccesssscccssssceesssceeesscess




                                                                                                                             Tye
A




          Board      Of COMMISSIONEYLS                 ..........ccccscscsscccscscescscccscsceccsescscscecescccscecesesees
LE




          Sample          Board RESOLUTION ...............cccccsssccccsscsscceressscceecessscecessssceeeessecs
LE




          Ex@Cutive DIPr@CtOr .............cccccccsssscccssscccessscecesscccsscceessscceesscceessseeeesseees




                                                                                                                             eeo
          Contracting OPFFICET................eessssssscecccccceensssscsccccccceseceeesscsccccceeeseeseeses
LE A




          PUDIIC HOUSING AG@NCY                    ............ecccsesssscccccssssccccccessescccccsensscccccceseeseeees
EE
A




          Procurement Planning at PHAs




                                                                                                                             net
EE
A




          Methods of Procurement                      ..................cssssssssssscecececccccccccceeceeesssssessseseees
EE
A




       Other Administrative REQUIFEMENTS.                            ..............ccccccccssssccccsessscerscsssseeeeees
A OE




                                                                                                                             =
          TErMs Of CONTACTS .............ceecssssssssscccccceesssssssceccccceeceessssscecccceeseeaeeseees                    11
A
EE




          Federal Labor Standards and Wage Rates ................. seessssseeeeeeees                                         11
EE




          Actions Requiring HUD Approval                                                                                     12
EL
A
EE
A
EE
EE
EE
A
EE
LE
LEE
                                                                                                             TEE TE TEE TD TET EE TE FEEL TE TE EE TE TEE TA TEE TOTTis
©   PROCUREMENT   PRACTICES AT PUBLIC HOUSING AGENCIES




    All public housing agencies (PHAs) must have written, up-to-date procurement policies and
    procedures that follow applicable federal, state, and local laws and regulations in place. They
    must maintain a contract administration system and a written Code of Standards of conduct




                                                                                                             TL PE TPE TD TEP FTE EET TET EE TIED PE TET PL TD TEP TOE TEL EE TATE PE TD TEE TE TE EE TE TEE TE TE EE TE TET EE ITEP TFET EE TA FEEL TD TEE TD TOE PEE TTP EE TE TE EE TE TEE
    governing performance in the award and administration of contracts. In addition, PHAs are
    required to have an administrative process to manage all procurement and contracting activities.
    Typically, the Code of Standards is outlined in the procurement policy. It applies to not only the
    PHA‘s employees, but also to all board members and their relatives and partners. Other sources
    of PHA procurement regulations include PIH notices, as well as state and local laws. The PHA
    Should follow the more stringent of the federal, state, and local laws.




    A PHA’ss procurement policies and procedures are developed by the PHA and approved by the
    board of commissioners. The purpose of these guidelines is to ensure that a PHA is acting legally
    and with integrity in its daily operations by providing regulatory and administrative oversight of all
    procurement activities.

       Procurement Policy: The procurement policy identifies specific regulatory aspects of the
       procurement process. It reflects the regulatory principles outlined in the regulations — PHAs
       typically use the sample provided by HUD in the Procurement Handbook (see box). The policy
       should itemize any applicable state and local requirements. The handbook does not state that
       the board must approve the policy. However, it is standard practice, as per the Annual Contri-
       butions Contract (ACC) requirements, that the board approve the policy.

       Procurement Procedures: Procurement procedures are the standard operating procedures
       that implement the policy set by the board. The procedures are developed/adopted by the
       PHA’s executive director/CEO — board approval is not required for these procedures. These
       procedures are typically in the form of a management guide that outlines the internal admin-
       istrative steps undertaken at the PHA for all procurement actions. It outlines such procedures
       as:
       «   Person designated for issuing purchase orders
       «   The process for deliveries of equipment and supplies
       «   Person designated for accepting the delivery of equipment and supplies
       «   Person designated for paying for services delivered
                                                                                                             LE
                                                                                                             OL
                                                                                                             TE




@9 LEAD THE WAY
                                                                                                             STS
                                                                                                             ST
@   PROCUREMENT   PRACTICES AT PUBLIC HOUSING AGENCIES




    Roles and Responsibilities

    Board of Commissioners
    The board must be cognizant of the basic provisions noted in the PHA’s procurement policy,
    including the general procurement activities undertaken through the Capital Fund Program (CFP)
    and through the regular operating budget. The responsibilities of the board include:
       Approving the procurement policy
       Avoiding direct financial gain from any
       operational activities at the PHA                 BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS

       Avoiding conflicts of interest                       Provides general oversight of procurement
       Monitoring procurement activities with               activities
       regular meetings
                                                            Not directly involved in vendor selection
       Approving contracts and agreements
       following threshold limits noted in the              May approve contracts/agreements that
       procurement policy or procedures                     exceed       a threshold or address a condition
       Inquiring and following up on                        specifically outlined under the PHA’s
                                                            procurement       policies and/or procedures
       administrative inconsistencies or
       wrongdoing to prevent fraud and
       mismanagement at the PHA
       Ensuring, through the review of the personnel policy and position descriptions, that duties are
       separated to the point that adequate internal controls are maintained at the PHA
       Reviewing the Independent Public Audit for problems with the procurement function
       Always being alert for any indications of fraud and mismanagement
    While the board does not have direct administration of the procurement functions at the PHA,
    they are responsible for monitoring all procurement awards through regular meetings. In
    particular, the board should inquire about administrative inconsistencies that do not follow the
    Standard Operating Procedures. As part of the procurement policies and procedures, the board
    can set a threshold that requires its concurrence on certain purchases. However, the board
    Should not micromanage a PHAS procurement activities.




                                                                                            €) LEAD THE WAY
©     PROCUREMENT         PRACTICES AT PUBLIC HOUSING AGENCIES




      Sample Board Resolution


                                                    RESOLUTION NO. 57 OF 2011

         A Resolution — Authorizing the Executive Director or his Designee to enter into an Electrical Contract with Merit
                           Electrical Group, Inc. for Switchboard Replacement at the Bidwell High-rise.

        WHEREAS, the Housing Agency has determined that it is in the best interests of the Agency and the residents of Bid-
        well High-rise to replace the existing electrical switchboard; and

        WHEREAS, on May 18, 2011, the Housing Agency tasked the Architectural/Engineering (A/E) firm of D7D Engi-
        neering to design the electrical work required to replace the existing switchboard and to provide the bidding documents
        necessary to produce a contractor to perform the work; and

        WHEREAS, on October 31, 2011, the Housing Agency issued an Invitation for Bids (“IFB”) for the Switchboard Re-
        placement at the Bidwell High-rise; and

        WHEREAS, on November 28, 2011 the Housing Agency received seven (7) bids for the electrical construction work in
        response to the Invitation for Bids; and

        WHEREAS, Merit Electrical Group, Inc. is the lowest responsive and responsible bidder with a bid amount for
        $84,000.00 which is 80% of the Independent Cost Estimate (ICE) of $106,242.50; and

        WHEREAS, this procurement was performed in accordance with applicable Federal regulations and the procurement
        policies and procedures of the Housing Agency

        NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED by the Housing Agency

        Section 1. That the Executive Director or his designee is hereby authorized to enter into an Electrical Construction Con-
        tract with Merit Electrical Group, Inc. in the amount of $84,000.00 for Switchboard Replacement as the Bidwell High-
        rise.

        Section 2. That the contract will be paid from MtW Funds.

        “Ayes”: Reverend Ricky V. Burgess, Mr. Frederick Frank, Ms. Beatrice Hogan, and Ms. Doris Carson Williams.

        “Nayes’’: None.




      Above is a sample board resolution to enter into an electrical construction contract. Locate and
      highlight the important aspects of this resolution, including:
             Scope of work defined
    ORWN >




             Date the bid was issued
             Number of bids received
             Bid cost compared to estimate
             Method of paying for contract




€) LEAD THE WAY
@   PROCUREMENT   PRACTICES AT PUBLIC HOUSING AGENCIES




    Executive Director
    The executive director, sometimes called the
    CEO, is appointed by the board to conduct
    procurement activity as the Contracting Officer.        EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR
    The executive director is the only person
                                                                Has full authority to procure and execute
    designated to obligate funds and to execute
                                                                contracts on behalf of the PHA
    contracts, purchase orders, intergovernmental
    agreements, and change orders. This person              -   May delegate authority to staff if approved
    analyzes bids and proposals to ensure fair                  by the board per official resolution

    executive director will also grant or deny                  types of actions allowed
    protests in writing.


    Contracting Officer
    The Contracting Officer, in most cases, is the executive director. Therefore, any delegations of
    authority must be clearly outlined and approved by the board, particularly for project-based
    developments under Asset Management.


    Public Housing Agency
    It is the responsibility of the PHA to ensure that subcontract awards are made to responsible
    contractors with the ability to perform successfully under the terms and conditions of a proposed
    procurement. The PHA must also:

    Maintain sufficient records to detail the history of a procurement contract. Clear and concise
    records of every action should be properly documented. Then, if the PHA is audited, it can justify
    the award.

    Settle all contractual and administrative issues in accordance with good administrative practice
    and sound business judgment. This includes all protests, disputes, and claims.

    Implement protest procedures to handle and resolve disputes relating to procurements. Protest
    Procedures should be addressed in both the procurement policies and procedures. PHAs have
    the legal authority to administer their own programs. Federal agencies will not pass judgment on
    a PHAs determination unless the matter is primarily a federal concern. HUD’s review of a protest
    is limited to the assessment of violations of federal law or regulation or a PHA‘s violation of their
    own Protest Procedures for failure to review a complaint or protest.

    Implement a contract administration system that ensures that contractors hired by the PHA
    perform in accordance with the terms, conditions, and specifications of the contract. A contract
    administration system can be used for all contracts awarded under:
    «   Small Purchase Procedures (SPP)
    «   Invitation for Bids (IFB)
    «   Request for Proposals (RFP)
    «   Request for Qualifications (RFQ)


6                                                                                       €) LEAD THE WAY
                                                                                                               TEE TE TEE TD TET EE TE FEEL TE TE EE TE TEE TA TEE TOTTis
©     PROCUREMENT     PRACTICES AT PUBLIC HOUSING AGENCIES




     This system relates to the staff assignment and internal coordination needed to administer all
     procurement activities at the PHA. It helps the PHA answer critical questions such as:
      «      Is the PHA getting a good value for their payment?
      «      Are the goods received acceptable?
      «      Are compliance schedules being met?




                                                                                                               TL PE TPE TD TEP FTE EET TET EE TIED PE TET PL TD TEP TOE TEL EE TATE PE TD TEE TE TE EE TE TEE TE TE EE TE TET EE ITEP TFET EE TA FEEL TD TEE TD TOE PEE TTP EE TE TE EE TE TEE
     PHAs who have had problems administering Architecture/Engineering (A/E) and other
     professional-type consultants in the past should have specific performance criteria included in
     their contracts.

     Ensure open competition according to the Code of Federal Regulations (2 CFR 200.319(a)),
     “procurement transactions must be conducted in a manner providing full and open competition...”
     Activities that might restrict open competition include:
             Placing unreasonable requirements on firms in order for them to qualify to do business
    DORWN>




             Requiring unnecessary experience and excessive bonding
             Noncompetitive pricing practices between firms or between affiliated companies
             Noncompetitive contracts to consultants that are on retainer contracts
             Organizational conflicts of interest
             Specifying only a “brand name” product instead of allowing “an equal” product to be offered
             and describing the performance or other relevant requirements of the procurement
     7.      Any arbitrary action in the procurement process.
     When you have a concern about procurement, ask yourself, “Did everyone have an opportunity
     to participate in a fair manner?”




                                                                                                               LE
                                                                                                               OL
                                                                                                               TE




@9 LEAD THE WAY                                                                                            7
                                                                                                               STS
                                                                                                               ST
OT OUST TTL TOO OLT ESTO O OTIS TTT TOO OTI SETTLE O OTIS STATO TCUIS TTT TOO OOIS TTT TTT TOO OOIS TTT OT TOT OTIS TTT TTC OOII TUTTO COIS E TET TTC COIS TTT TOO CUUS TTT ETT OO OTIT TTT TTT OOOII IT TTT O OUEST TTT TOO DISET TTT TTC COIS TT TTTTTTTSOTSSTT




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Ah | PROCUREMENT                        PRACTICES AT PUBLIC HOUSING AGENCIES




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        For each procurement action planned at your PHA, it is important to plan well ahead of time.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Good planning determines the procurement method for what is needed, ensures that goods and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        services are obtained when needed, and enables economy of buying off-season. It will also help
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        your PHA develop a schedule for each action. Planning should include determining your short-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        term and long-term needs per your physical needs assessment (PNA), the time restraints the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        activity is under (e.g., urgency, type and size of the job, and market conditions), and the source
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        and availability of funds for the activity, whether they be from operating funds, capital funds, or
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        other funds.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        There are ten basic procurement steps that PHAs                            must undertake with all procurement activities.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        These steps include:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1.  Develop a Statement of Work (SOW). An SOW is typically used for service contracts (e.g.,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            accounting or legal services) and establishes a baseline for evaluation factors.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2. Complete an Independent Cost Estimate (ICE). An ICE is the PHA’s estimate of the cost of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            goods and services being sought. It is used to evaluate the contractor’s reasonableness.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        3.  Determine the rationale for the procurement method.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        4. Solicit and receive quotes/bids/proposals.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        5. Determine responsive/responsible bidder, as applicable.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        6. Determine price reasonableness.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        7. Award the contract.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        8. Implement the contract administration system.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        9. Close out the contract.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        10. Maintain records for minimum of three years.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ==        Sey
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Sy   ok eta   oye*     ery       moe   2 By
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       a8          x        ra    x   5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        a od
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        9a




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             o                :
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ries




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2      . PEARS         AEE  3     ae
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ae
O TOTS S TLL OOOO SET




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        There are four primary methods of procurement, described                           below.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Small                Purchase                     Procedures
O OTIS ETT




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Small Purchase Procedures (SPPs) are normally used for purchases equal to or less than
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        $100,000 or based on PHA’s small purchase threshold. It is less formal than the other types
OTIS ETT TOT OTIS TTL O COTTE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        of procurement procedures. SPPs can be used to procure all types of procurements, such as
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        requests for bids or competitive proposals; however, informal procedures are not recommended
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        for formal requests for proposals due to the evaluation process involsved. Federal regulations
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        State that offers shall be obtained from an “adequate number of qualified sources.” HUD
OC OLEATE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        recommends a minimum of three qualified sources; however, two is the minimum. If one offer is
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        received under SPP, it becomes a single source. However, no HUD approval is required to award
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        the contract since the procedure is not formal.
OO OII STE O COLELLO OCIS
TOOTS




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            @} LEAD THE WAY
OTOL




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    °
OOOO
                                                                                                                                                                                                rs




                                                                                                             TEE TE TEE TD TET EE TE FEEL TE TE EE TE TEE TA TEE TOTT
©     PROCUREMENT     PRACTICES AT PUBLIC HOUSING AGENCIES




      Steps to an SPP include:
             Develop an Independent Cost Estimate for the needed work of materials.
    RWNS



             Solicit three quotes.
             Compare the quotes to the cost estimate.
             Negotiate the price.




                                                                                                             TL PE TPE TD TEP FTE EET TET EE TIED PE TET PL TD TEP TOE TEL EE TATE PE TD TEE TE TE EE TE TEE TE TE EE TE TET EE ITEP TFET EE TA FEEL TD TEE TD TOE PEE TTP EE TE TE EE TE TEE
      5.     Execute a purchase order.
      Micro Purchases are a subcategory of SPP for procurements costing less than $2,000. For
      PHAs to use this category, it must be outlined in the PHA’s procurement policies. Under this new
      category, implemented with the revised HUD Procurement Handbook, an ICE and a wage rate
      are not required. Only one quote is required if the price is considered reasonable.

      Sealed Bids
      Sealed bids are normally used for construction contracts that are less than $100,000. This
      procurement method incorporates the qualifications into the request itself, and is awarded based
      on price alone. To issue and award a sealed bid, PHAs typically use the following process:
             Develop a cost estimate for the needed work or materials.
    ORWN >




             Draft a request for proposals (RFP).
             Publicly open the bids as they are received.
             Determine the lowest responsible and responsive bidder.
             Execute a fixed price contract with the selected bidder.
      An invitation for bids (IFB) is a formal type of procurement. The issuance of IFB is the procurement
      method used for acquiring tangible items such as equipment and supplies, and for construction
      activities.

      Competitive Procedures
      Competitive procedures can be used when sealed bids or small purchases are not practical. This
      procurement method is useful when there are unclear or incomplete specifications in the scope
      of work. It is awarded based on the specifications offered by the bidder. There are two types of
      competitive procedures: 1) Price Considered, where price is included in the assessment of the
      proposal; and 2) Price Not Considered, where the assessment is based solely on the technical
      merits of the proposal. Price Not Considered is typically used for A/E and developers. To issue
      and award a competitive bid, PHAs typically use the following process:
      1.     Develop a cost estimate for the needed work or materials.
      2.     Draft an RFP or Competitive-based Proposal (CBP).
      3.     Receive proposals, but don’t open them publicly.
                                                                                                             LE

      4.     Rate the proposals based on the technical merits and price of the proposal (when price is
             considered).
                                                                                                             OL




      5.     Choose the highest-rated proposal.
      6.     Negotiate the price with highest-ranked firm, via the Contracting Officer.
                                                                                                             TE




      7.     Execute either a fixed price or cost reimbursement contract with the selected firm.




@9 LEAD THE WAY
                                                                                                             STS
                                                                                                             ST
@   PROCUREMENT   PRACTICES AT PUBLIC HOUSING AGENCIES




    Non-Competitive    Procedures
    Non-competitive procedures are used for emergencies and when competition is lacking. A
    cost analysis must be performed in all cases, due to the lack of competition. All technical and
    cost aspects may be negotiated with the sole provider. Types of noncompetitive procurement
    methods include:

       Sole source
       ¢«  PHA solicits an offer from one source through a Non-competitive-based        Proposal (Non-
           CBP) since it knows there is no competition in the open market
       «   The item or service is available from only one entity

       Single source
       ¢«  PHA solicits offers from multiples sources through a Competitive-based      Proposal (CBP) in
           the open market, but receives only one offer
       «   PHA was not aware of lack of competition in the open market

       Emergencies and Public Exigencies
       -  Must be a justifiable condition where the health and safety of the residents is at stake and
           must be corrected immediately
       ¢   No HUD approval is required, in order to facilitate   a quicker response



                                           Example of Single Source

       Legal services for a PHA may be difficult to obtain in smaller communities. The PHA may initially
       issue an RFP as a CBP, but must process as a Non-CBP if only one response is received. If there
       is no response to the RFP, the PHA may consider performing a sole source by targeting one
       firm willing to negotiate. If it is a formal IFB, HUD approval must be obtained before awarding
       the contract. If it is informal, the PHA may proceed to award without approval from HUD, but it
       must document the procedure.



    Non-competitive bid procedures require a justification. The justification must describe the action
    required, the history of prior purchases, the HUD exception under which the activity applies (24
    CFR 85.36(d)(4)(i)(A) through (D)), a statement of the unique circumstances requiring the award
    under this method of procurement, any efforts made to achieve competition (past and future),
    and approval by the Contracting Officer of the executive director or board, as applicable, per the
    PHA’s procurement procedures.




©                                                                                     €) LEAD THE WAY
©   PROCUREMENT    PRACTICES AT PUBLIC HOUSING AGENCIES




    Other Administrative Requirements

    Terms of Contracts
    All contracts must have a finite performance period, including any options to be exercised, each
    outlined with the maximum value for the service/materials and/or the limit on total quantities/
    services being acquired (Section 10-8 of the Procurement Handbook). Specifically:

    Contracts shall not exceed five years, including options for renewal or extension.
    «   Any contracts over five years, including options, must be approved by HUD (Section 12.2 of
        the Procurement Handbook).
        «   HUD has determined that contracts beyond five years inherently restrict the competition
            and must be re-bid to provide opportunities to other entities and to verify the price being
            paid for the service.
        «   The HUD Field Office may approve contract extensions beyond five years if there is no
            alternative or if the PHA can verify that state or local law allows that contracts can exceed
            the five-year limit.
    All options must be evaluated at the time of the original award of the contract and assessed      by
    the PHA prior to activating the option.
    «   Options to extend a contract can only be exercised if the original contract outlined such
        options; otherwise, the PHA must re-bid the solicitation.


    Federal Labor Standards and Wage                  Rates
    For construction and maintenance contracts over $2,000, The Davis-Bacon and Related
    Acts wages guidelines apply. The Davis-Bacon and Related Acts apply to contractors and
    subcontractors performing on federally funded or assisted contracts in excess of $2,000 for the
    construction, alteration, or repair (including painting and decorating) of public buildings or public
    works. Under Davis-Bacon, PHAs must pay workers applicable wages based on the established
    classifications of work. PHAs must also post wages in the job site and other public places and
    interview employees. Interviews ensure that work performed and salaries paid to workers are
    consistent with job classification wages reported in the payrolls.

    Service contracts are exempt. These might include extermination, security guard services,
    dumpster/trash pickup, alarm systems, routine servicing and testing of HVAC, building
    inspections, office equipment maintenance, and vehicle service and repairs.

    More   information   can   be found   on www.wdol.qdov.




€) LEAD THE WAY
@   PROCUREMENT   PRACTICES AT PUBLIC HOUSING AGENCIES




The following actions require HUD     approval, according to the regulations in 24 CFR 85.36(g)(2):
«   Any procurement procedures or operational actions which fail to comply with the established
    regulations
-   Formal procurements exceeding the $100,000 Federal Simplified Acquisition Threshold or the limit
    specified in the PHA’s procurement policies where:
    «   Only one bid or offer is received
    «   The contract is awarded without competition
    ¢«  The contract or RFP specifies a “brand” name
    «   The contract is awarded to a firm other than the apparent low bidder under an IFB
¢   Acontract modification under any procurement type that changes the Scope of Work or increases
    the contract amount by more than the $100,000 Federal Simplified Acquisition Threshold or the limit
    specified in the PHA’s procurement policies
The nature of these procurement measures is to limit competition. Therefore, HUD has an interest in
assessing their basis to be sure that the justification is legitimate. It is the responsibility of the PHA to
contact HUD to obtain approval for these methods.




©                                                                                      @ LEAD THE WAY
