        June 2024




Diversity, Equity, and
Inclusion Plan
2024-2026
Oregon Department of Environmental Quality
                                   This document was prepared by
                             Oregon Department of Environmental Quality
                           700 NE Multnomah Street, Portland Oregon, 97232




Translation or other formats
Español | 한국어 | 繁體中文 | Pусский | Tiếng Việt | ‫اﻟﻌﺮﺑﻴﺔ‬
800-452-4011 | TTY: 711 | deqinfo@deq.oregon.gov

Non-discrimination statement
DEQ does not discriminate on the basis of race, color, national origin, disability, age or sex in administration
of its programs or activities. Visit DEQ’s Civil Rights and Environmental Justice page.
Gratitude

This plan was made possible through the time, vulnerability and experiences shared by individuals and groups
across DEQ. To the folks who joined in engagement sessions with the DEI Planning team, the Strategic planning
team and Engaged to Change (ETC), we are grateful for you.

BIPOC affinity group
DEI Council
DEQ Support Staff
Veterans affinity group
DEQ Pride
Disability engagement group
Vehicle Inspection Program
Communications
Human Resources
Wellness Committee
Recruitment and Retention Committee
Environmental Justice Working Groups
DEQ Trainers
Data Governance engagement group
Procurement
Leadership Team




Report Name                                                                                                 3
Table of contents
Gratitude ........................................................................................................................................ 3
Statement of support ................................................................................................................... 5
Leadership Team DEI Word Cloud ............................................................................................... 6
DEI plan introduction ................................................................................................................... 7
Legacy of racism in Oregon ........................................................................................................................................ 7
History of racial harm and injustice at DEQ .......................................................................................................... 8
DEI planning team ......................................................................................................................... 8
Our decision process ..................................................................................................................................................... 9
Our work process ............................................................................................................................................................ 9
Definitions...................................................................................................................................... 9
DEI plan ........................................................................................................................................ 10
Equity statement .......................................................................................................................................................... 10
Engagement approach and limitations ..................................................................................... 11
Engagement session themes ................................................................................................................................... 12
Focus areas and actions............................................................................................................................................. 12
Environmental and Climate Justice ....................................................................................................................... 13
Next steps .................................................................................................................................... 25
Appendix ...................................................................................................................................... 27
Documents Reviewed ................................................................................................................................................. 27




DEI Plan June 1, 2024-June 1, 2026                                                                                                                                           4
Statement of support
We are excited and energized to affirm and support this plan. The DEI planners – the names of
DEI Plan team members have been omitted due to safety concerns and a lack of protective factors
and accountability measures established at the agency at this time - spent time planning and
modeling the practice of centering the most vulnerable and harmed voices in developing this
plan. We know that by centering the traditionally unheard, we are able to identify actions that
will benefit all. The plan charts a vision for long term change within DEQ combined with a two-
year action plan. The journey is ongoing as we continually strive to build an anti-racist
organization that supports current employees and those who will pick up the work in the future.
The Leadership Team crafted and shared our individual visions for equity and inclusion. The
word cloud is the result. By sharing our individual hopes and aspirations, we built a collective
understanding and pinpointed a set of commitments that will be the foundation for ensuring we
each champion implementation of the DEI action plan in a way that is inclusive, transparent and
accountable to the work.

Our commitments
•  Be of this work. We individually and collectively strive to be an anti-racist organization. We
   will prioritize this work, dedicate the time and seek the resources needed to do this work
   and support the most vulnerable employees at the agency.
•  Relationships first. To do this we must build relationships with the people doing the work.
   We recognize that those most impacted are also closest to the solutions. These relationships
   include the affinity groups, the DEI Council, the Environmental Justice Work Group, The
   Recruitment and Retention steering committee and individuals.
•  Thoughtful co-creation and action. We will work to share power and use our positional
   authority to support the DEI plan activities and the people doing the work. We will show up
   with curiosity and share our expertise within specific DEI plan activities and in our daily work.
•  Transparency. We strive to communicate frequently and openly – both the work we are
   doing and the work of our colleagues throughout the organization. We will show our work
   and seek feedback and input as a gift.
•  Clarity and support. We will bring clarity and transparency to our policies, centering them
   in anti-racism while also supporting our individual and collective work to develop our
   understanding and skills of DEI practice and anti-racist approaches. We will transparently
   share our learning and use it to make anti-racist policies.

All this will take time and we share determination to make the time to do this. We are at the
beginning of the journey that many in our agency are further along in. We are proud to affirm
this plan, support its implementation, and hold ourselves accountable to progress through
regular reporting.

In gratitude to the DEI Plan team and all the voices who contributed to it.
Keith Andersen, Brian Boling, Matt Davis, Shannon Davis, Lydia Emer, Leah Feldon, Mike
Kucinski, Ali Mirzakhalili, Lori Pillsbury, Sara Slater, Christine Svetkovich, Jennifer Wigal, Lauren
Wirtis


DEI Plan June 1, 2024-June 1, 2026                                                                      5
Leadership Team DEI Word Cloud




DEI Plan June 1, 2024-June 1, 2026   6
DEI plan introduction
In January 2023, Governor Kotek directed State of Oregon agencies to develop a Diversity,
Equity and Inclusion Plan to be updated every two years. The DEI plan must be meaningful,
actionable and measurable, and it must be connected and aligned with the agency strategic
plan and affirmative action plan. The key focus areas required in the DEI Plan are
communication, community engagement, data, decision making, contracts and procurement,
budgeting, workforce development, workplace culture and no tolerance for racism, hate and
discrimination. Agencies were encouraged to adopt the strategies, goals and implementation
processes from the statewide Diversity, Equity and Inclusion Action Plan.

Before the announcement of the Governor’s
                                                            DEI Plan Required Focus Areas
expectations, DEI efforts were already taking place at
DEQ through the union, DEI Restructuring group, affinity     No tolerance for racism, hate
groups, DEI Council, strategic planning, the recruitment       and discrimination
and retention project, and countless efforts led by          Budgeting
individuals throughout agency. These efforts are staff       Communication
led, and they developed an essential foundation for          Community engagement
building the agency’s DEI plan.                              Data
                                                             Decision making
Legacy of racism in Oregon                                    Contracts and procurement
From its beginnings as a state, Oregon’s government at
                                                              Workforce development
the local, regional and state level has played a role in
                                                              Workplace culture
creating and maintaining racial inequity and oppression.
Exclusion laws in the 1840s and 1850s were a
determined effort to establish a whites-only state by denying Black people the right to live in
Oregon, own real estate, make contracts, vote or use the legal system. Out of growing hostility
towards Japanese farmers in the Hood River Valley, the Alien Land law was established in 1923
which prevented first generation Japanese Americans from owning or leasing land. Racism
persisted throughout the state’s history through the theft of indigenous land, Japanese
internment camps and the segregation of communities and schools. 1 Racist language from the
exclusion laws remained in the State Constitution until 2002.

Violations to human rights and justice throughout Oregon’s history impact diversity, equity and
inclusion today. Systemic racism continues to create barriers for the BIPOC community across
the state by hindering access to housing, education, healthcare, economic stability, safety and
opportunities to thrive.




1
    Timeline of Oregon’s History



DEI Plan June 1, 2024-June 1, 2026                                                                7
History of racial harm and injustice at DEQ
As a government agency, DEQ is linked to historical legacies and white-dominant systems that
repeat racial inequity. Patterns of exclusion and harm to BIPOC staff have been voiced and
unaddressed. In 2021, the BIPOC affinity group wrote a letter to the agency detailing
experiences of inequity, harassment and discrimination. Ten recommendations were presented
to promote diversity, inclusion and safety. As of May 2024, the recommendations have not been
implemented and agency leadership has not responded to the letter.

DEQ hired a DEI coordinator in 2021, and due to a lack of authority, role clarity and support in
the agency’s organizational structure, the coordinator resigned in 2023. The former coordinator
described that it was unclear who was responsible for DEI decision-making and outcomes, and
this challenge remains persistent. The absence of standards for handling microaggressions was
also called to attention, and as of May 2024 a racial harm policy has not been put into place.

In June 2023, Engage to Change released an Organizational Assessment (OA) “to provide insight,
analysis and recommendations to support DEQ in alignments of its mission and goals with its
commitment to racial and social justice.” ETC assessed DEQ between “passive and symbolic
change” on the continuum in becoming an anti-racist organization. Five themes were identified
as barriers within the agency for progressing to full inclusivity: lack of transparency and
accountability, perfectionism, defensiveness, a lack of support for BIPOC employees and the
siloed nature of DEQ’s structure. All of those themes also emerged in engagement sessions for
the DEI plan. Harm occurred during townhall meetings when the OA was released. DEQ’s lack of
readiness to build safe structures for BIPOC staff and facilitate conversations about racism,
power and privilege was apparent and has remained.


DEI planning team
DEQ’s DEI planning team was selected in November 2023 through an application process that
considered diverse identities and specific skills sets needed to craft a comprehensive plan. Our
goal was to create an achievable plan that was supportive of existing DEI efforts by the DEI
Council, affinity groups, recruitment and retention and with consideration to the incoming Office
of Equity team.

Experiences of harm and injustice shared with us through engagement sessions were also
directly experienced by the team during the planning process. Patterns of top-down decision
making that lack accountability and transparency expressed in the BIPOC letter, the
Organizational Assessment and DEI coordinator letter are persistent in the agency today. This
plan necessitates actionable and intentional change at DEQ and a call to action by the
Governor’s Office to dismantle racist and oppressive systems and structures to create a
workplace that centers racial equity and supports care and belonging. We recognize the plan
sets ambitious goals, but we strongly believe these actions are necessary and achievable for
DEQ.


DEI Plan June 1, 2024-June 1, 2026                                                                 8
Our decision process
These principles guided our decision-making process as a team:

    •   Build in time for thoughts to percolate before a decision is made unless it’s clear for
        everyone that we can move forward.
    •   Everyone gets a chance to share final thoughts before we move forward.
    •   Recap the decision first then give a clear vote yes, no, thumbs down/up.
    •   We come to a consensus on every decision.
    •   We value clarity around action, next steps and roles.
    •   Revisit a decision if it’s not working, new information is available or someone on the
        team requests.

Our work process
These principles guided how we worked together as a team:

    •   We will let each other know if we have accessibility needs.
    •   We will ask for help and resources as necessary—within the team and external to the
        team.
    •   We will consider the plan implementors.
    •   Our process will be inclusive of those most impacted, and we will include impacted
        groups from the beginning.
    •   Our team values inclusive ideas of engagement, including but not limited to sharing
        ideas in meetings by mic or in the chat. It also includes sharing when we don’t have
        items to add or felt stuck, as opposed to being silent. Examples of engagement include
        sharing positive feedback with team members, recognizing and acting on our areas for
        growth, offering emotional support, and offering practical support around next items to
        help balance workloads.


Definitions
The State of Oregon’s definitions for racial equity, diversity, equity and inclusion develop a
shared language to operationalize the DEI Plan.

Racial Equity means closing the gaps so that race can no longer predict any person’s success,
which simultaneously improves outcomes for all. To achieve racial equity, we must transform our
institutions and structures to create systems that provide the infrastructure for communities to
thrive equally. This commitment requires a paradigm shift on our path to recovery through the
intentional integration of racial equity in every decision.

Diversity means honoring and including people of different backgrounds, identities, and
experiences collectively and as individuals. It emphasizes the need for sharing power and
increasing representation of communities that are systemically underrepresented and under-



DEI Plan June 1, 2024-June 1, 2026                                                                9
resourced. These differences are strengths that maximize the state’s competitive advantage
through innovation, effectiveness, and adaptability.

Equity acknowledges that not all people, or all communities, are starting from the same place
due to historic and current systems of oppression. Equity is the effort to provide different levels
of support based on an individual’s or group’s needs in order to achieve fairness in outcomes.
Equity actionably empowers communities most impacted by systemic oppression and requires
the redistribution of resources, power, and opportunity to those communities.

Inclusion is a state of belonging when persons of different backgrounds, experiences, and
identities are valued, integrated, and welcomed equitably as decision-makers, collaborators, and
colleagues. Ultimately, inclusion is the environment that organizations create to allow these
differences to thrive.


DEI plan
Becoming an anti-racist organization is critical to prepare the workforce to meet the needs of
diverse communities and address complex environmental issues. This plan focuses on
foundational work DEQ can do to make structural changes to move the agency beyond passive
and symbolic change. It provides actionable and measurable changes to policies and practices
to build a culture of care through racial equity, inclusion, transparency and accountability.

As a living document, the plan will evolve through implementation and be updated every two
years. It connects with the agency Strategic Plan through the shared strategies to a) co-create a
culture of care, b) build practices and processes to achieve more inclusive and equitable
outcomes, and c) define and prioritize manageable workloads for all DEQ employees.

Equity statement
The Oregon Department of Environmental Quality’s journey towards racial equity demands
institutional self-reflection, humility, vulnerability, honesty, and a steadfast commitment to
recognizing the value of all individuals. Together, we condemn racism and prioritize anti-racism
as the cornerstone of DEQ’s efforts to build a more just and equitable agency.

We acknowledge that achieving racial equity requires intentional and ongoing practice,
involving critical review and strategic changes to policies, accepted practices, systems and
structures. We recognize the legacy of historical injustices perpetuated/upholding systems of
oppression against Black, Brown, Asian, Indigenous, LGBTQIA2S+, disabled and low-income
communities. We commit to centering their experiences, values, and expertise, community self-
determination, to expanding opportunities of involvement and leadership, and to working
together to advance environmental protection/justice goals for all.




DEI Plan June 1, 2024-June 1, 2026                                                                10
We recognize the enduring effects of
racial segregation and disinvestment,           The DEI Plan is informed by internal
particularly in environmental justice           engagement with the following DEQ
issues such as access to clean air, land,       groups:
and water.
                                                 BIPOC staff
                                                 BIPOC managers
Engagement approach                              DEI Council
                                                 DEQ Support Staff (facilitated by
and limitations                                     Strategic Planning)
The plan is informed by insights shared          Veterans affinity group (facilitated by
during engagement sessions with                     Strategic Planning)
employees most impacted by injustice             DEQ Pride (facilitated by Strategic
and individuals and teams integral to the           Planning)
advancement of racial equity in the              Disability affinity group (facilitated by
agency. Engagement included
                                                    Strategic Planning)
discussions and surveys to understand
                                                 Vehicle Inspection Program (facilitated
how the plan could help provide support
                                                    by Engage to Change)
to achieve DEI goals and activities. We
                                                 Communications
are grateful for the time, vulnerability
                                                 Human Resources
and contributions of those who
participated in the engagement sessions.         Wellness Committee
                                                 Recruitment & Retention Committee
The timeline of the plan and siloing of          Environmental Justice Working Groups
information within the agency resulted in
                                                   (EJWG)
gaps. The team had five months to hold
                                                 DEQ Trainers
engagement sessions, learn about the
                                                 Data governance engagement group
agency’s data, procurement and
                                                 Procurement
budgeting processes, and create the plan
                                                 Leadership team
by the June 1 deadline. The condensed
timeline impacted our access to                  Wellness Committee
information. Work with external                  DEQ Trainers
communities happens across DEQ, but
due to time constraints and a lack of
central point of contact, the planning team was unable to fully learn about community
engagement efforts.

Future updates to the DEI plan should include metrics and use a timeline that supports a fuller
understanding of DEQ’s structures and processes.




DEI Plan June 1, 2024-June 1, 2026                                                                11
Engagement session themes
Themes emerged across engagement sessions, and they are important considerations for
agency leadership to know and engage with while implementing the DEI plan
recommendations.

    •   Capacity (FTE, workload issues, funding, expertise)
    •   The impact of power dynamics and a lack of accountability
    •   Silos are a barrier to progress and meaningful impact for all Oregon communities
    •   Uncertainty and a lack of clarity across the agency:
            o Vision
            o Agency priorities
            o Decision-making processes
            o Roles and responsibilities
    •   Inequitable processes (ex. ADA accommodations, trial service, interview panels,
        complaints)
    •   DEQ is a reactive agency that needs to move towards being a proactive and strategic
        agency
    •   A lack of leadership team visibility and accountability
    •   Experiences of individual and collective harm




Focus areas and actions
Strategies from agency’s Strategic Plan and key focus areas from Oregon’s statewide DEI plan
are represented in DEQ’s DEI plan. The recommended actions are solutions to address the
barriers identified in engagement sessions.

Transparency and accountability are the foundation of becoming an anti-racist organization, and
the DEI Plan shares definitions from the Strategic Plan for those values.

                                We are open and visible to how we make policies and
         Transparency           decisions.


         Accountability         We take responsibility for the impact of our words and actions
                                with each other and the communities we serve.




DEI Plan June 1, 2024-June 1, 2026                                                               12
No Tolerance for Racism, Hate and Discrimination
Why this is             DEQ must set up institutional policies, practices and structures to protect, care
important               for and serve those who have been harmed by racism, hate and discrimination.
                        Transparent policies create organizational accountability in the workplace. A
                        lack of transparency and accountability in the execution of current policies and
                        process, for example the complaints process will continue to harm BIPOC
                        employees and employees from marginalized communities. Approaches,
                        practices and policies rooted in care for our most impacted are essential to
                        transforming our current culture rooted in fear to one rooted in diversity and
                        belonging.

Actions                     •   Fully resource, support, advocate for and empower the newly created
                                Office of Equity and staff. This includes:
                                    o Leadership at DEQ demonstrating a deep commitment to DEI
                                        and anti-racism through word, prioritization, practice, decision-
                                        making, funding and care for those doing the work.
                                    o Co-create 2 a safety plan for all DEI professionals and
                                                   1F1F




                                        practitioners in the agency.
                                    o Develop the office’s scope of work, roles and responsibilities.
                                    o Include the Office of Equity at the start of strategic
                                        conversations and initiatives rather than utilizing the office as a
                                        triage service for the agency.
                            •   Set clear guidelines and accountability structures for expected
                                behavior and clear methods for reporting and addressing
                                inappropriate behavior.
                            •   Co-create and implement a racial harm policy that centers the most
                                impacted employees and outlines a clear range of accountability, from
                                restorative practices to dismissal.
                            •   Establish restorative practices and processes for impacted individuals
                                and parties when harm occurs.
                            •   Collaborate through DEI best practices with the Office of Equity, DEI
                                Council, affinity groups and other relevant parties to establish clear
                                policies and accountability structures to respond to incidents of racism,
                                hate and discrimination.
                            •   Establish clear processes for sharing and reporting complaints related
                                to racism, hate and discrimination using a trauma-centered approach
                                that prioritizes impacts on people who are harmed.
                            •   Proactively communicate the racial harm policy, complaints procedure
                                and accountability structures throughout the agency.



2
 Co-create means figuring out who needs to be at the table, internally and externally, and using inclusive
and equitable approaches to working collaboratively from the beginning of the decision-making process.



DEI Plan June 1, 2024-June 1, 2026                                                                      13
Environmental and Climate Justice
Why this is                   Environmental and climate justice work cannot effectively be achieved by
important                     one person or team within DEQ. It requires all staff, regardless of position
                              or seniority, to embrace environmental and climate justice. This will require
                              cultivating an agency-wide mindset shift to recognize justice as integral to
                              our core work and not as separate or in addition to the work we do. This
                              requires accountability, a deep commitment from leadership, resources
                              and community input.

Actions                       •   Root all current and future work in anti-racist practices.
                              •   Identify gaps in resources and capacity and address these gaps in
                                  future resourcing conversations and plans.
                              •   Ensure that agency-wide training plans include environmental and
                                  climate justice related options.
                              •   Develop a comprehensive vision, structure, and plan (for example,
                                  decision-making, roles and responsibilities) to prioritize and resource
                                  environmental and climate justice activities as an integral part of
                                  everyone’s work. This will require adequate staffing and time.


Workplace culture
Why this is               An inclusive workplace culture enhances the success of individuals and the
important                 ability of DEQ to achieve its mission. Developing a culture of care through
                          systemic structures is crucial to fulfilling DEQ’s commitment to “a work climate
                          reflecting respect, care and concern for every individual.” 3
                                                                                     2F2F




                          DEQ does not currently have effective systems in place to prevent or address
                          harm when it occurs. By reforming these systems to be explicitly anti-racist,
                          DEQ aligns with broader state initiatives and directives and ensures all
                          employees are cared for and supported. This direction is further supported by
                          findings in the Secretary of State’s audit and expectations from the Governor’s
                          office.

Actions                   Workloads
                            • Collaborate (staff and management) to identify where work can be
                                stopped, paused, prioritized and identify where more resources are
                                needed. Communicate internally and with external interested parties.
                            • Allocate dedicated time for staff and management to invest in
                                professional development.
                            • Reduce workloads for interview panelists to intentionally invest in the
                                interview process.



3
    Affirmative Action Plan 2023-2025



DEI Plan June 1, 2024-June 1, 2026                                                                  14
                       Safety
                          • Create a safety assessment to understand current physical and
                              psychological safety concerns in all programs across DEQ.
                          • Develop a trauma informed safety plan to address current safety
                              concerns in all programs across DEQ.3F3F 4

                       Leadership Development and Accountability
                          • Co-create a leadership training program to enhance skills in
                             collaboration, inclusivity, active listening, engagement and team
                             building.
                          • Co-create a robust lead worker training program and cohort.
                          • Reimagine our current performance review tools and processes by
                             applying statewide policies, such as management core competencies,
                             in addition to union contract protections, and centering feedback from
                             employees.
                          • Appoint an independent third-party entity (approved by the DEI
                             Council) to conduct annual manager reviews.

                       Training
                          • Develop and implement an agency-wide DEI training and education
                              plan to increase employee knowledge, awareness, and skills. Ensure
                              that frontline staff can participate. Training subjects should include:
                                  o Anti-racism
                                     o   Racial equity
                                     o   The history of racism in Oregon
                                     o   Conflict de-escalation and by-stander intervention training
                                     o   Constructive communication
                                     o   Conflict management
                                     o   Trauma informed care
                                     o   Environmental and climate justice
                                     o   Disability justice
                           •   Co-create agency-wide standards and practices for incorporating DEI
                               and accessibility standards in internal and external trainings and
                               outreach.
                           •   Develop protocols and trainings to disrupt harm, use community
                               agreements to steward conversations and repair conflict.


4
 Trauma informed organizations, systems and plans 1) Realize the widespread impact of trauma and
understand potential paths for recovery 2) Recognize the signs and symptoms of trauma in individuals 3)
Respond by fully integrating knowledge about trauma into policies, procedures and practices and seek to
actively resist re-traumatization (SAMHSA, 2012).



DEI Plan June 1, 2024-June 1, 2026                                                                   15
                       DEI Council
                          • Establish clear roles and responsibilities.
                          • Leverage the DEI Council’s insights to drive meaningful and impactful
                             change.
                          • Provide adequate resources to the council that includes time, funding
                             and leadership support.

                       Centralize Information and Procedures
                          • Create and update Standard Operating Procedures for routine
                              procedures for each position to strengthen information sharing and
                              decrease barriers to fill-in coverage.
                          • Prioritize time for staff and managers to attend Web and Records
                              teams townhalls to increase knowledge and institutionalize best
                              practices.
                          • Evaluate support and resources needed for agency administrative staff.
                              Develop and implement solutions, such as a central hub of information
                              and equitable procedures.

                       Culture of Care
                          • Implement the statewide definitions for diversity, equity and inclusion
                              across the organization.
                          • Co-create and sponsor an agency-wide equitable mentorship program
                              to foster advancement opportunities and networking.
                          • Provide employees support and resources when pay equity is
                              identified as an issue.
                          • Evaluate access to space resources (gyms, meeting spaces, parking
                              costs) and implement equitable changes across all DEQ locations.
                          • Eliminate barriers that are keeping frontline staff and other DEQ
                              employees from taking advantage of flexible work options that DEQ
                              provides other employees.
                          • Prioritize employee well-being by supporting and resourcing affinity
                              groups and employee community building activities, i.e., Wellness
                              Committee activities
                          • Co-create an equitable ADA accommodation policy to better support
                              employee needs, backgrounds and learning styles.
                          • Co-create quarterly review questions to emphasize support, care and
                              professional development. Incorporate pay equity review and training
                              plan forms into quarterly check-in structure.
                          • Develop and implement inclusivity and antiracism guidelines for
                              working groups and project teams at DEQ. Ensure organization-wide
                              understanding and commitment through training and clear
                              communication. Regularly monitor and adjust the guidelines to
                              maintain their relevance and effectiveness.



DEI Plan June 1, 2024-June 1, 2026                                                           16
Decision making
Why this is               Those directly affected by issues often have the deepest understanding of the
important                 challenges and deserve to part of the development of solutions and decision-
                          making processes. By involving impacted employees and external
                          communities in decision processes, DEQ can develop more effective, practical,
                          and innovative solutions.

                          Meaningful equity efforts require visibility to build trust with those who have
                          historically been harmed and excluded and to raise confidence in DEQ and our
                          work. Lack of transparency can result in distrust, inaccuracy, uncertainty, and
                          damage to relationships. Transparency requires open communication,
                          honesty, and a willingness to engage in healthy conflict. It is the responsibility
                          of not only individuals within the organization, but the organization itself. This
                          includes transparency around decision making, policies, and accountability.

Actions                       •   Adopt and use inclusive, racially equitable, transparent decision-
                                  making processes that center the voices of the most impacted,
                                  recognize that the people closest to the work are closest to solutions,
                                  and bring historically excluded individuals and/or groups into the
                                  process from beginning to end.
                              •   Integrate qualitative data into decision making and collect, synthesize,
                                  and center communities of color’s’ stories.
                              •   Implement more inclusive and equitable formation and management
                                  of workgroups and teams. Involve impacted people early in the
                                  process, and revisit decisions regularly.
                              •   Visibly communicate how the DEQ leadership team charter’s, principles
                                  and beliefs are carried out. 5
                                                             4F4F




    EQUITY BASED DECISION MAKING
    (From DEQ’s Organizational Assessment – Engage to Change)
    Recognize            Challenge          Commit to               Value             Use an
    Intersectionality    Dominant           Social Justice          Experiential      Interdisciplinary
                         Perspective                                Knowledge         Approach
    With race at the     Identify           Address systemic        Consider the      Identify all the
    center of the        inequities         inequities and          real-life         interested
    analysis, consider   involved in the    commit to not           experiences of    parties,
    the identities of    issue and          do further harm         the individuals   collaborators and
    the individuals      consider what                              impacted to       potential
    who will be          would challenge                                              solutions.



5
    Affirmative Action Plan 2023-2025



DEI Plan June 1, 2024-June 1, 2026                                                                    17
  impacted by the     the dominant                          inform the
  decision            perspective                           issue/decision

Data
Why this is            Data is key to understanding the bigger picture and taking action.
important
                       Leveraging qualitative and quantitative data helps identify needs, optimal
                       conditions for access to services, and opportunities for improvement within
                       DEQ and in DEQ’s environmental programs. Before collecting and using data,
                       we must build trust with communities involved. Engaging with these
                       communities helps us interpret data accurately, ensuring we focus on the
                       systems at play rather than defining people by the data.

                       Data governance is crucial for DEQ Oregon as it ensures the accuracy, security,
                       and ethical use of data, enabling informed decision-making and fostering
                       transparency. Effective data governance supports our commitment to
                       environmental quality and equity, helping us track progress, identify
                       disparities, and implement targeted actions to protect and improve Oregon's
                       environment for all communities.

Actions                    •   Adopt and communicate agency equitable data standards and tools.
                           •   Provide agency-wide education and training in alignment with
                               established data standards and tools.
                           •   Assess and enhance agency data management roles, responsibilities,
                               and internal structures to implement data actions in the DEI Statewide
                               Action Plan.
                           •   Focus on using more inclusive methods of gathering data.
                           •   Programs, divisions, regions and groups within DEQ use data for
                               culturally and linguistically responsive communications.
                           •   Programs, divisions, regions, and groups within DEQ use data to direct
                               resources for the most impacted communities across the state.
                           •   Co-create dashboard(s) to monitor and report on status of strategic
                               planning and DEI plan actions.

                       Human Resources
                         • Collect and analyze demographic data to better inform DEQ’s work
                            and to identify barriers to achieving equitable outcomes, including:
                               • Pay equity
                               • Trial service
                               • Recruitment and retention




DEI Plan June 1, 2024-June 1, 2026                                                             18
                                  • Track incidents of racial and other harm. 6 By understanding the
                                                                                  5F5F




                                    prevalence and nature of racial and other harm, DEQ can create
                                    interventions, effective policies, and training to foster a more
                                    inclusive and respectful environment.
                           • Collect and analyze recruitment, interview panel, advancement and
                               retention data metrics, including, but not limited to:
                                  • Diversity of candidates in hiring pools, receiving interviews, asked
                                    to participate in second interview, receiving offer letters and
                                    accepting offer letters.
                                  • Diversity of panel members in interview process
                                  • Diversity of candidates who are promoted to an internal position.
                           • Develop a trauma informed exit interview process, develop metrics and
                               co-create accountability for addressing resignations due to
                               mishandling of policies, practices and impacts of internal culture.
                       Collect and analyze trial service and complaints data.

Budgeting
Actions                     •   Adopt and communicate agency equitable data standards and tools.
                            •   Provide agency-wide education and training in alignment with
                                established data standards and tools.
                            •   Assess and enhance agency data management roles, responsibilities,
                                and internal structures to implement data actions in the DEI Statewide
                                Action Plan.
                            •   Focus on using more inclusive methods of gathering data.
                            •   Programs, divisions, regions and groups within DEQ use data for
                                culturally and linguistically responsive communications.
                            •   Programs, divisions, regions, and groups within DEQ use data to direct
                                resources for the most impacted communities across the state.
                            •   Co-create dashboard(s) to monitor and report on status of strategic
                                planning and DEI plan actions.

                       Human Resources
                         • Collect and analyze demographic data to better inform DEQ’s work
                            and to identify barriers to achieving equitable outcomes, including:
                               • Pay equity
                               • Trial service
                               • Recruitment and retention




6
 Historically, this has been known as a “microaggression”, but the term "microaggression" is inadequate
and underplays the severity and impact of the behaviors it describes.



DEI Plan June 1, 2024-June 1, 2026                                                                    19
                                   • Track incidents of racial and other harm. 7 By understanding the
                                                                                  5F5F




                                     prevalence and nature of racial and other harm, DEQ can create
                                     interventions, effective policies, and training to foster a more
                                     inclusive and respectful environment.
                            • Collect and analyze recruitment, interview panel, advancement and
                                retention data metrics, including, but not limited to:
                                   • Diversity of candidates in hiring pools, receiving interviews, asked
                                     to participate in second interview, receiving offer letters and
                                     accepting offer letters.
                                   • Diversity of panel members in interview process
                                   • Diversity of candidates who are promoted to an internal position.
                            • Develop a trauma informed exit interview process, develop metrics and
                                co-create accountability for addressing resignations due to
                                mishandling of policies, practices and impacts of internal culture.
                            Collect and analyze trial service and complaints data.

Actions                     •   Adopt and communicate agency equitable data standards and tools.
                            •   Provide agency-wide education and training in alignment with
                                established data standards and tools.
                            •   Assess and enhance agency data management roles, responsibilities,
                                and internal structures to implement data actions in the DEI Statewide
                                Action Plan.
                            •   Focus on using more inclusive methods of gathering data.
                            •   Programs, divisions, regions and groups within DEQ use data for
                                culturally and linguistically responsive communications.
                            •   Programs, divisions, regions, and groups within DEQ use data to direct
                                resources for the most impacted communities across the state.
                            •   Co-create dashboard(s) to monitor and report on status of strategic
                                planning and DEI plan actions.

                       Human Resources
                         • Collect and analyze demographic data to better inform DEQ’s work
                            and to identify barriers to achieving equitable outcomes, including:
                               • Pay equity
                               • Trial service
                               • Recruitment and retention
                               • Track incidents of racial and other harm. 8 By understanding the
                                                                                  5F5F




                                 prevalence and nature of racial and other harm, DEQ can create


7
 Historically, this has been known as a “microaggression”, but the term "microaggression" is inadequate
and underplays the severity and impact of the behaviors it describes.
8
 Historically, this has been known as a “microaggression”, but the term "microaggression" is inadequate
and underplays the severity and impact of the behaviors it describes.



DEI Plan June 1, 2024-June 1, 2026                                                                    20
                                    interventions, effective policies, and training to foster a more
                                    inclusive and respectful environment.
                           • Collect and analyze recruitment, interview panel, advancement and
                               retention data metrics, including, but not limited to:
                                  • Diversity of candidates in hiring pools, receiving interviews, asked
                                    to participate in second interview, receiving offer letters and
                                    accepting offer letters.
                                  • Diversity of panel members in interview process
                                  • Diversity of candidates who are promoted to an internal position.
                           • Develop a trauma informed exit interview process, develop metrics and
                               co-create accountability for addressing resignations due to
                               mishandling of policies, practices and impacts of internal culture.
                           Collect and analyze trial service and complaints data.

Workforce development
Why this is            Diversifying the workforce at DEQ provides increased opportunities to engage
important              and support culturally and ethnically diverse staff. The agency’s Affirmative
                       Action Plan establishes a commitment to “develop and maintain a workforce
                       that reflects Oregon’s demographics, encourages career development and
                       employee advancement, and provides employees with the tools necessary to
                       serve a more diverse customer base.” To achieve this, policies and practices
                       centered in DEI need to be created to support recruitment, hiring and
                       retention.

Actions                Position Descriptions (PDs) and Work Agreements
                          • Incorporate DEI, environmental and climate justice related work in all
                              position descriptions and work agreements (current and new).
                          • Equip hiring managers with guidance to create or revise position
                              descriptions to incorporate equity and inclusion work.
                          • Co-create a PD review process to ensure that the agency mission,
                              values, qualifications and expectations of the position are transparent.

                       Interview Panels
                           • Diversify interview panels to include BIPOC staff, staff from
                              marginalized communities, VIP, regions, Lab and administrative staff.
                           • Invite panelists from other state agencies and community partners,
                              such as search advocates, to enhance diversity and leverage expertise.
                           • Co-create a consistent process and approach for evaluating diversity
                              questions and question criteria for interviews.
                           • Improve panelist training on recognizing and mitigating bias and
                              provide guidance on how to report incidents to HR.

                       Applicant Experience




DEI Plan June 1, 2024-June 1, 2026                                                               21
                           •   Develop an equitable and trauma-informed interview process that
                               centers the applicant’s accessibility needs and creates an atmosphere
                               that allows the applicant to thrive. For example,
                               provide applicants more time (ex. 2 days) to review interview
                               questions.
                               Clearly communicate how applicants are reviewed. If length of
                               response to questions is important, make it clear that candidates need
                               to elaborate.

                       Community Engagement and Recruitment
                           • Prioritize and fund recruitment outreach to diverse and marginalized
                               communities.
                           • Increase staff from historically marginalized and underrepresented
                               communities across all work classes.
                           • Establish a transparent pipeline and goals for promoting employees
                               into advanced and leadership roles.
                           • Build relationships with colleges to foster recruitment.
                       Trial Service
                           • Establish clear standards and consistency within the trial service
                               process to address known inequities and harm. Minimize bias by
                               ensuring uniform evaluation criteria.
                           • Rename the trial service process to emphasize its purpose and align it
                               with the goals of inclusivity and fairness.
                           • Establish and track metrics for measuring trial service outcomes.
                           • Conduct a transparent annual review of trial service metrics, develop
                               procedures for accountability and report out themes to the agency.

                       Talent Development and Succession Planning
                          • Co-create a job shadowing program to enhance skill development and
                              succession planning.
                          • Provide transparent communication and mentorship on progressing
                              from one classification level to the next. Clear pathways for growth and
                              advancement should be transparent.
                          • Develop clear expectations and accountability processes rooted in
                              anti-racism and equity for managers and lead workers.
                          • Provide transparent agency-wide communication on the lead worker
                              role, expectations, accountability and an equitable recruitment process.
                          • Evaluate through DEI best practices for positions that are challenging
                              to fill and develop recruitment and retention plans.
                          • Establish a job rotation program to build career development
                              opportunities and strengthen succession planning efforts.
                          • Evaluate and reimagine the project management pool to increase
                              resources and address known inequities.



DEI Plan June 1, 2024-June 1, 2026                                                             22
                           Develop an implementation plan for DEQ’s current succession plan.

Community engagement
Why this is            Community engagement means proactively working with members of
important              communities to build partnerships and collaborate in decision-making. To
                       achieve its mission, DEQ must work with inclusive and anti-racist engagement
                       practices to serve diverse communities. Without a commitment to diversity,
                       equity and inclusion in community engagement, external policies will burden
                       and further marginalized communities.

Actions                    •   Ensure policymaking bodies include the voices of BIPOC, Tribal and
                               marginalized communities.
                           •   Engage and center diverse community interested parties and local
                               leaders in the decision-making process.
                           •   Co-create an agency-wide community engagement infrastructure
                               using the statewide Racial Equity Toolkit.
                           •   Co-create resources for staff working in community engagement
                               across the agency to share ideas and collaborate.
                           •   Demonstrate accountability and a commit to accessibly report back
                               findings to those involved in engagement efforts.
                           •   Provide trauma informed training for staff working with community
                               groups.
                           •   Dedicate resourcing to increase the capacity for staff working with
                               community groups.
                           •   Address contracting and procurement barriers that prevent
                               community-based organizations from collaborating with the agency.
                           •   Acknowledge the labor of marginalized communities and provide
                               compensation for community-based organizations for collaborating
                               with the agency.


Contracting and procurement
Why this is            Applying equitable contracting and procurement practices promotes
important              economic development for BIPOC, LGBTQIA2S+, women and service-disabled
                       veteran owned emerging small businesses.

Actions                    •   Embed an equity framework in the entirety of a project life cycle from
                               concept, planning, project development, procurement and
                               administration.
                           •   Increase outreach to BIPOC, women and service-disabled veteran
                               owned emerging small businesses.
                           •   Forecast and communicate upcoming contracting opportunities
                               including expiring contracts which will be re-purchased to anticipated
                               new projects.



DEI Plan June 1, 2024-June 1, 2026                                                              23
                           •   Develop metrics to track and analyze equitable procurement goals.
                           •   Conduct annual disparity studies to understand utilization and address
                               inequities.
                           •   Require contractors follow accessibility guidelines developed by web
                               team for all relevant deliverables.



Service delivery
Why this is                Equitable and inclusive service delivery works to eliminate inequity
important                  through policies and actions. According to the Secretary of State's audit
                           report, “the escalating effects of climate change and related impacts to
                           environmental quality may outpace DEQ’s ability to provide a high level of
                           service especially to some of Oregon’s more vulnerable communities"
                           ("Oregon Department of Environmental Quality Ongoing Strategic
                           Planning Can Help DEQ Address Obstacles to Achieving its Goals," April
                           2024, Report 2024-1). Providing resources to enhance accessibility,
                           communication and safety for all is crucial to achieving the agency’s
                           mission.

Actions                    •   Evaluate the policies and procedures for translation and interpretation
                               services using the statewide Racial Equity Toolkit. Create an awareness
                               campaign for staff about the translation and interpretation guidelines.
                           •   Install visitor signage in multiple languages at all office locations and
                               VIP stations.
                           •   Adhere agency-wide to Web Content Accessibility Guidelines for web-
                               based information and services.
                           •   Improve communications between state and county agencies by
                               addressing overlapping authority issues.
                           •   Use multimodal communication tools, such as short videos, to
                               communicate DEQ processes to the public.
                           •   Implement chip readers at VIP stations to improve efficiency.


Communications
Why this is                Addressing the overall lack of clarity, transparency and accountability
important                  described by our staff and external interested parties is foundational work
                           in advancing racial equity and anti-racism at DEQ. Co-creating a clear
                           agency vision, communication strategies and messages are vital to
                           building an inclusive community of diverse individuals and communities
                           needed to advance our environmental and climate justice goals.




DEI Plan June 1, 2024-June 1, 2026                                                                24
Actions                    •   Identify and acquire adequate additional staff, resources, and expertise
                               to support the agency’s current and communication needs and
                               DEI/anti-racism efforts.
                           •   Develop and implement an agency-wide trauma informed language
                               guidance and language access plan.
                           •   Identify and begin building relationships with culturally specific media
                               outlets.
                           •   Create inclusive, multi-lingual communications to increase accessibility
                               of agency program information and services. Develop a
                               communication plan and engagement process collaboratively with
                               historically and currently underserved populations and
                               communities that includes actively listening, being responsive, and
                               incorporating feedback in the development of programs, policies, and
                               other areas of work.
                           •    Utilize the Racial Equity Toolkit questions on Inclusive Communication
                               and community-informed Policy and Partnerships in Oregon’s
                               Statewide Diversity, Equity and Inclusion plan.




Next steps
The DEI plan is a living document to be updated as implementation efforts, future inclusive
teams, staff and community engagement, equitable decision-making and resources evolve.
Successful and sustainable implementation of the actions will require following anti-racist and
DEI best practices. Engage To Change assessed DEQ between passive and symbolic change on
the continuum in becoming an anti-racist organization. There is much work to be done to
transform our structures, policies and practices to center diversity, equity and inclusion.

Harm that occurred in townhalls and conversations after the release of the Organizational
Assessment showed DEQ’s lack of readiness to build safe structures for BIPOC employees and
facilitate conversations about racial equity. Becoming an anti-racist agency requires a
commitment to disrupt racism, acknowledge and understand power and privilege, dismantle
structures designed for the status quo and learn new ways to carry out the agency’s mission and
values. In the process of moving from where we are now to where we want to be with our DEI
goals, actions must be taken to protect those most impacted by racial harm and oppression. To
protect BIPOC employees and employees from marginalized communities, it is recommended
that the agency take these implementation steps:

    1. Share the plan with affinity groups first. This plan emerged from engagement sessions
       with affinity groups and sharing it with them first is an act of care and support.




DEI Plan June 1, 2024-June 1, 2026                                                               25
    2. Leadership Team in collaboration with other groups in the agency should establish an
       implementation team to prioritize the DEI plan actions and develop an equitable and
       inclusive implementation plan.
    3. A racial harm policy or plan should be in place before agency-wide conversations about
       the DEI plan are facilitated. A racial harm policy helps to create organizational
       accountability for anti-racism and DEI in the workplace, guidelines around what will and
       won’t be tolerated, and transparency in the reporting process.
    4. Hire third-party DEI facilitators to lead agency-wide discussions about the plan. Protocols
       should be developed for disrupting harm, using community agreements to steward
       conversations, holding people accountable and repairing conflict.
    5. Create affinity spaces for DEI plan conversations. Harm occurs when BIPOC colleagues
       are expected to be in the room to listen to their white colleagues learn about racism and
       work through dominant, white culture conditioning.
    6. Leadership Team must ensure that resource shortages do not hinder the implementation
       of the DEI Plan.

These recommendations create policies and structures that are essential to engage in
meaningful and trauma informed conversations about diversity, equity and inclusion. It is crucial
that transparent and accountable expectations are set up to support the commitment to
becoming an anti-racist agency.




DEI Plan June 1, 2024-June 1, 2026                                                             26
Appendix
Documents Reviewed
    •   State of Oregon Diversity, Equity and Inclusion Action Plan (2021)
    •   BIPOC letter (2021)
    •   Letter from former DEI Coordinator (2022)
    •   DEI Organizational Assessment (2023)
    •   Succession Plan (2023)
    •   Affirmative Action Plan (2023-2025)
    •   Strategic Plan (2024)
    •   ETC Engagement Session Notes (2023-2024)
    •   Strategic Planning Engagement Session Notes (2023-2024)
    •   State of Oregon Disparity Study (2023)
    •   Audit Report: Ongoing Strategic Planning Can Help DEQ Address Obstacles to Achieving
        its Goals (2024)




DEI Plan June 1, 2024-June 1, 2026                                                        27
