                                 State of Oregon




                      HIGHER
                  EDUCATION
                      COORDINATING
                      COMMISSION


                      Request for Project Proposals for

                            Online Course Exchange

                                        21-016



                         Opening Date: June 16, 2021

          1 Round of Questions Due: June 29, 2021, 1:00pm

  1“ Virtual Conference to Discuss Q&A: July 8, 2021, 9am - 11am

         2" Round of Questions Due: July 30, 2021, 1:00 pm

2" Virtual Conference to Discuss Q&A: August 5, 2021, 9am — 11 am

          Proposals accepted until: August 30, 2021, 1:00pm

     If you have questions concerning this project please contact:
     Tom Riel, Procurement Manager
     971-707-1631 | hecc.procurement@hecc.oregon.gov




                                                                     Page 1 of 26
1. ADDENDUM INFORMATION

     The purpose of this addendum is to extend the timeframe for this Request for Project Proposals
      RFPP)   process, increase the distribution of this opportunity, and to clarify the goal of the project.

2.   INTRODUCTION


     The State of Oregon, acting by and through the Higher Education Coordinating Commission, (“HECC’’), is
     seeking an Oregon public higher education institution (“Institution”) or a consortium of Institutions to
     create an online course exchange (“Exchange”) that will allow students of Institutions to access online
     classes provided by other Institutions (the “Project’’). It is foreseen the Exchange will be owned by the
     Institution or Institutions creating it and must be accessible to all Institutions and their students. Through
     the CARES Act’s GEER Funding, $1.5 million has been made available for this Project. All money spent
     must follow the guidelines of the GEER Funds and CARES Act. The funds must be expended by
     September 30, 2022. It is required the Platform shall go live prior to that date.
     Fiscal Requirements: Recipients shall follow the Cash Management Improvement Act (“CMIA”)
     found in 31 CFR Part 205, the Uniform Guidance found in 2 CFR Part 200, program and applicable
     EDGAR regulations (including fiscal requirements), and all applicable requirements of the CARES
     Act, as well as any federal guidance on GEER funding.

     (https://www.congress.gov/bill/116th-congress/house-
     bill/748/text/enr?q=%7B%22search%22%3A%5B%22CARES+Act%22%5D%7D&r=4)

     (https://www.congress.gov/bill/116th-congress/house-
     bill/748/text/enr?q=%7B%22search%22%3A%5B%22CARES+Act%22%5D%7D
                                                          &r=4#H581CD2
     C2995343D3BCFC1AC86482B021)

     GEER funds may be used to cover administrative costs consistent with cost principles in 2 C.F.R. part
     200, Subpart E.


3.   BACKGROUND

     This one-time funding award was made available through the Governor’s Emergency Education Relief. An
     Online Course Exchange Steering Committee (OCESC) has been created to guide this Project. HECC’s
     role is to oversee the funding; this Request for Project Proposal (“RFPP”) process; and provide planning
     and meeting support. The OCESC created five subcommittees: Governance, Instruction, Operations and
     Cost, Student Support, and Technology. HECC staff met with each subcommittee to discuss and get
     feedback on the Project. HECC then summarized the results of those meetings and shared them with the
     OCESC. Based on agreement about the key elements of the Exchange the OCESC agreed that this RFPP
     should move forward.

     The goal for these funds is a fully functional course exchange system. If a Proposer does not feel that is
     possible given the time and dollar constraints, Proposers are encouraged to provide their feedback through
     the question and answer process, during the teleconference, or in a Proposal that details the scope of the
     proposed partial project and the costs entailed.
             RFPP# 21-016



  HECC retains the right to reject any or all Project Proposals in-whole or in-part, or may cancel this RFPP
  at any time when the rejection or cancellation is in the best interest of the State as determined by HECC.

  Some high-level reasons for the Exchange are to:

  3.1.       Allow students to take classes that are unavailable at their home Institution in a given term.

  3.2.       Fill classes to capacity.

  3.3.       Allow college students to “test the waters” in university classes.

4. TIMELINE AND SCHEDULE

   The revised RFPP process shall be as follows:

         e     HECC will post and distribute the RFPP July 20, 2021.

         e     Institutions shall have approximately two weeks to submit written questions, concerns or other
               feedback or to acknowledge interest in participating in a videoconference about this RFPP. (An
               email to hecc.procurement@hecc.oregon.gov with “21-016 Online Course Exchange” in the
               subject line will suffice to show interest in the videoconference)

         e     HECC shall address these questions, concerns and feedback in written form and will follow up
               with a Q&A virtual conference with all interested parties.

         e     Following that discussion, HECC may, if warranted, addend the RFPP, based on the results of the
               virtual conference.

         e     Proposals shall be due approximately four weeks after videoconference or the publishing of an
               addendum.

    Below is an estimated schedule of events:

             Posting of RFPP                             June 15, 2021
             Questions Due                          1:00 pm, June 29, 2021
             Answers Published                           ~ July 6, 2021
             Q&A Virtual Conference               (9 am-11am)     July 8, 2021
             Addendum to RFPP, if any                    ~July 15, 2021
             Questions Due                           1:00 pm, July 30, 2021
             Answers Published                           ~ August 3, 2021
             Q&A Virtual Conference              (9 am - 11 am) August 5, 2021
             Proposals Due                          1:00 pm, August 30, 2021
             Grant Awarded                            ~September 19, 2021
             Project Completed                        September 31, 2022




                                                                                                  Page 3 of 26
                                                                                                          TR
                RFPP# 21-016



5. PROPOSED SCOPE OF ACTIVITIES

HECC anticipates the awarded Institution(s) (“Grantee”) shall collaborate with all Institutions through
the OCESC and subcommittees mentioned above as well as other sections of Institutions, as necessary,
throughout the Project. Through this collaboration, the Grantee shall design and build an Exchange that
addresses the following features:

5.1.     Required Features

       5.1.1      Accessibility: Exchange must be easily accessible and meet the web accessibility guidelines
                  outlined in WCAG 2.1 Level AA (https:/Awww.w3.org/TR/WCAG21/) while using various
                  devices such as computer, tablet or phone.

       5.1.2      Security: Exchange must meet applicable Federal and State of Oregon IT security laws and
                  standards.

       5.1.3.     Sustainability: This is a one-time source of funds and the Exchange must be financially and
                  operationally sustainable.

       5.1.4      Importation of Course Catalogs: The Exchange must be designed to avail participating
                  Institutions course and seat availability data in an automated fashion.

       5.1.5      Institutional Agreements: Along with developing the Exchange, the selected Institution(s) must
                  develop a Participation Agreement to be signed by all participating Institutions that addresses the
                  necessary obligations and commitments for participation.

5.2.     Preferred Features

       5.2.1      Financial Aid: The Exchange must be governed to allow students taking courses on the
                  Exchange to use Financial Aid at their home Institution.

       5.2.2      Registration: The Exchange must be designed so that a student’s home institution will serve as
                  their primary registration for courses on the Exchange and students must receive approval from
                  their home institution prior to registering for any online course exchange offerings.

5.3      Variable Features. These features may be addressed in a variety of ways and HECC welcomes
         innovative approaches or ideas. In the Proposal, please explain Proposer’s plan to address the
         feature. Proposer may have a solution or may explain how they will arrive at a solution.

       5.3.1      Transferability: Explain how course transferability will be handled. It was discussed that
                  courses offered on the Exchange should be transferable to all participating Institutions and
                  students should be able to easily discern how a course offered on the Exchange is
                  transferable to their home Institution.

       5.3.2      Transcripts: Explain how transcripts will work. It was discussed that completed Exchange
                  courses should appear on a student’s home Institution’s transcript or on a unified Exchange
                  transcript. That is, a student completing several courses from the Exchange from several different
                  Institutions, should not have several different transcripts.


                                                                                                    Page 4 of 26
                                                                                                            TR
            RFPP# 21-016




   5.3.3      Course Offering (What courses can be put on the Exchange): The Exchange should be
              structured so that all participating Institutions have a way of controlling which of their
              courses are offered on the Exchange. Explain how this will be accomplished.

   5.3.4      Requirements of Exchange Courses: Courses on the Exchange will have been vetted for
              quality assurance and instructional design process by the Institution offering the course. Explain
              how this will be accomplished.

   5.3.5      Complaint Process: Explain how the complaint process will work. It was discussed that
              complaints from students taking courses on the Exchange should follow the policies of the
              Institution where the course is taught and information about how to pursue complaints should be
              easily accessible to students.

   5.3.6      Payment Structure: Explain how the Proposed payment structure would work or how Proposer
              shall decide on a payment structure. It was discussed that there could be a three-component
              payment system where the; Institution offering the course, the Institution where the student
              resides, and the Institution that hosts the Exchange, each get a portion of the course fee. In this
              section, also explain how courses on the Exchange will be priced.

   5.3.7.     Timing of Course Offerings: Explain how the timing of the availability of courses on the
              Exchange will work. It was discussed the Exchange may have a priority mechanism for home
              students to have the first opportunity to register with a delayed mechanism to release ‘empty’
              seats. Having a waiting list was also discussed.

   5.3.8      Marketing Requirement: Explain the marketing that will be done to advertise the Exchange. It
              was discussed that along with developing the Exchange, the selected Institution(s) shall develop a
              set of communication/marketing tools in multiple languages including information about
              registering for courses, using different Learning Management Systems (LMS), and making sure
              the courses will count towards degree or program requirements.

6. QUESTIONS, CONCERNS AND OTHER FEEDBACK

   Questions, concerns, and other feedback should be submitted no later than July 30, 2021, 1:00 PM
   to hecc.procurement@hecc.oregon.gov with “21-016” in the subject line.

7. PROPOSAL SUBMISSION

   Proposals should be submitted no later than August 30, 2021, 1:00 PM to
   hecc.procurement@hecc.oregon.gov with “21-016” in the subject line.

8. PROPOSAL CONTENT REQUIREMENTS

   Proposal must address each of the items listed in this section. Total response should be a maximum of 30
   pages.




                                                                                                Page 5 of 26
                                                                                                        TR
        RFPP# 21-016



   8.1 Proposer’s Implementation Plan
        The Proposer shall describe how they intend to do the work. The description should include:
               e   Proposer’s knowledge and understanding of the Project,
               e   How the Proposer will seek collaboration with other Institutions,
               e   Proposer’s approach to staffing and scheduling needs for the Project,
               e   Project timeline.

   8.2 Proposer’s Plan to Address all the Features

        For each feature in Section 4, describe how Proposer will address that feature.

   8.3 Use of Grant Funds

        Describe how Proposer plans to expend the funds (budget and narrative).

9. Evaluation
   Proposals should address the following questions:
   9.1 Proposer’s Implementation Plan
       9.1.1       How well does the Proposal convey Proposer’s knowledge and understanding of the Project?
       9.1.2       How well does the Proposal convey how the Proposer will seek collaboration and will this
                   approach be successful?
       9.1.3.      Is the Proposer’s staffing approach and scheduling well defined and will it work?
       9.1.4       How did Proposer arrive at its proposed timeline?
   9.2 Proposer’s plan to address each feature.
       9.2.1       Was each feature addressed? That is, how well did the Proposal explain the approach the
                   Proposer would take in addressing each feature.
       9.2.2       How will the proposed approaches lead to a successful Exchange?
   9.3 Use of Grant Funds
       9.3.1       Is the budget and budget narrative explained well?
       9.3.2       Does the budget meet the Project’s goals?

10.Selection Process

HECC will consider each Proposer’s responses to the questions above and determine how well each
Proposer meets HECC’s articulated needs in light of the following goals for this Project:

   e   GOAL 1: Create the Exchange to allow students to register for and take classes online in a
       seamless, affordable, and accessible manner.



                                                                                                Page 6 of 26
                                                                                                        TR
        RFPP# 21-016




   e   GOAL 2: Help institutions fill classes to enrollment capacity through the use of the Exchange.

   e   GOAL 3: Design the Exchange and its’ governance so it is fiscally and operationally self-
       sustaining with no further fiscal support from HECC and with little, if any, additional financial
       burden on the students.

HECC may enter negotiations for an award to one or more Proposer(s) as HECC determines will best
meet the goals for this Project as described in this Section 9.

If HECC does not select a Proposer during the first round, HECC may seek further information from
Proposers. This may include written questions and responses as well as interviews. Following the
second round, HECC intends to award the grant to the Proposer(s) that has best represented to HECC
their ability to successfully develop an Exchange based on its Proposal.



11. Terms and Conditions of Grant

By submitting a Project Proposal, Proposer agrees to the terms of this RFPP, including the terms and
conditions in the sample Grant (Attachment A).




                                                                                           Page 7 of 26
                                                                                                   TR
  RFPP# 21-016




                                 Attachment A - Sample Grant

                               Informational Cover Page - Grants

                           [This page is not part of the Agreement|

                                 Agreement No. XX-XXXXX-XXX

AGREEMENT INFORMATION
                 Project title: | Online Course Exchange Online Course Exchange
   Allowable cost period: | July 1, 2020 - September 30, 2022
          Effective period: | Date of Last Signature - October 31, 2021
                    Amount: | $1,500,000
          Funding source: | GEER Funding
GRANTEE INFORMATION
                    Grantee:

                    Address:

           Administrator:

                      Phone:

                       Email:

            Fiscal contact:

                      Phone:

                       Email:

HECC INFORMATION
           Administrator:

                      Phone:

                       Email:

    Procurement contact:

                      Phone:

                       Email:




                                                                                  Page 8 of 26
                                                                                          TR
                       RFPP# 21-016



                                                           Federal Award Identification

                                  [This page is for information only and is not considered part of the Agreement]

1.             Subrecipient* Name (which must match the name
               associated with below):

2.             Subrecipient’s Unique Entity Identifier (i.e., DUNS
               number):
3.             Federal Award Identification Number (FAIN):                                  S425C 200048

               Federal Award Date:                                                            6/02/2020
5.             Sub-award Period of Performance Start and End
               Sate.                                                                   6/2/2020 — 9/30/2022
6.             Total Amount of Federal Funds Obligated by this
               Agreement:
7.             Total Amount of Federal Funds Obligated to the
               Subrecipient by the pass-through entity including
               this Agreement™:

8.             Total Amount of the Federal Award committed to
               the Subrecipient by the pass-through entity:
                                                                                 84.425C
9.             Federal Award Project Description:                                  Governors Emergency Education
                                                                                             Relief Fund

10.            Name of federal awarding agency, pass-through entity, and contact information for awarding official of
               the pass-through entity:

         (a)   Federal Awarding Agency:                                            US Department of Education

         (b) Name of pass-through entity*:                                                      HECC

         (c)   Contact Information for awarding official of the
               pass -through entity:                                                       Donna Lewelling
(xi)           CFDA Number and Name:                                                           84.425C
                 Amount:
(xii)          Is Award Research and Development?                                      []Yes               XX] No
(xiii)         Indirect Cost Rate:                                                      Indirect rate: up to 10%
                *For the purposes of this form, “Subrecipient”       refers to Grantee or Recipient and “pass-
                through entity” refers to HECC.

                **The total amount of federal funds obligated to the Subrecipient by the pass-through entity
                is the total amount of federal funds obligated to the Subrecipient by the pass-through entity
                during the current State fiscal year.




                                                                                                                    Page 9 of 26
                                                                                                                              TR
           RFPP# 21-016




                                           STATE OF OREGON
                                          GRANT AGREEMENT
                                          Agreement No. XX-XXX
  This Agreement is between the State of Oregon acting by and through its Higher Education Coordinating
  Commission (“HECC”) and                                                       (“Grantee”), each a
  “Party” and, together, the “Parties”.


SECTION 1:        AUTHORITY
  This Agreement is authorized by ORS 350.075.0RS 350.075.


SECTION 2:        PURPOSE
  The purpose of this Agreement is to support the development of an online course exchange
  (“Exchange”).


SECTION 3:        TERM OF AGREEMENT
  This Agreement is effective when all Parties have executed this Agreement and all necessary approvals
  have been obtained. This Agreement terminates on October 31, 2022 unless terminated earlier in
  accordance with Section 16.


SECTION 4:        GRANT ADMINISTRATORS

  HECC’s Grant Administrator is:

           Tamyra Perkins
           3225 25th Street SE
           Salem, OR 97302
           Phone: 503-947-2427
           Email: tamyra.d.perkins@hecc.oregon.gov




  Grantee’s Grant Administrator is:




                                                                                      Page 10 of 26
                                                                                                 TR
                RFPP# 21-016




  Either Party may change its Grant Administrator by providing written notice to the other Party.


SECTION 5:            PROJECT ACTIVITIES
  Grantee shall perform the project activities set forth in ExhibitA (the “Project”), attached and
  incorporated by this reference.


SECTION 6:            GRANT
  In accordance with the terms and conditions of this Agreement, HECC shall provide Grantee up
  to $1,500,000 (“Grant Funds”) for the purposes described in this Agreement.

  6.1     Disbursement Generally. HECC shall disburse the Grant Funds on a reimbursement basis
          upon receipt and acceptance of Grantee’s disbursement requests which may be submitted
          no more frequently than monthly.

          To be processed for payment, disbursement requests must include the following
          information:

                Disbursement request date;
                HECC’s Agreement number, XX-XXX
                HECC’s Grant Administrator;
                Amount being requested;
                A description of the Project activities completed during the disbursement request
                period.

          Grantee shall e-mail disbursement requests to: HECC.finance@HECC.Oregon.gov
          and a copy to the Grant Administrator.

  6.2     Allowable Cost Period. The Allowable Cost Period is the period between July 1, 2021 and
          September 30, 2022.

  6.3     Allowable Costs. The Grant Funds shall only be used to pay for costs incurred by Grantee
          during the Allowable Cost Period and used for the Project as set forth in Section 5. Any
          changes to the use of the funds must be approved by HECC in writing. Indirect costs may
          be billed at a rate not to exceed 10%.

  6.4     Conditions Precedent to Disbursement. HECC’s obligation to disburse Grant Funds to
          Grantee under this Agreement is subject to satisfaction of each of the following conditions
          precedent:

        6.4.1     HECC has received sufficient funding and expenditure authorizations to allow HECC,
                  in the exercise of its reasonable administrative discretion, to make the disbursement.

        6.4.2     No default as described in Section 11 has occurred.

                                                                                              Page 11 of 26
                                                                                                         TR
                 RFPP# 21-016



        6.4.3.     Grantee’s representations and warranties set forth in Section 7 are true and correct
                   on the date of disbursement(s) with the same effect as though made on the date of
                   disbursement.
        6.4.4      HECC has received and accepted all reports due at time of disbursement.
  6.5        Backup Documentation. Upon request by HECC, Grantee will promptly provide backup
             documentation satisfactory to HECC to support Grantee’s expenditure of Grant Funds.

  6.6        Recovery of Grant Funds. Any Grant Funds disbursed to Grantee under this Agreement
             that are expended in violation or contravention of one or more of the provisions of this
             Agreement or that remain unexpended on the earlier of termination or expiration of this
             Agreement must be returned to HECC unless otherwise agreed to by HECC in writing.

  6.7        Duplicate Payment. Grantee shall not be compensated for, or receive any other form of
             duplicate, overlapping or multiple payments for the same costs financed by or costs and
             expenses paid for by Grant Funds from any agency of the State of Oregon or the United
             States of America or any other party, organization or individual.

  6.8        Suspension of Funding and Project. HECC may by written notice to Grantee,
             temporarily cease funding and require Grantee to stop all, or any part, of the Project
             dependent upon Grant Funds for a period of up to 180 days after the date of the notice, if
             HECC has or reasonably projects that it will have insufficient funds from the funding
             source to disburse the full amount of the Grant Funds. Upon receipt of the notice, Grantee
             must immediately cease all Project activities dependent on Grant Funds, or if that is
             impossible, must take all necessary steps to minimize the Project activities allocable to
             Grant Funds. If HECC subsequently projects that it will have sufficient funds, HECC will
             notify Grantee that it may resume activities. If sufficient funds do not become available,
             Grantee and HECC will work together to amend this Grant to revise the amount of Grant
             Funds and Project activities to reflect the available funds. If sufficient funding does not
             become available or an amendment is not agreed to within a period of 180 days after
             issuance of the notice, HECC will either (i) cancel or modify the stop-work order by a
             supplemental written notice or (ii) terminate this Agreement as permitted by either the
             termination at HECC’s discretion or for cause provisions of this Agreement.


SECTION 7:             REPRESENTATIONS AND WARRANTIES
  Grantee represents and warrants to HECC that:

  7.1        Grantee is an Oregon                                 duly organized and validly existing under the
             laws of the State of Oregon and is eligible to receive the Grant Funds. Grantee has full power,
             authority and legal right to make this Agreement and to incur and perform its obligations
             hereunder;

  7.2        The making and performance by Grantee of this Agreement (a) have been duly authorized by
             Grantee according to its governing laws and organizational documents, (b) do not and will not
             violate any provision of any applicable law, rule, regulation, or order of any court, regulatory
             commission, board, or other administrative agency or any provision of Grantee’s enabling law,
             organizational documents or other organizational rules or policies; and (c) do not and will not
                                                                                              Page 12 of 26
                                                                                                         TR
           RFPP# 21-016



         result in the breach of, or constitute a default or require any consent under any other agreement
         or instrument to which Grantee is a party or by which Grantee or any of its properties may be
         bound or affected. No authorization, consent, license, approval of, or filing or registration with or
         notification to any governmental body or regulatory or supervisory authority is required for the
         execution, delivery or performance by Grantee of this Agreement, other than those that have
         already been obtained;

  7.3    This Agreement has been duly executed and delivered by Grantee and, when executed by HECC,
         constitutes a legal, valid and binding obligation of Grantee enforceable in accordance with its
         terms; and

  7.4    The representations and warranties set forth in this section are in addition to, and not in lieu of,
         any other representations or warranties provided by Grantee.

  7.5    Grantee acknowledges that the Oregon False Claims Act, ORS 180.750 to 180.785, applies to any
         action or conduct by Grantee pertaining to this Agreement that constitutes a “claim” (as defined
         by the Oregon False Claims Act, ORS 180.750 (1)). By its execution of this Agreement, Grantee
         certifies the truthfulness, completeness, and accuracy of any statement or claim it has made, it
         makes, it may make, or causes to be made that pertains to this Agreement or to the Project. In
         addition to other penalties that may be applicable, Grantee further acknowledges that if it makes,
         or causes to be made, a false claim or performs a prohibited act under the Oregon False Claims
         Act, the Oregon Attorney General may enforce the liabilities and penalties provided by the
         Oregon False Claims Act against Grantee. Nothing in this section or this Agreement may be
         construed as limiting or derogating from any authority granted the Oregon Attorney General
         under 180.750 to 180.785.

  7.6    Grantee shall immediately report in writing, to the HECC, any credible evidence that a principal,
         employee, agent, or subcontractor of Grantee, or any subgrantee or other person, has made a
         false claim or committed a prohibited act under the Oregon False Claims Act, or has committed a
         criminal or civil violation of laws pertaining to fraud, bribery, gratuity, conflict of interest, or
         similar misconduct in connection with this Agreement or monies paid by HECC under this
         Agreement.

  7.7    Grantee must include subsections 7.5 through 7.6 of this section in each subcontract or subgrant
         Grantee may award in connection with the performance of this Agreement. In doing so, Grantee
         may not modify the terms of those subsections, except to identify the subcontractor or
         subrecipient who will be subject to those provisions.

  7.8    Grantee must comply with the assurances in Exhibit B.

  7.9    Grantee agrees to provide information necessary for HECC to manage and report on these GEER
         funds.


SECTION 8:       GOVERNING LAW, CONSENT TO JURISDICTION
  This Agreement shall be governed by and construed in accordance with the laws of the State of Oregon
  without regard to principles of conflicts of law. Any claim, action, suit or proceeding (collectively “Claim”)
  between HECC or any other agency or department of the State of Oregon, or both, and Grantee that

                                                                                            Page 13 of 26
                                                                                                       TR
              RFPP# 21-016



   arises from or relates to this Agreement shall be brought and conducted solely and exclusively within the
   Circuit Court of Marion County for the State of Oregon; provided, however, if a Claim must be brought in
   a federal forum, then it shall be brought and conducted solely and exclusively within the United States
   District Court for the District of Oregon. In no event shall this Section be construed as a waiver by the
   State of Oregon of any form of defense or immunity, whether sovereign immunity, governmental
   immunity, immunity based on the eleventh amendment to the Constitution of the United States or
   otherwise, to or from any Claim or from the jurisdiction of any court. GRANTEE, BY EXECUTION OF THIS
   AGREEMENT, HEREBY CONSENTS TO THE IN PERSONAM JURISDICTION OF SAID COURTS.


 SECTION 9:          OWNERSHIP OF WORK PRODUCT
   9.1       Asused in this Section 9 and elsewhere in this Agreement, the following terms have the meanings
             set forth below:

          9.1.1   “Third Party Intellectual Property" means any intellectual property owned by parties other
                  than Grantee or HECC.

          9.1.2   “Work Product" means every invention, discovery, work of authorship, trade secret or other
                  tangible or intangible item that Grantee is required to deliver to HECC under this Agreement,
                  and all intellectual property rights therein.

   9.2       Grantee retains ownership of all Work Product, and grants HECC an irrevocable, non-exclusive,
             perpetual, royalty-free, fully paid-up, world-wide license to use, to reproduce, to prepare
             derivative works based upon, to distribute, to perform and to display the Work Product, to
             authorize others to do the same on HECC’s behalf, and to sublicense the Work Product to other
             entities without restriction.

             If the Work Product created by Grantee under this Agreement is a derivative work based on
             Third Party Intellectual Property, or is a compilation that includes Third Party Intellectual
             Property, Grantee shall secure on HECC’s behalf and in the name of HECC an irrevocable, non-
             exclusive, perpetual, royalty-free, fully paid-up, world-wide license allowing HECC and other
             entities the same rights listed above for to use, reproduce, prepare derivative works based upon,
             distribute copies of, perform and display the pre-existing element of the Third party Intellectual
             Property employed in the Work Product.

   9.3.      If state or federal law requires that HECC or Grantee grant to the United States a license to any
             intellectual property in the Work Product then Grantee shall execute such further documents and
             instruments as HECC may reasonably request in order to make any such grant or to assign
             ownership in such intellectual property to the United States or HECC.


SECTION 10:          INDEMNIFICATION
   10.1      Grantee shall defend, save, hold harmless, and indemnify the State of Oregon and HECC and their
             officers, employees and agents from and against all claims, suits, actions, losses, damages,
             liabilities, costs and expenses of any nature whatsoever, including attorney’s fees, resulting from,




                                                                                              Page 14 of 26
                                                                                                         TR
           RFPP# 21-016



          arising out of, or relating to the activities of Grantee or its officers, employees, subcontractors, or
          agents under this Agreement or in connection with the Project.

   10.2   Grantee will have control of the defense and settlement of any claim that is subject to this Section.
          But neither Grantee nor any attorney engaged by Grantee may defend the claim in the name of
          the State of Oregon or any of its agencies, nor purport to act as legal representative of the State of
          Oregon or any of its agencies, without first receiving from the Attorney General, in a form and
          manner determined appropriate by the Attorney General, authority to act as legal counsel for the
          State of Oregon. Nor may Grantee settle any claim on behalf of the State of Oregon or any of its
          agencies without the approval of the Attorney General. The State of Oregon may, at its election
          and expense, assume its own defense and settlement in the event that the State of Oregon
          determines that Grantee is prohibited from defending the State of Oregon, or is not adequately
          defending the State of Oregon’s interests, or that an important governmental principle is at issue
          and the State of Oregon desires to assume its own defense.


SECTION 11:       GRANTEE DEFAULT
   Grantee will be in default under this Agreement upon the occurrence of any of the following events:

   11.1   Grantee fails to perform, observe or discharge any of its covenants, agreements or obligations
          under this Agreement;

   11.2   Any representation, warranty or statement made by Grantee in this Agreement or in any
          documents or reports relied upon by HECC to measure the Project, the expenditure of Grant
          Funds or the performance by Grantee is untrue in any material respect when made;

   11.3   Grantee (a) applies for or consents to the appointment of, or taking of possession by, a receiver,
          custodian, trustee, or liquidator of itself or all of its property, (b) admits in writing its inability, or
          is generally unable, to pay its debts as they become due, (c) makes a general assignment for the
          benefit of its creditors, (d) is adjudicated a bankrupt or insolvent, (e) commences a voluntary case
          under the U.S. Bankruptcy Code (as now or hereafter in effect), (f) files a petition seeking to take
          advantage of any other law relating to bankruptcy, insolvency, reorganization, winding-up, or
          composition or adjustment of debts, (g) fails to controvert in a timely and appropriate manner, or
          acquiesces in writing to, any petition filed against it in an involuntary case under the U.S.
          Bankruptcy Code (as now or hereafter in effect), or (h) takes any action for the purpose of
          effecting any of the foregoing; or

   11.4   A proceeding or case is commenced, without the application or consent of Grantee, in any court of
          competent jurisdiction, seeking (a) the liquidation, dissolution or winding-up, or the composition
          or readjustment of debts of Grantee, (b) the appointment of a trustee, receiver, custodian,
          liquidator, or the like of Grantee or of all or any substantial part of its assets, or (c) similar relief in
          respect to Grantee under any law relating to bankruptcy, insolvency, reorganization, winding-up,
          or composition or adjustment of debts, and such proceeding or case continues undismissed, or an
          order, judgment, or decree approving or ordering any of the foregoing is entered and continues
          unstayed and in effect for a period of sixty consecutive days, or an order for relief against Grantee
          is entered in an involuntary case under the Federal Bankruptcy Code (as now or hereafter in
          effect).


                                                                                                Page 15 of 26
                                                                                                            TR
           RFPP# 21-016



   11.5   Grantee uses or expends Grant Funds for any purpose other than that permitted in this
          Agreement.




SECTION 12:       HECC DEFAULT
   HECC will be in default under this Agreement if HECC fails to perform, observe or discharge any of its
   covenants, agreements, or obligations under this Agreement.


SECTION 13:       REMEDIES
   13.1    In the event Grantee is in default under Section 11, HECC may, at its option, pursue any or all of
           the remedies available to it under this Agreement and at law or in equity, including, but not
           limited to: (a) termination of its obligations under this Agreement pursuant to Section 16, (b)
           reducing or withholding disbursement of Grant Funds, (c) requiring Grantee to complete, at
           Grantee’s expense, additional activities necessary to satisfy its obligations or meet performance
           standards under this Agreement, (d) initiation of an action or proceeding for damages, specific
           performance, or declaratory or injunctive relief, (e) exercise of its right of recovery of
           overpayments under Section 14 of this Agreement or setoff, or both, or (f) declaring Grantee
           ineligible for the receipt of future awards from HECC. These remedies are cumulative to the
           extent the remedies are not inconsistent, and HECC may pursue any remedy or remedies singly,
           collectively, successively or in any order whatsoever.

   13.2    In the event HECC is in default under Section 12 and whether or not Grantee elects to exercise its
           right to terminate this Agreement under Section 16.3, or in the event HECC terminates this
           Agreement under Sections 16.2.1, 16.2.2, 16.2.3, or 16.2.5, Grantee’s sole monetary remedy will
           be for reimbursement of Project activities completed and accepted by HECC, within any limits
           set forth in this Agreement but not yet invoiced, for authorized expenses incurred, less any
           claims HECC has against Grantee. In no event will HECC be liable to Grantee for any expenses
           related to termination of this Agreement or for anticipated profits. If previous amounts paid to
           Grantee exceed the amount due to Grantee under this Section 13.2, Grantee shall promptly pay
           any excess to HECC.


SECTION 14:       RECOVERY OF OVERPAYMENTS
   If payments to Grantee under this Agreement, or any other agreement between HECC and Grantee,
   exceed the amount to which Grantee is entitled, HECC may, after notifying Grantee in writing, withhold
   from payments due Grantee under this Agreement, such amounts, over such periods of times, as are
   necessary to recover the amount of the overpayment.


SECTION 15:       LIMITATION OF LIABILITY
   EXCEPT FOR LIABILITY ARISING UNDER OR RELATED TO SECTION 10, NEITHER PARTY WILL BE
   LIABLE FOR INCIDENTAL, CONSEQUENTIAL, OR OTHER INDIRECT DAMAGES ARISING OUT OF OR
   RELATED TO THIS AGREEMENT, REGARDLESS OF WHETHER THE LIABILITY CLAIM IS BASED IN

                                                                                          Page 16 of 26
                                                                                                     TR
                RFPP# 21-016



   CONTRACT, TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE), STRICT LIABILITY, PRODUCT LIABILITY OR
   OTHERWISE. NEITHER PARTY WILL BE LIABLE FOR ANY DAMAGES OF ANY SORT ARISING SOLELY
   FROM THE TERMINATION OF THIS AGREEMENT IN ACCORDANCE WITH ITS TERMS.


SECTION 16:           TERMINATION
   16.1    This Agreement may be terminated at any time by mutual written consent of the Parties.

   16.2    HECC may terminate this Agreement as follows:

      16.2.1       Upon 30 days advance written notice to Grantee;

      16.2.2       Immediately upon written notice to Grantee, if HECC fails to receive funding, or
                   appropriations, limitations or other expenditure authority at levels sufficient in HECC’s
                   reasonable administrative discretion, to perform its obligations under this Agreement;

      16.2.3.      Immediately upon written notice to Grantee, if federal or state laws, rules, regulations or
                   guidelines are modified or interpreted in such a way that HECC’s performance under this
                   Agreement is prohibited or HECC is prohibited from paying for such performance from the
                   planned funding source;

      16.2.4       Immediately upon written notice to Grantee, if Grantee is in default under this Agreement
                   and such default remains uncured 15 days after written notice thereof to Grantee; or

      16.2.5       As otherwise expressly provided in this Agreement.

   16.3.   Grantee may terminate this Agreement as follows:

      16.3.1       Immediately upon written notice to HECC, if HECC is in default under this Agreement and
                   such default remains uncured 15 days after written notice thereof to HECC; or

      16.3.2       As otherwise expressly provided in this Agreement.

    16.4   Upon receiving a notice of termination of this Agreement, Grantee will immediately cease all
           activities under this Agreement, unless HECC expressly directs otherwise in such notice. Upon
           termination, Grantee will deliver to HECC all documents, information, works-in-progress, work
           product and other property that are or would be deliverables under the Agreement. And upon
           HECC’s reasonable request, Grantee will surrender all documents, research or objects or other
           tangible things needed to complete the Project activities that were to have been performed by
           Grantee under this Agreement.


SECTION 17:           CONFLICT OF INTEREST
   If Grantee is currently performing work for the State of Oregon or the federal government, Grantee by
   signature to this Agreement declares and certifies that Grantee’s activities under this Agreement and the
   Projects activities to be funded by this Agreement, create no potential or actual conflict of interest as
   defined by ORS Chapter 244.


                                                                                               Page 17 of 26
                                                                                                          TR
            RFPP# 21-016



SECTION 18:       NONAPPROPRIATION
   HECC’s obligation to pay any amounts and otherwise perform its duties under this Agreement is
   conditioned upon HECC receiving funding, appropriations, limitations, allotments, or other expenditure
   authority sufficient to allow HECC, in the exercise of its reasonable administrative discretion, to meet its
   obligations under this Agreement. Nothing in this Agreement may be construed as permitting any
   violation of Article XI, section 7 of the Oregon Constitution or any other law limiting the activities,
   liabilities or monetary obligations of HECC.


SECTION 19:       AMENDMENTS
   The terms of this Agreement may only be altered, modified, supplemented or otherwise amended by
   written agreement signed by authorized representatives of both Parties, unless explicitly stated in other
   sections of this Agreement.


SECTION 20:       NOTICE
   Except as otherwise expressly provided in this Agreement, any notices to be given relating to this
   Agreement must be given in writing by email, personal delivery, or postage prepaid mail, to a Party’s
   Grant Administrator at the physical address or email address set forth in this Agreement, or to such
   other addresses as either Party may indicate pursuant to this Section 20. Any notice so addressed and
   mailed becomes effective five (5) days after mailing. Any notice given by personal delivery becomes
   effective when actually delivered. Any notice given by email becomes effective upon the sender’s receipt
   of confirmation generated by the recipient’s email system that the notice has been received by the
   recipient's email system.


SECTION 21:       SURVIVAL
   All rights and obligations of the Parties under this Agreement will cease upon termination of this
   Agreement, other than the rights and obligations arising under Sections 6.5, 6.6, 6.7, 7.8, 7.9. 7.10, 8, 9,
   10, 13, 14, 15, 21 and 32 hereof and those rights and obligations that by their express terms survive
   termination of this Agreement, such as any report required to be submitted after the termination date;
   provided, however, that termination of this Agreement will not prejudice any rights or obligations
   accrued to the Parties under this Agreement prior to termination.


SECTION 22:       SEVERABILITY
   The Parties agree that if any term or provision of this Agreement is declared by a court of competent
   jurisdiction to be illegal or in conflict with any law, the validity of the remaining terms and provisions
   will not be affected, and the rights and obligations of the Parties will be construed and enforced as if the
   Agreement did not contain the particular term or provision held to be invalid.


SECTION 23:       COUNTERPARTS
   This Agreement may be executed in several counterparts, all of which when taken together shall

                                                                                              Page 18 of 26
                                                                                                         TR
            RFPP# 21-016



   constitute one agreement, notwithstanding that all Parties are not signatories to the same counterpart.
   Each copy of the Agreement so executed constitutes an original.


SECTION 24:        COMPLIANCE WITH LAW

   In connection with their activities under this Agreement, the Parties shall comply with all applicable
   federal, state and local law. Including but not limited to:

   24.1    Grantee shall, throughout the duration of this Agreement, comply with all tax laws of this state
           and all applicable tax laws of any political subdivision of this state.

   24.2   Grantee shall comply with ORS 652.220 and shall not discriminate against any of Grantee’s
          employees in the payment of wages or other compensation for work of comparable character, the
          performance of which requires comparable skills, or pay any employee at a rate less than another
          for comparable work, based on an employee’s membership in a protected class. “Protected
          class” means a group of persons distinguished by race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation,
          national origin, marital status, veteran status, disability or age. Grantee’s compliance with this
          section constitutes a material element of this Agreement and a failure to comply constitutes a
          breach that entitles HECC to terminate this Agreement for cause.


SECTION 25:        INDEPENDENT CONTRACTORS
   The Parties agree and acknowledge that their relationship is that of independent contracting parties and
   that Grantee is not an officer, employee, or agent of the State of Oregon as those terms are used in ORS
   30.265 or otherwise.


SECTION 26:        INTENDED BENEFICIARIES
   HECC and Grantee are the only parties to this Agreement and are the only parties entitled to enforce its
   terms. Nothing in this Agreement provides, is intended to provide, or may be construed to provide any
   direct or indirect benefit or right to third persons unless such third persons are individually identified by
   name herein and expressly described as intended beneficiaries of this Agreement.


SECTION 27:        FORCE MAJEURE
   Neither Party is responsible for any failure to perform or any delay in performance of any obligations
   under this Agreement caused by any and all unforeseen fire, riot, civil unrest, labor unrest, pandemic,
   natural causes, or war, which is beyond that Party's reasonable control. Each Party shall, however, make
   all reasonable efforts to remove or eliminate such cause of failure to perform or delay in performance
   and shall, upon the cessation of the cause, diligently pursue performance of the Project activities under
   this Agreement. HECC may terminate this Agreement upon written notice to Grantee after reasonably
   determining that the failure or delay will likely prevent successful performance of this Agreement.


SECTION 28:       ASSIGNMENT AND SUCCESSORS IN INTEREST


                                                                                            Page 19 of 26
                                                                                                       TR
            RFPP# 21-016



   Grantee may not assign or transfer its interest in this Agreement without the prior written consent of
   HECC and any attempt by Grantee to assign or transfer its interest in this Agreement without such
   consent will be void and of no force or effect. HECC’s consent to Grantee’s assignment or transfer of its
   interest in this Agreement will not relieve Grantee of any of its duties or obligations under this
   Agreement. The provisions of this Agreement will be binding upon and inure to the benefit of the Parties
   hereto, and their respective successors and permitted assigns.


SECTION 29:       SUBCONTRACTS
   Grantee shall not, without HECC’s prior written consent, enter into any subcontracts for any of the
   Project activities required of Grantee under this Agreement. HECC’s consent to any subcontract will not
   relieve Grantee of any of its duties or obligations under this Agreement.


SECTION 30:       TIME IS OF THE ESSENCE
   Time is of the essence in Grantee’s performance of the Project activities under this Agreement.


SECTION 31:       MERGER, WAIVER
   This Agreement and all exhibits and attachments, if any, constitute the entire agreement between the
   Parties on the subject matter hereof. There are no understandings, agreements, or representations, oral
   or written, not specified herein regarding this Agreement. No waiver or consent under this Agreement
   binds either Party unless in writing and signed by both Parties or otherwise agreed to as explicitly stated
   in other sections of this Agreement. Such waiver or consent, if made, is effective only in the specific
   instance and for the specific purpose given.


SECTION 32:       RECORDS MAINTENANCE AND ACCESS
   Grantee shall maintain all financial records relating to this Agreement in accordance with generally
   accepted accounting principles. In addition, Grantee shall maintain any other records, books, documents,
   papers, plans, records of shipments and payments and writings of Grantee, whether in paper, electronic
   or other form, that are pertinent to this Agreement in such a manner as to clearly document Grantee
   performance. All financial records, other records, books, documents, papers, plans, records of shipments
   and payments and writings of Grantee, whether in paper, electronic or other form, that are pertinent to
   this Agreement, are collectively referred to as “Records.” Grantee acknowledges and agrees that HECC
   and the Oregon Secretary of State's Office and the federal government and their duly authorized
   representatives will have access to all Records to perform examinations and audits and make excerpts
   and transcripts. Grantee shall retain and keep accessible all Records for a minimum of six (6) years, or
   such longer period as may be required by applicable law, following termination of this Agreement, or
   until the conclusion of any audit, controversy or litigation arising out of or related to this Agreement,
   whichever date is later. Subject to foregoing minimum records retention requirement, Grantee shall
   maintain Records in accordance with the records retention schedules set forth in OAR Chapter 166.


SECTION 33:       PUBLIC RECORDS


                                                                                             Page 20 of 26
                                                                                                        TR
            RFPP# 21-016



   All information and records submitted to HECC are subject to disclosure under the Public Records Law,
   ORS 192.311 to 192.478. If Grantee believes that any information or records it submits to HECC may be a
   trade secret under ORS 192.345(2), or otherwise is exempt from disclosure under the Oregon Public
   Records Law, Grantee must identify such information with particularity and include the following
   statement:

   “This data is exempt from disclosure under the Oregon Public Records Law pursuant to ORS 192.[insert],
   and is not to be disclosed except in accordance with the Oregon Public Records Law, ORS 192.311
   through 192.478.”

   If Grantee fails to identify with particularity the portions of such information that Grantee believes are
   exempt from disclosure, Grantee is deemed to waive any future claim of non-disclosure of that
   information.


SECTION 34:       HEADINGS
   The headings and captions to sections of this Agreement have been inserted for identification and
   reference purposes only and may not be used to construe the meaning or to interpret this Agreement.


SECTION 35:       ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS
   Grantee shall follow: the Cash Management Improvement Act (“CMIA”) found in 31 CFR Part 205, the
   Uniform Guidance found in 2 CFR Part 200, program and applicable EDGAR regulations (including fiscal
   requirements), and all applicable requirements of the CARES Act, as well as any federal guidance on
   GEER funding.

   All expenditures in administering the program must be in accordance with criteria and guidance
   established by CARES Act, the Governor’s Emergency Education Relief (“GEER”) Fund and the applicable
   Terms and Conditions in the federal Notice of Award:

    httos://www.conegress.gov/bill/116th-congress /house-
   bill/748/text/enr?g=%7B%22search%22%3A%5B%22CARES+Act%22%5D%7D&r=4)

   (https://www.congress.gov/bill/116th-congress /house-
   bill/748 /text/enr?q=%7B%22search%22%3A%5B%22CARES+Act%22%5D%7D&r=4#H581CD2C
   2995343 D3BCFC1AC86482B021)

   httos:/Awww.oregon.gov/highered/about/Documents/Grants-contracts/NOFA/CFDA%2084.425C-
   %20GEER1%20FAIN%20S425C200048%20Posted%20June%203%2cC%202021 .pdf




   GEER funds may be used to cover administrative costs consistent with cost principles in 2 C.F.R. part
   200, Subpart E.




SECTION 36:       AGREEMENT DOCUMENTS
                                                                                            Page 21 of 26
                                                                                                       TR
               RFPP# 21-016



   This Agreement consists of the following documents, which are listed in descending order of
   precedence:

       e       The CARES Act: _(https://www.congress.gov/bill/116th-congress/house-
               bill/748 /text/enr?q=%7B%22search%22%3A%5B%2Z2CARES+Act%22%5D%7D&r=4)

       e   GEER Fund: (https://www.congress.gov/bill/116th-congress /house-
           bill /748 /text/enr?q=%7B%22search%22%3A%5B%22CARES+Act%22%5D%7D&r=44#H581C
           D2C 2995343 D3BCFC1AC86482B021)

               Federal Notice of Award: httos:/Avww.oregon.govw/highered/about/Documents/Grants-
               contracts/NOFA/CFDA%2084.425C-
               %20GEER1%20FAIN%20S425C200048%20Posted%20June%203%2cC%202021 .pdf

       e       Federal Terms and Conditions: Exhibit B

       e       this Agreement less all exhibits

       e       attached ExhibitA (the “Project”).




SECTION 37:           SIGNATURES
   EACH PARTY, BY SIGNATURE OF ITS AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE, HEREBY ACKNOWLEDGES
   THAT IT HAS READ THIS AGREEMENT, UNDERSTANDS IT, AND AGREES TO BE BOUND BY ITS TERMS
   AND CONDITIONS. The Parties agree that by the exchange of this Agreement electronically, each has
   agreed to the use of electronic means. By inserting an electronic signature below, each authorized
   representative acknowledges that it is their signature, that each intends to execute this Agreement and
   that their electronic signature should be given full force and effect to create a valid and legally binding
   contract.




               By:
                                                                                      Date

               HIGHER EDUCATION COORDINATING COMMISSION


               By:
                      Donna Lewellin, Interim Director CCWD                                    Date

               HECC - Review for procurement sufficiency


               Reviewed by:
                       Tom Riel, Procurement Manager                          Date

               DO] - Review for legal sufficiency

               By:


                                                                                                      Page 22 of 26
                                                                                                                 TR
        RFPP# 21-016



                                       EXHIBIT A
Part 1 - Background and Goals - TBD




Part 2 - Project Activities - TBD




Part 3 - Project Schedule and Budget- TBD




Part 4 - Project Evaluation/   Reporting   Requirements- TBD




                                                               Page 23 of 26
                                                                          TR
            RFPP# 21-016



                                                 EXHIBIT B
                    FEDERAL TERMS AND CONDITIONS

1.         FEDERAL FUNDS

     1.1            If specified below, Agency’s payments to Grantee under this Agreement will be paid in whole or in part
                    by funds received by Agency from the United States Federal Government. If so specified then Grantee,
                    by signing this Agreement, certifies neither it nor its employees, grantees or contractors,
                    subcontractors or subgrantees who will perform the Project activities are currently employed by an
                    agency or department of the federal government.
           Payments hx] will                    will not be made in whole or in part with federal funds.

     1.2            In accordance with the State Controller’s Oregon Accounting Manual, policy
                    30.40.00.102, Agency has determined:
           [x] Grantee is a sub-recipient                            Grantee is a vendor

     1.3            Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance (CFDA) #(s) of federal funds to be paid through
                    this Agreement:
                    84.425C Governor’s Emergency Education Relief Fund


           FEDERAL TERMS AND CONDITIONS

     2.1            The use of all federal funds paid under this Grant are subject to all applicable federal regulations, including
                    without limitation, the requirements of 2 CFR, 29 CFR and 34 CFR, and the Federal Assurances and
                    Certifications described below.

     2.2            Grantee shall ensure that any further distribution or payment of the federal funds paid under this Grant by
                    means of any subgrant or other agreement between Grantee and another party for the performance of any
                    of the work of this Grant, shall include the requirement that said funds shall be used solely ina manner that
                    complies with the provisions of this Grant.

     2.3            Grantee shall include and incorporate the Federal Assurances and Certifications described below in all
                    subgrants that may use, in whole or in part, the funds provided by this Grant.

     2.4            Grantee represents, warrants, and guarantees that it:


               1.   Has the legal authority to apply for Federal assistance and the institutional, managerial and financial
                    capability (including funds sufficient to pay the non-Federal share of project cost) to ensure proper
                    planning, management and completion of the project described in this application.
               2.   Will give the awarding agency, the Comptroller General of the United States and, if appropriate, the State,
                    through any authorized representative, access to and the right to examine all records, books, papers, or
                    documents related to the award; and will establish a proper accounting system in accordance with
                    generally accepted accounting standards or agency directives.
               3.   Will establish safeguards to prohibit employees from using their positions for a purpose that constitutes or
                    presents the appearance of personal or organizational conflict of interest, or personal gain.
               4.   Will initiate and complete the work within the applicable time frame after receipt of approval of the
                    awarding agency.

               5.   Will comply with all Federal statutes relating to nondiscrimination. These include but are not limited to:

                       a.   Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (P.L. 88-352) which prohibits discrimination on the basis of


                                                                                                            Page 24 of 26
                                                                                                                       TR
RFPP# 21-016



             race, color or national origin;

                b.   Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972, as amended (20 U.S.C.§§1681- 1683, and 1685-
             1686), which prohibits discrimination on the basis of sex;

                c.   Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as amended (29 U.S.C. §794), which prohibits
             discrimination on the basis of handicaps;

                d.   The Age Discrimination Act of 1975, as amended (42 U. S.C. §§6101-6107), which prohibits
             discrimination on the basis of age;

                e.   The Drug Abuse Office and Treatment Act of 1972 (P.L. 92-255), as amended, relating to
             nondiscrimination on the basis of drug abuse;

                 f.  The Comprehensive Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism Prevention, Treatment and Rehabilitation Act
             of 1970 (P.L. 91-616), as amended, relating to nondiscrimination on the basis of alcohol abuse or
             alcoholism;

                 g.  Sections 523 and 527 of the Public Health Service Act of 1912 (42 U.S.C. §§290 dd-3 and 290 ee-3),
             as amended, relating to confidentiality of alcohol and drug abuse patient records;

                h.   Title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968 (42 U.S.C. §§3601 et seq.), as amended, relating to
             nondiscrimination in the sale, rental or financing of housing;

                 i.  Any other nondiscrimination provisions in the specific statute(s) under which application for
             Federal assistance is being made; and

                j.   The requirements of any other nondiscrimination statute(s) which may apply to the application.
   6.        Will comply with all applicable federal law, including but not limited to:
        a.      The requirements of Titles II and III of the Uniform Relocation Assistance and Real Property
                Acquisition Policies Act of 1970 (P.L. 91-646) which provide for fair and equitable treatment of
                persons displaced or whose property is acquired as a result of Federal or federally-assisted programs.
                These requirements apply to all interests in real property acquired for project purposes regardless of
                Federal participation in purchases;
                All applicable provisions of the Hatch Act (5 U.S.C. §§1501-1508 and 7324-7328) which limit the
                political activities of employees whose principal employment activities are funded in whole or in part
                with Federal funds;

                The Davis- Bacon Act (40 U.S.C. §§276a to 276a-7), the Copeland Act (40 U.S.C. §276c and 18 U.S.C.
                §874), and the Contract Work Hours and Safety Standards Act (40 U.S.C. §§327- 333), regarding labor
                standards for federally-assisted construction subagreements;
                If applicable, with flood insurance purchase requirements of Section 102(a) of the Flood Disaster
                Protection Act of 1973 (P.L. 93-234) which requires recipients in a special flood hazard area to
                participate in the program and to purchase flood insurance if the total cost of insurable construction
                and acquisition is $10,000 or more;

                Environmental standards which may be prescribed pursuant to the following: (a) institution of
                environmental quality control measures under the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (P.L. 91-
                190) and Executive Order (EO) 11514; (b) notification of violating facilities pursuant to EO 11738; (c)
                protection of wetlands pursuant to EO 11990; (d) evaluation of flood hazards in floodplains in
                accordance with EO 11988; (e) assurance of project consistency with the approved State management
                program developed under the Coastal Zone Management Act of 1972 (16 U.S.C. §§1451 et seq.); (f)
                conformity of Federal actions to State (Clean Air) Implementation Plans under Section 176(c) of the
                Clean Air Act of 1955, as amended (42 U.S.C. §§7401 et seq.); (g) protection of underground sources of
                drinking water under the Safe Drinking Water Act of 1974, as amended (P.L. 93-523); and, (h)
                protection of endangered species under the Endangered Species Act of 1973, as amended (P.L. 93-
                205);
                The Wild and Scenic Rivers Act of 1968 (16 U.S.C. §§1271 et seq.) related to protecting components or
                potential components of the national wild and scenic rivers system;


                                                                                                      Page 25 of 26
                                                                                                                 TR
RFPP# 21-016



        g.      Assuring compliance with Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966, as amended
                (16 U.S.C. §470), EO 11593 (identification and protection of historic properties), and the
                Archaeological and Historic Preservation Act of 1974 (16 U.S.C. §§469a-1 et seq.);
                P.L. 93-348 regarding the protection of human subjects involved in research, development, and related
                activities supported by this award of assistance.
                The Laboratory Animal Welfare Act of 1966 (P.L. 89-544, as amended, 7 U.S.C. §§2131 et seq.)
                pertaining to the care, handling, and treatment of warm blooded animals held for research, teaching, or
                other activities supported by this award of assistance;
                The Lead-Based Paint Poisoning Prevention Act (42 U.S.C. §§4801 et seq.) which prohibits the use of
                lead-based paint in construction or rehabilitation of residence structures;
        k.      The Intergovernmental Personnel Act of 1970 (42 U.S.C. §§4728-4763) relating to prescribed
                standards for merit systems for programs funded under one of the 19 statutes or regulations specified
                in Appendix A of OPM's Standards for a Merit System of Personnel Administration (5 C.F.R. 900,
                Subpart F); and
                All applicable requirements of all other Federal laws, executive orders, regulations, and policies
                governing this program.

   7.        Will or will cause to be performed the required financial and compliance audits in accordance with 2 CFR
             200 Uniform Administrative Requirements, Cost Principles, and Audit Requirements for Federal Awards.

             System for Award Management. Grantee must comply with applicable requirements
             regarding the System for Award Management (SAM), currently accessible at
             https://www.sam.gov, and used to complete Exhibit D. This includes applicable
             requirements regarding registration with SAM, as well as maintaining current
             information in SAM. The Grantee also must comply with applicable restrictions on
             subawards ("subcontracts") to first-tier subrecipients (first-tier "subcontractors"),
             including restrictions on subawards to entities that do not acquire and provide (to the
             Grantee) the unique entity identifier required for SAMregistration.

   9.        Audits.

        a.      Grantee shall comply, and require any subcontractor to comply, with applicable
                audit requirements and responsibilities set forth in this Agreement and applicable
                state or federal law.
        b.      If Grantee receives federal awards in excess of $750,000 in a fiscal year, Grantee is
                subject to audit conducted in accordance with the provisions of 2 CFR part 200,
                subpart F. Copies of all audits must be submitted to Agency within 30 days of
                completion.
                Grantee shall save, protect and hold harmless the State of Oregon from the cost of any
                audits or special investigations performed by the Secretary of State with respect to the
                funds expended under this Agreement. Grantee acknowledges and agrees that any
                audit costs incurred by Grantee as a result of allegations of fraud, waste or abuse are
                ineligible for reimbursement under this or any other agreement between Grantee and
                State.




                                                                                                    Page 26 of 26
                                                                                                               TR
