        The Inclusion
        Initiative




The City
Quantum Summit
A briefing on Diversity and Inclusion in the Quantum Sector




                                   By Cecily Josten, Grace Lordan and
                               Karina Robinson, The Inclusion Initiative
                        Please email comments to c.c.josten@lse.ac.uk
I am often asked what is the silver bullet, the one thing that an organisation should
do to drive progress. Regrettably, there is no such magic. Improving diversity means
a multi-year, multi- layered approach it requires systematic change and taking on a
system that has worked very well for some, but excludes others.




Each and every one of us have a role to play in promoting equal opportunity for all
in the workplace, and the contribution of men at work and in the home is crucial to
gender equality. We all have a voice, and the power to effect change and we all walk
taller for using it.
Denise Wilson




Quantum computing is opening up new opportunities for innovation, and more
importantly for diversity and inclusion. This technology will change computing more in
the next 10 years than it has changed in the last century. Providing equal access, and
equal opportunities will make the difference between humanity’s future being diverse
or dystopian.




The most important factors in hiring and retaining diverse talent are a company’s
commitment and culture. Commitment because hiring for DEI isn’t without its challenges
and you can’t give up if you face a few along the way. Culture because that’s the #1 key to
DEI in a company. Without a culture that embraces and celebrates differences you simply
won’t succeed. DEI has to be built into your company’s DNA.
whurley




                                                                                              1
The City Quantum
Summit Briefing

Workplaces are changing rapidly, with an increasingly diverse workforce
and a lack of talent to fill all the roles, which is why companies across all
industries are tackling Diversity & Inclusion within their organisations.
Over a dedicated lunch session, The City           The Quantum sector is at the forefront
Quantum Summit addressed D&I in the                of technology, dealing with some of the
quantum sector, not least by seeking to learn      world’s most pressing issues such as energy
lessons from the experience of the financial       provision and supply chain logistics. It relies
sector, which has been wrestling with the          on its workforce to be innovative and creative.
challenge for many more years.                     Inclusion and inclusive behaviour, such as
                                                   providing individuals with a voice during
In the panel discussion, moderated by whurley
                                                   a meeting can, together with a diverse
of Strangeworks, the status quo of diversity in
                                                   workforce that represents individuals from
quantum companies was analysed, alongside
                                                   different backgrounds, increase innovation
top tips on how to create and maintain D&I.
                                                   and firm performance more generally
The key takeaway from the panel is that
                                                   (Lordan and Josten 2021).
implementing D&I takes effort but this
effort is intrinsically valuable and pays off in   Like many other sectors, the quantum
innovation and in financial terms.                 computing sector, however, struggles to achieve
                                                   equal representation with only 1 in 54 of all
Fostering diversity and inclusion ultimately
                                                   applicants for quantum roles being female
entails collecting data and statistics on
                                                   and 79 per cent of quantum companies not
diversity figures, hiring fairly, auditing work
                                                   having a female senior figure, according to the
processes to ensure equal opportunity, voice
                                                   recruitment company Quantum Futures. While
and visibility of everyone, creating awareness
                                                   the reason for such low numbers are manifold,
for and informing on diversity and inclusion,
                                                   the panel offered the following potential
amongst other factors.
                                                   solutions and tips to improve D&I in the sector.




                                                                                                      2
1. The crucial role of recruiting
Connor Teague from Quantum Futures, an            One issue is that individuals often self-select out
internationally operating recruitment company     of roles before they even apply because of the
specialised in Quantum roles, highlighted the     language of the job description. Companies and
crucial role of recruiters in paving the way      organisations hence need to focus on unbiased
for a more diverse workforce. Collecting          job descriptions and interview processes.
data on diversity, benchmarking and fair
                                                  Further, by relying less on an applicant’s
hiring processes are crucial to ensure equal
                                                  background and more on, for example, task-
representation early in the hiring pipeline.
                                                  based assessments, recruiters can broaden
The role of the recruiter is also to encourage,   their talent spectrum and hire more diversely.
particularly, female employees with work
                                                  It is also key for companies to bear in mind
experience to negotiate higher salaries
                                                  that that diversity and inclusion is both a selling
and speak for themselves. Recruiters have
                                                  point for their company and can be helpful to
the responsibility to educate and increase
                                                  retain talent. To note, 62 per cent of current
awareness and information of benchmarks in
                                                  employees in quantum want their workforce
the industry.
                                                  to do more to increase diversity, according to
                                                  Quantum Futures.




  If we begin educating mid to senior leaders in other industries of the cross pollination of
  roles in quantum which they could be suitable for, we would be in a good position for them
  to filter down a more diverse and inclusive culture from which they have had experience
  with. It starts from the top.




  Hiring non-traditional quantum leaders to the business – When the co-founders step
  to the side and bring in a leader from a different industry, the business tends to stop
  hiring versions of themselves! I’ve seen great success with quantum business who
  have done this.

  Every quarter, host ‘feedback days’ for employees. Find out what they are enjoying,
  have their career goals changed, have their motivations changed, would they like
  to learn something new. Businesses have a relaxed mindset after they have hired
  someone, however, we are dealing with people and people’s situations change.
  It’s good to realign expectations from both sides.
  Connor Teague




                                                                                                        3
  In order to ensure change in the workplaces of the future, it would be essential to
  increase the number of inclusive leaders who do not hire their friends or hire based on
  their own affinity, but hire for diversity and for perspectives that they do not yet have
  and that really requires a change in ego in our leaders and a change of perspective
  towards a diversity mindset.




  We wouldn’t need HR policies, government mandates and quotas if every single manager
  and leader was giving equal opportunities, visibility and voice and hiring from a wide
  talent pool based on merit.
  Grace Lordan




2. Treat diversity and inclusion like any other
business critical issue
Denise Wilson argued that D&I should be                 evaluations and the like. The status quo needs
treated like other key business issue. She is           to be challenged and norms surrounding hiring
chief executive of the FTSE Women Leaders               removed. It takes a multi-layered, multi-year
Review that increased the number of women               and systematic approach to change the make
                                                        up and culture of an organisation.
on FTSE 350 boards and is now also focused
on senior leadership positions. She argued            • D&I must be owned and held accountable at
that organisations that make most progress              the Board level. It needs to be talked about
are robust and purposeful in their intent, they         like ‘big business’ in charts, graphs, budgets
treat diversity and inclusion like any other            and while D&I budgets are still comparatively
business critical issue which crucially entails         small they should move closer to those of other
the following factors:                                  departments such as marketing.

• A data-led approach, identifying gaps, setting      • There is no silver bullet but the role and
  targets and incentivising success. Collecting         ambition of the leader is key. Information and
  data is necessary to progress on gender issues        communication, just like data, is also crucial
  such as the gender pay gap. The power of              to creating a diverse and inclusive workforce.
  publication should not be underestimated and          The modern leader needs to be trained and
  transparency drives change in the industry.           well-informed on this topic if they are to attract,
                                                        retain and develop a diverse workforce. Only
• Like any other business goal, executives need         when leaders are well informed on the facts,
  to work hard to foster diversity and inclusion.       will they be confident to use their voices as a
  The need to lift the lid on every people process,     force for good, and will their voices be heard.
  pay, bonus allocations, retention, performance


                                                                                                              4
3. Opportunity, visibility, voice
Dr Grace Lordan, Founder and Director of The          By ensuring equal opportunities, visibility
Inclusion Initiative at The London School of          and voice we can create an inclusive culture
Economics and Political Science, emphasised           where every person has equal chance of
the role of opportunity, visibility and voice.        progression and of getting a pay rise.

First, to achieve inclusion at work we need           In summary, it was highlighted that while
to ensure equal opportunities for all talent of       promoting diversity and inclusion takes effort,
both growth and networking opportunities.             we should not talk of it as ‘effort’ as it pays
Inclusive leaders in firms should ensure that         off in increased retention, promotion and
all people in their team are offered equal            productivity. Instead, companies should stay
opportunities. Auditing this type of behaviour        adventurous and embrace the challenge.
is crucial to make salient the choices leaders        Hiring diverse candidates will become easier
are making, often unconsciously.                      with increasingly larger networks of diverse
                                                      individuals and more information on diverse
Second, we need to ensure the equal visibility
                                                      and inclusive hiring and retaining practices in
of all talent. Inclusive leaders should ensure
                                                      the sector.
equal visibility for their colleagues i.e. give
accolades or speak about them positively when         Ultimately, the Quantum industry is missing
they are not in the room.                             out on talent, innovation and productivity
                                                      without hiring diversely and turning its firms
Third, we need to ensure the equal voice of
                                                      into inclusive employers.
all talent. Inclusive leaders should make sure
that everyone is heard and has voice when they
are having meetings. Companies can implement
an advocation system where advocates act as
promoter of opportunities, visibility and voice for
the employee and as enabler of their career.




  The future of inclusion comes down to transparency – over pay, over promotions –
  and without which we look likely to repeat the mistakes of the past.




  Illustration plays a critical role in the recruitment and retention of a more diverse
  workforce. A company’s website is its window shop to the world – don’t hide your diverse
  staff, highlight them and their contribution. Just as important is collaboration – measure
  success, measure failure, and share that with others outside the company to learn from
  each other.
  Karina Robinson


                                                                                                        5
Notes

Denise Ruffner, President at Women in              Speakers at the lunch included:
Quantum, is concretely promoting women in
                                                   Karina Robinson, Founder of The City Quantum
the quantum sector by funding scholarships for
                                                   Summit and Co-founder of The Inclusion
women. The scholarship programme ‘Quantum
                                                   Initiative at The London School of Economics
Women’ funds projects, trips to conferences,
                                                   and Political Science.
and training, amongst other measures. It is
one important and concrete example of how to       whurley, Founder and CEO of strangeworks.
advance women’s careers.
                                                   Connor Teague, CEO and President
Dr Grace Lordan offers a virtual, eight-week       at Quantum Futures.
course on inclusive leadership at The London
                                                   Denise Wilson, CEO at FTSE Women
School of Economics and Political Science to
                                                   Leaders Review.
improve inclusion, collaboration, and resilience
within your organisation.                          Denise Ruffner, President at Women
                                                   in Quantum.
The City Quantum Summit was hosted by
Robinson Hambro and Vincent Keaveny, The           Cecily Josten, Fellow at The Inclusion Initiative
Rt Hon the Lord Mayor of the City of London,       at The London School of Economics and
on Tuesday 11th October 2022 at the Mansion        Political Science.
House. The lunch to brainstorm D&I in quantum
                                                   Grace Lordan, Founder and Director of The
computing, held in aid of Women in Quantum,
                                                   Inclusion Initiative at The London School of
was hosted by Robinson Hambro at The
                                                   Economics and Political Science.
Walbrook Club.




                                                                                                       6
The City Quantum Summit
Briefing – Appendix

Research by the Inclusion Initiative: The Good Finance Framework,
which gives a step by step guide to creating an inclusive organisation.
wibf.org.uk/images/uploads/documents/WIBF_ACT_Good_Finance_Framework_Report.pdf




  Inclusion at work – what does the future look like?

  Organizations of all sizes recognize the importance diversity, equity, and inclusion in the
  workplace, and many are working to implement processes and programs that will help
  ensure these values become part of their work culture.

  I expect that to continue until diversity, equity, inclusion become so ingrained that
  workers expect it and accept nothing less.

  Millennials and Gen Z workers have really pushed inclusion to the forefront and are
  choosing to work for entities that align to these values. Younger generations will continue
  to lead this charge and ensure it’s not a fad and our workplaces become truly inclusive.




  What are the two key factors in recruiting and retaining diverse talent?

  There are several factors but two that I believe are key are 1) Ensure your hiring,
  compensation and other policies and procedures support diversity, equity and inclusion
  efforts and are adhered to throughout an organization. Too often, organizations talk
  about supporting these efforts but do not have the policies, tools, or training in place
  to ensure best practices are followed; 2) Retention is a huge issue for organizations
  and companies, especially those with highly skilled employees. Organizations need to
  pay attention to their culture and cultivate an environment where different voices and
  viewpoints are not only heard but encouraged and considered.
  Denise Ruffner




                                                                                                7
            The Inclusion
            Initiative



The Inclusion Initiative (TII) at LSE launched in November 2020. TII
leverages behavioural science insights to advance our understanding
of the factors that enhance inclusion at work. Our first area of focus
has been the financial and professional service while we are now
also moving into Deep Tech. We are building an open source research
repository that houses rigorous and relevant research related to
inclusion at work, in the financial and professional services and beyond.
TII’s research agenda has three main aims. First, to propose a viable
proxy measure of inclusion. Second, to quantify the direct link between
inclusion and the core business outcomes it should theoretically
improve, such as innovation, creativity and behavioural risk
assessment both within and across firms. Third, to propose to firms a
menu of cost effective interventions that could improve inclusion of all
talent from pipeline to boardroom.
The Inclusion Initiative (TII) is bringing industry, academics and other
stakeholders together regularly to exchange ideas, highlight new
findings and build partnerships. Please do join the conversation.




The Inclusion Initiative
Connaught House
63-65 Aldwych
London WC2B 4EJ
Web: lse.ac.uk/tii
Tel: +44 (0)7879 741 117
Email: TII@lse.ac.uk
     @LSE_TII
