                                                                                                                            PUBLIC HOUSING
                                                                                                                      OCCUPANCY GUIDEBOOK




    Eligibility Determination and
    Denial of Assistance
Contents
TL    —-_ Chapter OVErVIOW .........cccceeceeceeceeeeeceecenceeceeceeseaeesaesaesaueaaaasassassseeseeseeseeeeeeeeesessesseseeseaeeeaesausaasassssssssseseess 3

2           Overview of Eligibility Factors and Requirements at AAMISSION ..............::2::s::ssssssseseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeess 3

      2.1       — Eligibility Factors for AAMISSION.........ccccccccccceceeeessseseeeeeeeeeeceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseseeeeaananseeeseeseeseeeseeeeeesesseaes 3

      2.2           Screening and Other Requirements at AAMISSION ........cccccccceeeeeeecesssssssseeeeneeeeeeeeeeeneeeeseeesssseees 4

3           Family Eligibility REQUIFEMENES .........cccccececeeceeeeeeeeceeeeseeeseeeeeeneeeeeeeeeeeseseseeeeseseseananseeeseeseeeeeeeeseeeeseseeees 4

A           INCOME) LIMES «02sec ee cece cent eee ee teeta eee cnet ee eee eee eee ee eee eee eee eee eee eee eee enna eee eee eee eee eee ee     eee            eee 6

      A.1           INCOME Targeting .......cccccccceceseesseeeeneeeeeseeeeeeeeeeeseseesseeeeeaneeeeeeeseeeeeeseseseeesseseeaeeaeseeseeseeseeeeeseeesesseses 6

F——         CIRIZENSNIP StAtUS ...........cceeseeessessssssssssssssssesseeseeseeeceeeeeeeeeenseeseeceeceeseeseeeeeaeeausausauaaassaesseeseeeeeeeeeeeeeeesensees 6

      5.1           Documentation of Citizenship Or IMMISration StAtuS........ccccccccceecesssssssseeeseeeseeseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeessseees 8

            5.1.1          S401
                             01S) [0] 0S eee                                                                                                                              9

      5.2           Verification of Eligible IMMigration Status ...........cccccececeseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeesessseeseeaneeeeseeeeeeneeeeeeeesseseees 9

            5.2.1          Primary Verification M@thd ........:cccccccccceceeceeeeeceseseseeeeenseeeseeseeseeeeeeeseeessssesesesansneeseneneeeenees 9

            5.2.2          Secondary Verification MEthOd ........cccccccecessesseeseeeneeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseseessseseeaneeeseeeeeseeseeeeeeeeeesesesaes 9

            5.2.3          CIS Appeals Proce                 ..........::2::s:sssssssssseeseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeeeceeceeeeseeeeeaneaueaaasaassaessesseeseeseeeeeeeeeeeeeess 9

      5.3           Prorating Assistance for Mixed Famili€S ..........c.cccccsssssseceeceeeeeeeeeeeessessseseeanseesseeseeseeeseseeesesseeees 10

      5.4           Delay, Denial, Reduction or Termination of ASSISTANCE.............::::::sssseessesseeseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeess 11

            5.4.1          Notification of Denial Due to CitiZENSNIP Status ..............ccceeceeeeeeeeeeeeeceeceeceeceeeeeseeeeseesaees 12

      5.5           Compliance with Verification REQUIFEMENTS .......cccccceccceceeceeseeceecssssssssssssessseeseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeess 12

6           Disclosure of Social SeCurity NUMDENS...........:::cccceeceeeeseeeeeeeeeeeeessseseeceeaneeeeeeeseeeeseeeeesessssssesenenseesnes 13

      6.1           SSN Disclosure Requirements for Applicant Famili@s .............:::::ssssssssssssssseseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeees 13



Eligibility Determination and Denial of Assistance
US Department of Housing & Urban Development
June 2022
                                                                                                                              PUBLIC HOUSING
                                                                                                                        OCCUPANCY GUIDEBOOK

     6.2       SSN Disclosure Requirements for New Household Members Added to a Participant
     (O10s\—1 010) (6 eee                                                         eee                                                                                    13

           6.2.1           New Household Members Under Age 6 Who Do Not Have an SSN... ececescscececeeeeeeees 13

     6.3           Acceptable DOCUMENTATION ...............cccceeceeeeeeeeeeeeeeceeceeceeceeseeseaeesaesaesauaaasesseeeseeseeeeeeeeeeeeeseeneeees 14

T    —- TQ@NANt SCECNINGE .......ccceeceeseseeseneeeeceeeeeeeeeeeessseeseeeaeeneeeeseeseeeeeesesesseesseseeaeeaeeeeeseeseeeeeeeseeesesseseeeeanseeenes 15

     7.1L       = Criminal Background SCreening.........ccccscsecsessesneeeeeeeeeeeeeeeceeeseseeeeeaeeeeeseeeeseeeeeeseseeeesssesenenseesnees 16

           7.4.1          Consent for BACkZround SCIEN ing .......c:cccccccccceceeeceeeeseseseseeeeecneeeeseeeeeeeeeeeeeeesssseseeenseeenes 16

           7.1.2           Information from Drug Abuse Treatment Faciliti€S .........ccccccccccceceeesssssseseesereeeeeeeeeeeeneeees 17

           7.1.3           Records Retention and Confidentiality ............cccccssssssesseeseeceeeeeeeeeeseseessseseeeeeanseeeeeeeeeenenees 17

           7.1.4           Denial of Assistance for Criminal ACtiVity ............ccccccssssceseeceeeeeeeeeeseeessesssseeeanseeeseeeeeenenees 18

S    — EIV System Searches at AAMISSION........cccccceceeeceeeeseseseeeneeneeeeeeeeeeeeeeseceeeesseeeesenaneaeseeeseeeeeeseseeeesesseees 20

     8.1           Existing Tenant Search and Avoiding Duplicate SUDSI)............ccccscsessseesseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeeees 21

     8.2.          HUD-52675 Debts Owed to PHAS and Terminations. ..........cceeecceeceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeneees 21

     8.3            120-day review Of INCOME REPOMt........cecccccceceeeesseeseneeeeeeeeeceeeeeeseeeeeeseseseeaeeananseeeseneeeeseneeesseseeees 21

Q          Notifications tO FAMIly ...........cccesesceeeeeceeeeeeeeeeseesseeeeeaeeeeeseeeeeeeeeeeseseseseeseeaeeeeeeeeseeseeeseeesesessssesesensensnees 21

     9.1           EMergency COntact ........ccccccscsesseneneeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeessseseaeeaneeeeeeeseeeeessecesesssseseeaeeeeseeeseeeeseeeseseeesesseees 21

     9.2           Notification REQUIFEMENHS......cccccccccecceeceecesceeseecescessesansnssssssessessseeseeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeseeseseesseesesseesesaees 22

     9.3.          Effective Communication and Limited English Proficiency RequireMents............cccccesesseeeeees 22

10         Denial Of ASSISTANCE ....... cee ceceeceeceeee cee eeeeee eee eeeeee eee eee aee eee gae eee eaaaee eee eaeaeeeeegae see eaaee eee eaaeeeeeeeeaeeeeneeeeeeeees 22

     10.1             TIMING Of DONA uo... ceececcceceecessessseeeeeeeeeeeeeceeeeeeeeseseseesseeaeeaeseeeseeeeeeseseeesseeeseeeeeanaeseeeeeeseeenenees 22

           10.1.1          Notice and Right to Dispute Denial ......... eee ceceeseeseeeeeeeseeeeeeseeeeseeeseeseeeeseeeneeseneeaees 22
     10.2              NON-CISCHIMINATION ... eee eee cee teen ee eee eee eee eee ee ene teen eee e ee eaeeee eee ene eens eee eeeeeeee eee eee sesaeaeeeeeneseenanes 23

     10.3             Consideration Of CirCUMStANCES ........eeeeeeeceeeeneeeeeeeeeeeeeeaee
                                                                      eee eaneeeeesaaeeeeseaaeeeeseaaeeeeeeseaeeseseeaees 24

Exhibit 1: Non-Citizen Rule Summary of Documentation REQuireMent ..........cccceeesessseseereneeeeeeeeeeenenees 25




Eligibility Determination and Denial of Assistance
US Department of Housing & Urban Development
June 2022
                                                                                               PUBLIC HOUSING
                                                                                         OCCUPANCY GUIDEBOOK




1     Chapter Overview
This chapter outlines the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development’s (HUD) eligibility requirements
for participation in the Public Housing (PH) program and provides guidance to Public Housing Agencies (PHAs)
in establishing additional criteria for admission. The Department advises PHAs to objectively and consistently
apply these criteria when evaluating the eligibility of families who apply for assistance.              An applicant must
meet all eligibility requirements to receive housing assistance.! Applicants applying for assistance may be
asked to explain their circumstances, furnish additional information and are entitled to receive an explanation
in cases where the PHA determines the family is ineligible for admission.2

As with all areas of program administration, PHAs must comply with all federal, state and local laws, including
but not limited to nondiscrimination laws, such as laws governing fair housing and equal opportunity in
housing when determining eligibility.?



2     Overview of Eligibility Factors and Requirements at
      Admission
PHAs must consider three factors when determining a family’s eligibility for admission into the PH program.                   In
addition to the three eligibility factors, the PHA must conduct certain screenings which may result in denial of
assistance. Each factor is summarized below and discussed further in a corresponding section. Before
denying assistance for any criteria, the PHA should review Section 10, Denial of Assistance, to ensure
compliance with all nondiscrimination and fair housing requirements,                including for example, the Fair Housing
Act, Title VI of the Civil Rights Act, Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act, and Violence Against Women Act
(VAWA) requirements.


2.1    Eligibility Factors for Admission
Family eligibility requirements: The household must meet HUD’s definition of a “family,” which is provided in
Section 3, Family Eligibility Requirements.4

Income limits: The household's annual income must not exceed the applicable income limit as established by
HUD in the jurisdiction where the family leases a unit.5 This requirement applies at the time of admission and
is reevaluated at the time of reexamination; Section 4, Income Limits, further describes this requirement.

Citizenship or Eligible Immigration status: Each applicant in the household must have citizenship or eligible
immigration status with supporting documentation.®              Citizenship status only needs to be verified at the time of
admission for each household member.              Information on how to verify citizenship and eligible immigration



124 CFR § 960.201
2 24 CFR    § 960.208(a)
3 24 CFR   § 5.105(a); 24 CFR part 1; 24 CFR part 8; 24 CFR part 100; 24 CFR part 146; 28 CFR part 35
4 24 CFR    § 5.403
5 24 CFR   § 960.202(a); https://www.huduser.gov/portal/datasets/iLhtml
6 24 CFR   § 5.508(a)-(d)

Eligibility Determination and Denial of Assistance
US Department of Housing & Urban Development
June 2022
                                                                                         PUBLIC HOUSING
                                                                                   OCCUPANCY GUIDEBOOK




status and calculate assistance for families that include ineligible noncitizens is provided in Section 5,
Citizenship Status.


2.2    Screening and Other Requirements at Admission
Disclosure of Social Security Numbers and compliance with verification requirements. In order to verify the
family’s eligibility, the household must sign consent forms and provide requested verification materials.’ The
applicant must also disclose and document the social security numbers (SSN) of all family members (with a
few exceptions) as described in Section 6, Disclosure of Social Security Numbers. PHAs only need to verify
SSNs once per household        member. ®


Background screening. The PHA is responsible for screening family behavior and suitability for tenancy.2
Details on which types of activity must result in denial of assistance and what types of activity may result in
denial of assistance, and the PHA’s options for setting additional criteria are discussed in Section 7,
Background Screening. PHAs must perform background checks for each member to see if they are subject to
the lifetime sex offender registry.1° However, these background checks may be achieved by searching the Dru
Sjodin National Sex Offender Database, available at http://www.nsopw.gov.t1_ PHAs may obtain conviction
records from Law Enforcement Agencies (LEAs) to screen for other criminal activity related to suitability for
tenancy but are not required to do so.12 If PHAs choose to screen for admission using LEA conviction records,
all adult household members must sign a criminal background consent form to authorize the PHA to conduct
these background screenings.13

Enterprise Income Verification (EIV) system searches.            PHAs must use HUD’s EIV system to search for all
household members using the Existing Tenant Search and all adult household members in the Search for
Former Tenant. All adult household members also must sign the form HUD-52675.14 The PHA may be
required to deny assistance to household members already receiving assistance from another program or who
owe an outstanding debt to another PHA.   More information on the required searches and interpreting the
results is provided in Section 8, EIV System Searches at Admission.



3     Family Eligibility Requirements
Each applicant for assistance under the PH Program must, at a minimum                   meet the PHA's definition of “family.”
PHAs have discretion in defining what constitutes a family. However, the definition must not exclude any
groups included under HUD’s definition of family. © PHAs must ensure that its definition of “family” does not




724 CFR 8§§ 5.230; 5.233
8 24 CFR § 5.216(b)
9 24 CFR 960.203
10 24 CFR 5.856
11 PIH 2012-28, State Registered Lifetime Sex Offenders in Federally Assisted Housing, page 3, FN 1, page 4
12 See 24 CFR § 5.903
13 24 CFR § 5.903(b)
14 24 CFR § 5.233; Notice PIH 2018-18, Administrative Guidance for Effective and Mandated Use of the Enterprise Income Verification
System
15 24 CFR § 5.403

Eligibility Determination and Denial of Assistance
US Department of Housing & Urban Development
June 2022
                                                                                         PUBLIC HOUSING
                                                                                   OCCUPANCY GUIDEBOOK




consider actual or perceived sexual orientation, gender identity, or marital status.1©               PHAs must not make
inquiries as to the sexual orientation or gender identity of applicants.

A family includes, but is not limited to, regardless of actual or perceived sexual orientation, gender identity, or
marital status, the following:

1)   Asingle person, who may be an elderly person, displaced             person, disabled person, near-elderly person, or
     any other single person;

2)   A group of persons residing together, and such group includes, but is not limited to:

     a)   A family with or without children (a child who is temporarily away from the home because of placement
          in foster care is considered a member of the family).

     b)   An elderly family, which is defined as a family whose head, co-head, spouse, or sole member is at
          least 62 years of age. It may include two or more persons, each of whom are at least 62, living
          together; or one or more persons who are at least 62 living with one or more live-in aides.
     c)   Anear-elderly family, which is defined as a family whose head, co-head, spouse, or sole member is at
          least 50 years of age but below the age of 62; or two or more persons, each of whom are between the
          ages of 50 and 62, living together; or one or more persons who are between the ages of 50 and 62
          living with one or more live-in aides.
     d)   Adisabled family, which means a family whose head, co-head, spouse, or sole member,                      is a person
          with disabilities; or two or more persons with disabilities living together; or one or more persons with
          disabilities living with one or more live-in aides.

          i)    A “person with disabilities” means a person who:

                (1) Has a disability as defined in 42 U.S.C.      § 423(d)(1);
                (2)   Has a physical, mental or emotional impairment that is expected to be of long-continued and
                      indefinite duration, substantially impedes his or her ability to live independently, and is of such
                      a nature that ability to live independently could be improved by more suitable housing
                      conditions; or

                (3) Has a developmental disability as defined in 42 U.S.C.           § 15002(8) (formerly codified in 42
                    U.S.C. § 6001).
          it)   Important considerations:

                (1) The meaning of “a person with disabilities” does not exclude persons who have the disease of
                    acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) or any conditions arising from the virus that
                    causes AIDS.

                (2) The meaning of “a person with disabilities” does not include a person whose disability is
                      based solely on a dependency to any drug or alcohol (for eligibility purposes).

                (3) A person who qualifies as a “person with disabilities” also qualifies as an individual with
                      disabilities for purposes of protections under Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act, the
                      Americans with Disabilities Act, and the Fair Housing Act, including reasonable



16 24 CFR § 5.105(a)(2); Equal Access to Housing in HUD Programs regardless of Sexual Orientation or Gender Identity, 77 FR 5662,
Feb. 3, 2012

Eligibility Determination and Denial of Assistance
US Department of Housing & Urban Development
June 2022
                                                                                    PUBLIC HOUSING
                                                                              OCCUPANCY GUIDEBOOK




                    accommodation     and program accessibility for persons with disabilities.

      e)    Adisplaced family, which is a family in which each member or the sole member is a person displaced
            by governmental action, or whose dwelling has been extensively damaged or destroyed as a result of a
            disaster declared or otherwise formally recognized under federal disaster relief laws.

      f)    Aremaining member of a tenant family where other members of the family are no longer in the unit. 27



4          Income       Limits
HUD establishes income limits by family size for the area in which each PHA is located. These income limits
are used to determine the family’s eligibility for the program and are published annually in a HUD Notice. They
are generally effective on the date of publication. The income limits are available via the HUD USER
(https://www.huduser.gov/portal/datasets/il.html) website.

To be eligible for public housing, a family must have an annual income that is no more than the low-income
limit for the jurisdiction, generally 80 percent of area median income.18


4.1         Income Targeting
At least 40 percent of new admissions to public housing in the PHA fiscal year must be “extremely low-
income” (ELI) families with annual incomes at or below 30 percent of the area median income. PHAs that
manage both Public Housing and Section 8 voucher programs can reduce their public housing target of 40
percent of ELI admissions by exceeding the target of 75 percent of Section 8 admissions during the same PHA
fiscal year, i.e., the excess of Section 8 admissions may be credited against the public housing targeting
requirement. The fiscal year credit for excess voucher program admissions must not exceed the lowest of:


      e     Ten (10) percent of public housing waiting list admissions during the PHA's fiscal year;
      e     Ten (10) percent of waiting list admissions to the PHA's Section 8 tenant-based assistance program
            during the PHA fiscal year; or
      e     The number of qualifying low-income families who commence occupancy during the fiscal year of PHA
             public housing units located in census tracts with a poverty rate of 30 percent or more. 19



5          Citizenship Status
Eligibility for federal housing assistance, such as the PH program, is limited to U.S. citizens and noncitizens
who have eligible immigration status. 2°      Families in which all members are U.S. citizens or have eligible
immigration status are eligible for housing assistance.21       Families in which at least one member is a U.S. citizen
or has eligible immigration status may be eligible for partial, or pro-rated, assistance. A family in which some
family members have eligible immigration status, and some do not contend eligible immigration status is


17 24 CFR § 5.403; 24 CFR 5.105(a)(2), and the 2012 Equal Access Rule
(https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2012/02/03/2012-2343/equal-access-to-housing-in-hud-programs-regardless-of-
sexual-orientation-or-gender-identity).
18 24 CFR § 960.201(a)
19 24 CFR § 960.202(b)(2)
20 24 CFR § 5.506(a)
21 24 CFR § 5.506(b)

Eligibility Determination and Denial of Assistance
US Department of Housing & Urban Development
June 2022
                                                                                                PUBLIC HOUSING
                                                                                          OCCUPANCY GUIDEBOOK




referred to as a mixed family.         Family members whose eligible immigration status is pending are considered
ineligible for assistance until their immigration status is fully authorized                by U.S. Citizenship and Immigration
Services.     Once these family members receive their immigration status,                   the family’s financial assistance       will
be redetermined accordingly.          Mixed families receive prorated assistance based on the percentage of family
members who qualify for assistance.22

An individual who is not a U.S. citizen or national who is a resident of the U.S. and has any of the following
immigration statuses2° is eligible for assistance:

     e    anon-citizen lawfully admitted for permanent residence as an immigrant as defined by section
         1101(a)(15) and (20) of title 8, excluding, among others, alien visitors, tourists, diplomats, and
         students who enter the United States temporarily with no intention of abandoning their residence in a
         foreign country (Lawful Permanent Residents (LPRs));

     e    anon-citizen who entered the United States prior to June 30, 1948, or such subsequent date as is
          enacted by law, has continuously maintained his or her residence in the United States since then, and
            is not ineligible for citizenship, but who is deemed to be lawfully admitted for permanent residence as
          a result of an exercise of discretion by the Attorney General pursuant to section 1259 of title 8;

     e    anon-citizen who is lawfully present in the United States pursuant to an admission under section
          1157 of title 8 or pursuant to the granting of asylum (which has not been terminated) under section
          1158 of title 8 (Refugees and asylees (as long as their asylum has not been terminated));

     e   anon-citizen who is lawfully present in the United States as a result of an exercise of discretion by the
         Attorney General for emergent reasons or reasons deemed strictly in the public interest pursuant to
         section 1182(d)(5) of title 8 (a noncitizen paroled into the U.S. for a period of at least one year);

     e    anon-citizen who is lawfully present in the United States as a result of the Attorney General’s
         withholding deportation pursuant to section 1231(b)(3) of title 8 (A noncitizen granted withholding of
         removal under 8 U.S.C. 1231(b)(3));

     e    anon-citizen lawfully admitted for temporary or permanent residence under section 1255a of title 8;

     e    anon-citizen who is lawfully residing in the United States and its territories and possessions under
         section 141 of the Compacts of Free Association between the Government of the United States and
         the Governments of the Marshall Islands, the Federated States of Micronesia (48 U.S.C. 1901 note)
         and Palau (48 U.S.C. 1931 note) while the applicable section is in effect: Provided, That, within Guam
         any such alien shall not be entitled to a preference in receiving assistance under this Act over any
         United States citizen or national resident therein who is otherwise eligible for such assistance;24

     e    anon-citizen who is a human trafficking victim and certain family members25 who: (1) have a
          Certification Letter from the Department of Health and Human Services (including T-1 nonimmigrants




22 24 CFR § 5.516(b)
23 Afghan citizens and nationals paroled into the United States on or after July 31, 2021, unless parole has been terminated by the
Secretary of Homeland Security, are eligible for assistance. IMPORTANT NOTE: Eligibility on this basis for HUD programs continues until
March 31, 2023, or the end of the parole term, whichever is later (Extending Government Funding and Delivering Emergency
Assistance Act, Pub. L. No. 117-43, § 2502, 135 Stat. 377, 377-378 (2021).
24 42 U.S.C. § 1436a(a)
25 8 U.S.C. § 1641(c)(4); 8 U.S.C. § 1101(a)(15)(T);   22 U.S.C. § 7105(b)(1)(A);   https://www.acf.hhs.gov/orr/fact-sheet/fact-sheet-
victim-assistance-english

Eligibility Determination and Denial of Assistance
US Department of Housing & Urban Development
June 2022
                                                                                           PUBLIC HOUSING
                                                                                     OCCUPANCY GUIDEBOOK




           and Continued     Presence recipients2°), (2) are noncitizen minors who have received a Child Eligibility
           Letter from the Department of Health and Human Services;2’ or (3) are granted derivative T
           nonimmigrant status by USCIS (T-2 through T-6 nonimmigrant status);28 or

      e    anon-citizen who is a VAWA self-petitioner under 8 U.S.C. § 1101(a)(51), 8 U.S.C. § 1641(c), 62 Fed.
           Reg. 61344, 61367 (Nov. 17, 1997).29

Non-citizen students, even those with eligible immigration status, are not eligible to receive housing assistance.
When a non-citizen student is accompanied by a non-citizen spouse and/or non-citizen minor children, those
family members also are ineligible for assistance.             However, citizen spouses and the children of the citizen
spouse and non-citizen student are eligible for assistance. 3° Assistance would be prorated if a household
includes a non-citizen student and citizen spouse and/or citizen children. A non-citizen student is a bona fide
student who:

      e    Is pursuing a course of study in this country;
      e    Has a residence in another country outside of the United States that the person has no intention of
           abandoning; and
      e    Is admitted to this country temporarily, solely for the purpose of studying.31


5.1       Documentation of Citizenship or Immigration Status
Each eligible family member (or the parent/guardian for family members under age 18) must sign a
declaration of their status.°2 Eligible noncitizens also must provide supporting documentation as shown on
Exhibit 1: Non-Citizen Rule Summary of Documentation Requirements. Family members who do not sign a
declaration of their status or provide the required supporting documentation will be considered ineligible
noncitizens.

Documentation must be submitted no later than the date of the eligibility determination.3s Once documents
have been submitted and verified for an individual, citizenship documentation for that individual will not need
to be collected again. Household members who do not provide the required proof of citizenship or eligible
immigration status will be considered ineligible noncitizens.

                                 PHA Options: Additional Documentation of U.S. Citizenship

 PHAs are permitted, but not required to, adopt policies requiring additional documentation to verify
 U.S. citizenship. If the PHAs’ policy is to require verification of citizenship, the PHAs plan must
 clearly state this policy. The policy must be applied consistently to all applicants and ina
 nondiscriminatory manner.




26 See https://www.acf.hhs.gov/otip/victim-assistance/certification
27 See https://www.acf.hhs.gov/otip/victim-assistance/child-eligibility-letters
28 22 USC § 7105(b)(1)(A). Family members of individuals who are victims of a severe form of trafficking in persons that are derivative
T nonimmigrants (T-2 through T-6 nonimmigrants) are immediately eligible for benefits and services to the same extent as refugees.
They do not need a certification or eligibility letter from HHS.
22 HUD Memorandum, Eligibility of Battered Noncitizen Self-Petitioners for Financial Assistance Under Section 214 of the Housing and
Community Development Act of 1980 (Dec. 15, 2016); HUD Notice PIH 2017-02 (HA) Violence Against Women Act (VAWA) Self-
Petitioner Verification Procedures
30 24 CFR § 5.522; 42 USC § 1436a(c)(2)(A)
31 42 USC § 1436a(c)(2)(A)
32 24 CFR § 5.508(c)
33 24 CFR § 5.508 (g)(1)

Eligibility Determination and Denial of Assistance
US Department of Housing & Urban Development
June 2022
                                                                                PUBLIC HOUSING
                                                                          OCCUPANCY GUIDEBOOK




5.1.1    Extensions
If the family submits the declaration of eligible immigration status and certifies that the family needs more
time because the required evidence is temporarily unavailable, the PHA must provide an extension of up to 30
days to submit evidence of eligible status. To obtain an extension, the family also must certify that prompt and
diligent efforts will be undertaken to obtain the evidence.*4

Upon determining if the extension request meets the requirements, the PHA must inform the family, in writing,
whether their request for a time extension has been either granted or denied. If granted, the notice must
state the specific period of the extension. If the extension request is denied, the notice must explain the
reasons for the denial.35


5.2     Verification of Eligible Immigration Status
The PHA is required to verify eligible immigration status through the U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services
(CIS). While the PHA may not admit any individual prior to receiving the required documentation described in
Exhibit 1, the PHA may elect to provide assistance to the family prior to completing the verification process.3¢

5.2.1    Primary Verification Method
The PHA must conduct primary verification of eligible immigration status through the CIS automated system,
Systematic Alien Verification for Entitlements (SAVE).3’ System log-in instructions are found at:
https://SAVE://save.uscis.gov/web/.

5.2.2 Secondary Verification Method
If the primary verification system does not confirm eligible immigration status, or if the primary verification
system verifies immigration status that is ineligible for assistance under a Section 214 covered program,?3 the
PHA must attempt secondary verification— as of 2018, the SAVE system verification process is paperless. 39
The PHA must submit a request for secondary verification to CIS within 10 days of receiving results of the
primary verification. 4°

To request secondary verification, the PHA will forward photocopies of the original required documents with
the form G-845S Document Verification Request or such other form specified by the CIS.           If secondary
verification fails, the PHA must notify the family in accordance with the notification requirements described in
subsections 5.4.1 and 9.2 of this Chapters.41

5.2.3    CIS Appeals Process
The PHA must notify the family in writing if the secondary verification process does not confirm      eligible
immigration status. The notice must indicate whether assistance will be delayed, denied, or terminated and
inform the family of the right to file an appeal with the CIS. 42 HUD strongly encourages PHAs to include a copy
of the verification request form (CIS FORM   G-845S) with the notice.




34 24 CFR § 5.508( h) (1)- (2)
35 24 CFR § 5.508( h)(3)
36 24 CFR § 5.512( b)
37 24 CFR § 5.512(c)c
38 A2 U.S.C. § 1436(a)
39 24 CFR § 5.512(c)(2) and (d)(1)
40 24 CFR § 5.512(d)(1)
41 24 CFR § 5.512(d)(3)
42 24 CFR §§ 5.512(d)(3),5.514(d)
Eligibility Determination and Denial of Assistance
US Department of Housing & Urban Development
June 2022
                                                                                          PUBLIC HOUSING
                                                                                    OCCUPANCY GUIDEBOOK




If the family wants to exercise their right of appeal with the CIS, the family must submit a written request for an
appeal to the CIS within 30 days of the date of the PHA’s notification.48 The family also must take the
following steps:

       e     Include with the appeal request a cover letter and any support documentation as well as a copy of the
             verification request form (CIS Form G-845S) which was submitted by the PHA for the secondary
             verification request;
       e     Provide the PHA with a copy of the request for appeal with the CIS and proof of mailing (e.g., US Postal
             Service Certified Mail, a service that provides the sender with a mailing receipt); and
       e     Provide any additional documentation that the CIS may request.

Within 30 days the CIS will render its decision to the family and forward a copy to the PHA (or provide notice of
the reasons for any delay).44


5.3         Prorating Assistance for Mixed Families
A mixed family is eligible for prorated assistance.        “Prorated assistance” means the family will receive only a
portion of the subsidy for which a fully eligible family would qualify. The proration is calculated based on the
number of members who are citizens or have eligible immigration status and the total number of family
members. The method of prorating assistance for Public Housing programs*® is shown below:


                 Steps for Prorating Assistance for Mixed Families                              Example
             Determine the Total Tenant Payment (TTP) in accordance with
             24 CFR §5.628. (Annual income includes income of all family                            _
   1                                                                                           TTP = $300
             members, including any family member who has not
             established eligible immigration status.)

   9         Family maximum     rent is equal to the applicable flat rent for the           Flat Rent= $500
             unit size to be occupied by the family.


             Subtract the TTP from the family maximum rent. The result is                     $500 -$300
   3       | the maximum    subsidy for which the family could qualify if all           Family Maximum      Subsidy
             members were eligible (“Family Maximum Subsidy”).                                   = $200



             Divide the Family Maximum Subsidy by the number of persons
             in the family to determine the maximum subsidy per each                       $200 +4 persons =
   4       | family member who has citizenship or eligible immigration                     Member       Maximum
             status (“Eligible Family Member”). The subsidy per eligible                      Subsidy= $50
             family member is the “Member Maximum Subsidy.”




43 24 CFR § 5.514(e)
44 24 CFR § 5.514(e)(3)
45 24 CFR § 5.520(d)

Eligibility Determination and Denial of Assistance
US Department of Housing & Urban Development
June 2022
                                                                                       PUBLIC HOUSING
                                                                                 OCCUPANCY GUIDEBOOK




             Multiply the Member Maximum Subsidy by the number of
                                                                                                $50 x 3=
   5       | Eligible Family Members. The product of this calculation is the
                                                                                       Eligible Subsidy = $150
             “Eligible Subsidy.”


   6         The Mixed Family TTP is the maximum rent minus the amount                         $500-$150=
             of the Eligible Subsidy.                                                 Mixed Family TTP= $350

                                   ;       -                               ;                    UA= $35
             Subtract any applicable utility allowance (UA) from the Mixed                     $350 - $35=
   ¢       | Family TTP. The result of this calculation is the Mixed Family               ;            ;
                                                                                        Mixed Family Tenant
             Tenant Rent.                                                                          7
                                                                                               Rent= $315



5.4         Delay, Denial, Reduction or Termination of Assistance
The PHA must not delay, deny, reduce, or terminate assistance to an applicant or participant based on ineligible
immigration status of a family member if any of the following circumstances apply:46

       e     Atleast one person in the household       is a U.S. citizen or an eligible noncitizen who has been verified by
             CIS;47
       e     The family has submitted the required documents to the PHA timely, but the primary and secondary
             verification processes have not been completed;42
       e     The family member for whom required documents have not been submitted to the PHA has moved
             out;42
       e     The family member who is determined not to be in an eligible immigration status following the CIS
             verification has moved     out;5°
       e     The CIS appeals process has not been completed;>+
       e     Assistance is prorated in accordance with the types of preservation assistance available to mixed
             families;52
       e     Assistance is prorated, and the family is not receiving assistance for the family member(s) whose
             eligible immigration status has not been verified;5
       e     Adeferral of termination of assistance has been granted;>4 or
       e     Fora program       participant, the informal hearing process is not complete.®>




46 24 CFR § 5.514(a)
47 24 CFR § 5.514(b)(1)(v)-(vii)
48 24 CFR § 5.514(b) (1)(
49 24 CFR § 5.514(b) (1)(ii)
50 24 CFR § 5.514(b) (1)(
51 24 CFR § 5.514(b)(1(1)(
52 24 CFR § 5.514(
                      (oOo ey




53 24 CFR § 5.514(
54 24 CFR § 5.514(
55 24 CFR § 5.514(
Eligibility Determination and Denial of Assistance
US Department of Housing & Urban Development
June 2022
                                                                                         PUBLIC HOUSING
                                                                                   OCCUPANCY GUIDEBOOK




Assistance must be denied or terminated when:

      e    The family has not submitted the declaration of citizenship or eligible immigration status and
           appropriate documentation by the specified deadline or any extension;
      e    The family has submitted required documentation, but CIS primary and secondary verification do not
           verify eligible immigration status and the family does not pursue CIS appeal or informal hearing rights;
      e    The family has submitted required documentation, however CIS primary and secondary verification do
           not verify eligible immigration status, and the family pursues CIS appeal or informal hearing rights but
           decision(s) are rendered against the family; or
      e    The PHA determines that a family has knowingly permitted an ineligible person to live in the assisted
           unit on a permanent basis. In this case, the PHA must terminate assistance for the entire family for at
           least 24 months. This does not apply if the ineligible individual at issue was considered         in calculating
           any proration of assistance provided for the family. 5



5.4.1      Notification of Denial Due to Citizenship Status
When a PHA denies or terminates assistance due to lack of citizenship or eligible immigration status, the PHA
must send a written notice to the household which includes the following:

      e    Astatement that financial assistance will be denied or terminated and the justification;
      e    Notification that the family may be eligible for prorated assistance;
      e    Inthe case of a tenant, the criteria and procedures for preserving assistance;
      e    The right to appeal the results of the secondary verification to the CIS and the procedures to appeal;
           and
      e    The right to request an informal hearing from the PHA in lieu of or after a CIS appeal.5”

In the case of applicants, the notice must advise that assistance may be provided until the conclusion of the
CIS appeal process, however, assistance may be placed on hold until the end of the informal hearing
process.°8


5.9       Compliance with Verification Requirements
Participant families are required to provide all necessary information requested               by HUD and the PHA and to
cooperate in efforts to verify all information provided. 59

The PHA must require all adult applicants and participants (age 18 and over, as well as heads, co-heads, and
spouses, regardless of age), to sign the Authorization for the Release of Information/Privacy Act Notice (form
HUD-9886) as a condition for admission and continued assistance. The form is valid for 15 months from the
date of signature and must be signed at each regularly scheduled reexamination.©®°

Once signed, the form provides authorization for the following:

      e    HUD and the PHA to obtain any information necessary from State Wage Information and                Collection



56 24 CFR § 5.514(c)(1)
57 24 CFR §§ 5.512(d)(3), 5.514(d)
58 24 CFR § 5.514(d)
59 24 CFR § 960.259(a)
60 24 CFR § 5.230; Form HUD-9886, Authorization for the Release of Information/Privacy Act Notice

Eligibility Determination and Denial of Assistance
US Department of Housing & Urban Development
June 2022
                                                                                        PUBLIC HOUSING
                                                                                  OCCUPANCY GUIDEBOOK




           Agencies (SWICAs) to verify information provided at the time of application or              recertification. This
           authorization includes accessing HUD’s Enterprise Income Verification System (EIV);
      e    HUD and the PHA to verify income information with previous and current employers that is pertinent to
           eligibility or level of assistance;
      e    HUD and the PHA to obtain any financial information to determine an applicant’s or participant’s
           eligibility for assistance or level of benefits; and
      e    HUD to request income tax return information from the IRS and Social Security Administration (SSA) to
           verify income related to eligibility or level of assistance.



6         Disclosure of Social Security Numbers
The PHA must require applicants and program participants to disclose and document the Social Security
Numbers (SSNs) of all family members, except ineligible noncitizens, as a condition of admission and
continued assistance.®! This process occurs only one time for each family member, at time of admission and
when family members are added to an assisted family, unless a family member has been issued a new SSN or
the Social Security Administration (SSA) has determined that a previously disclosed SSN was invalid.


6.1       SSN Disclosure Requirements for Applicant Families
Since disclosure and documentation of SSNs is a condition of eligibility for the PH program, an applicant
family cannot be admitted to the program until the requirement is met. While the PHA can provide an
applicant family an extension of time to satisfy this requirement, a family’s failure to timely disclose and
document SSNs as required must result in the PHA’s denial of the family’s application.®2

If an applicant or occupant documents they are in satisfactory immigration status yet fails to provide a social
security number based on their immigration status, their federal housing assistance must not be delayed,
denied, reduced, or terminated while their immigration status is being verified and/or while their application
for a social security number is pending (see subsection 5.4).


6.2       SSN Disclosure Requirements for New Household Members Added to a
          Participant Household
When a participating family seeks to add a new household member age 6 and above without a SSN, the family
must obtain a SSN for the individual unless the family represents that the individual is not contending eligible
immigration status. A participating family may not add the new household member age 6 and above to the
household unless and until a SSN is disclosed and documented to the PHA.®3



6.2.1      New Household Members Under Age 6 Who Do Not Have an SSN
When adding a new household member who is under six years of age and who does not have an SSN (for
example, when adding a newborn child to the assisted household), the participant must disclose and




61 24 CFR § 5.216; Notice PIH 2018-24, Verification of Social Security Numbers, Social Security and Supplemental Security Income
Benefits; and Effective Use of the Enterprise Income Verification System’s Identity Verification Report
62 24 CFR § 5.216
63 24 CFR § 5.216(a) and (e)(2)(ii)

Eligibility Determination and Denial of Assistance
US Department of Housing & Urban Development
June 2022
                                                                                          PUBLIC HOUSING
                                                                                    OCCUPANCY GUIDEBOOK




document the SSN for the new member within 90 days of the child’s addition to the household.©4 PHAs may
grant a 90-day extension if the failure to provide the information was beyond the family’s control (i.e., if the
delay was due to delayed processing by the Social Security Administration (SSA), a natural disaster, or a death
in the family). A PHA must add the child to the assisted household pending submission of the SSN and the
family must receive all associated benefits and deductions. For submissions to the Inventory Management
System/Public and Indian Housing Information Center (IMS/PIC) system, PHAs must assign an “alternate ID”
to the child. PHAs must later replace the alternate ID with the child’s assigned SSN.


6.3       Acceptable Documentation
PHAs must accept any of the following as acceptable evidence of a family member’s or household                          member’s
SSN:


      e    Avalid SSN card issued by the SSA;
      e    An original document issued by the SSA that shows the person’s name and SSN (SSA award letter,
           Medicare card, etc.); or
      e    An original document issued by a federal, state, or local government agency that contains the name
           and SSN of the individual (unemployment insurance award letter, welfare or Medicaid documents,
           etc).65


A PHA must not reject these documents            unless:

      e    The document is not an original;
      e    The original document appears to be altered, mutilated, or is not legible; or
      e    The document appears to be a forged (i.e., does not appear to be authentic).°©

In this case, the PHA must explain to the family why the document is not acceptable and must request that the
family provide alternative documentation within a specified timeframe. A PHA must not require an original SSN
card as the only form of acceptable documentation.®’

With the exception of mixed families, the family’s failure to disclose and document SSNs shall result in a
denial of assistance for applicants and termination of assistance for participants.®




64 24 CFR § 5.216(e)(2)(ii)
65 24 CFR § 5.216(g)(1) (i)-(ii)
66 24 CFR §5.216(h)(3)(i); Notice PIH 2012-10, Verification of Social Security Numbers, Social Security and Supplemental Security
Income Benefits; and Effective Use of the Enterprise Income Verification System’s Identity Verification Report
67 24 CFR § 5.216(g)(1); Notice PIH 2012-10
68 24 CFR § 5.218(a) and (c)

Eligibility Determination and Denial of Assistance
US Department of Housing & Urban Development
June 2022
                                                                                             PUBLIC HOUSING
                                                                                       OCCUPANCY GUIDEBOOK




7        Tenant Screening
Determining eligibility for public housing also includes the PHA screening an applicant for suitability for
tenancy. As such, a PHA may consider certain relevant aspects of an applicant’s tenancy history, behaviors,
financial, and criminal conviction history.62 Each PHA’s ACOP sets forth its applicant selection policies,
including applicant screening.         Although PHAs have discretion in setting tenant selection criteria, the
established criteria must be reasonably related to individual attributes and behaviors, not to the attributes or
behavior imputed to a particular group or category of persons to which an applicant may belong.’°

PHAs are to keep in mind that certain screening criteria, for example screening criteria that are based on an
applicant’s criminal record, are likely to disproportionately impact minority applicants. Where a screening
policy has an unjustified discriminatory effect, such policy or practice is unlawful under Title VI and the Fair
Housing Act. Thus, a screening policy can be unlawful even if it is not intended to be discriminatory.     A
housing provider must be able to prove through reliable evidence that its policy or practice of making housing
decisions based on criminal history (or other factor) actually assists in protecting a legitimate interest such as
resident safety and/or property.’1 Having clear, detailed written screening procedures that limit the use of
screening criteria to those that are necessary to achieving legitimate interests such as resident safety can
help the PHA apply the criteria consistently to each applicant and ensure the criteria meets HUD
requirements.

In screening a family’s behavior and suitability for tenancy, the PHA may consider all relevant information,
which may include:

     e    Anapplicant’s past performance in meeting financial obligations, especially rent;
     e    Arecord of disturbance of neighbors, destruction of property, or poor housekeeping habits at prior
          residences which may adversely affect the health, safety, or welfare of other tenants; and
     e    Ahistory of criminal activity involving crimes of physical violence to persons or property and other
          criminal acts which would adversely affect the health, safety, or welfare of other tenants.72

If the PHA receives relevant unfavorable information regarding any screening criteria, the PHA must consider
the time, nature and extent of the applicant’s conduct, including the seriousness of the offense.’ The PHA
also may consider whether excluding a particular member of the applicant’s household with the unfavorable
information and allowing the remaining members to be admitted would resolve the PHA’s concerns.’4
Additionally, the PHA may identify in their policies how, when and under what circumstances mitigating factors
will be considered. For example, a willingness to participate in counseling or other social services, may
indicate a likely favorable change in future conduct. Regarding all screening criteria, PHAS may only consider
information that is accurate and that is relevant to predicting an applicant’s likely future behavior as a tenant.
Arrest records do not constitute proof of past unlawful conduct and are often incomplete (e.g., by failing to
indicate whether the individual was prosecuted, convicted, or acquitted).’> Likewise, records from eviction or



69 24 CFR § 960.203(c)
70 24 CFR § 960.203(a)
11 24 CFR 100.500 (providing that a policy or practice violates the Fair Housing Act if it has a discriminatory effect and is not necessary
to serve a substantial, legitimate, nondiscriminatory interest of the housing provider, or if such interest could be served by another
practice that has a less discriminatory effect); 24 C.F.R 1.4(b)(2)(i) (providing that practices with an unjustified discriminatory effect
violate Title VI).
72 24 CFR § 960.203(c)(1)-(3)
73 24 CFR § 960.203(d)
74 24 CFR § 960.203(c)(3)(i)
7S See Notice PIH-2015-19

Eligibility Determination and Denial of Assistance
US Department of Housing & Urban Development
June 2022
                                                                                           PUBLIC HOUSING
                                                                                     OCCUPANCY GUIDEBOOK




related cases in which the tenant prevailed or that were settled without either party admitting fault do not
necessarily demonstrate a poor tenant history, or extenuating circumstances may explain why a past eviction
is not indicative of an applicant’s future conduct (e.g., if an eviction was due to unexpected medical or
emergency expenses, or a negative reference reflected bias).

In all instances, tenant selection criteria are subject to the nondiscrimination and equal opportunity provisions
of 24 CFR 5.105, which includes the Fair Housing Act and Title VI and their implementing regulations
prohibiting practices with an unjustified discriminatory effect, and the provisions for the protection for victims
of domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault or stalking at 24 CFR part 5, Subpart L.”6

In cases of requests for emergency transfers under VAWA, with the written consent of the victim of domestic
violence, dating violence, sexual assault, or stalking, the receiving PHA may accept and use the prior covered
housing provider’s determination of eligibility and tenant screening and all related verification information.


7.1     Criminal Background Screening
HUD encourages PHAs to seek policies that strike a balance between resident safety and the reentry needs of
formerly incarcerated individuals and others with criminal histories.               PHA policies must comply with federal
nondiscrimination statutes, which may include an individualized assessment of a person’s criminal record and
reentry needs. PHAs are encouraged to consider options for providing housing access to persons with
conviction histories as appropriate and defined in the PHAs’ ACOP. PHAs may admit persons with criminal
conviction records outside of those who are subject to a lifetime sex offender registry and those who have
been convicted of manufacturing methamphetamine on the premises of federally subsidized housing. PHAs
may consider conviction records because other criminal records, such as arrest records, are not actually
evidence of unlawful conduct and are often incomplete. PHAs must set admission policies for their public
housing programs consistent with both program and federal fair housing and civil rights requirements.’? HUD
encourages PHAs to consider other factors such as evidence of rehabilitation or participation in social service
programs before any denial.’®

7.1.1    Consent for Background Screening
Criminal background checks to screen for whether an applicant is subject to a lifetime sex offender registry
must be performed in the state in which the housing is located and for states where the applicant and
members of the applicant’s household may have resided, unless the PHA uses a national database such as
the Dru Sjodin database to search for such information.’2 PHAs must ask adult applicants to provide all of the
states in which they have lived and whether their name appears on any sex offender registry or the PHA could
use a national database such as the Dru Sjodin database to search for such information. Failure of applicants
to disclose this information is cause for denial.8°




76 24 CFR §§ 5.105, 960.203(c)(4)
7T See Notice PIH-2015-19
78 24 CFR § 960.203(d)(1L)(ii); see also April 4, 2016 Office of General Counsel Guidance on Application of Fair Housing Act Standards
to the Use of Criminal Records by Providers of Housing and Real Estate-Related Transactions.
72 Notice PIH-2012-28
80 Notice PIH-2012-28

Eligibility Determination and Denial of Assistance
US Department of Housing & Urban Development
June 2022
                                                                                         PUBLIC HOUSING
                                                                                   OCCUPANCY GUIDEBOOK




To access an individual’s criminal conviction record, each adult household member must sign a consent form
for the release of criminal conviction records by law enforcement agencies.®1 Any fees law enforcement
agencies may charge for providing the records to the PHA must not be passed along to the applicant family.®2

7.1.2     Information from Drug Abuse Treatment Facilities
PHAs may deny admission to household members that are currently engaging in the use of illegal use of a
controlled substance. Information obtained that shows past use of substance abuse or alcoholism is not
grounds for denying admissions.®?

PHAs may require each person who applies for admission to sign one or more forms of written consent
authorizing the agency to receive information from a drug treatment facility to ascertain whether the applicant
is currently engaging in the use of illegal use of a controlled substance.?4  However, if the PHA chooses to
seek this information, it must follow specific requirements set forth in HUD’s regulations.®>

7.1.3     Records Retention and Confidentiality
Because there are strict penalties for improper disclosure of criminal conviction records, the PHA must
establish procedures aimed at maintaining confidentiality. 8° Criminal records must be maintained
confidentially and may only be disclosed to persons within the PHA with a job-related need to know the
contents.”

Criminal background records, including sex offender registration information must be destroyed promptly once
the purpose has been served. For example, if the PHA decides to admit the family to the PH program, the
records must be destroyed immediately. If the PHA decides to deny admission based on a criminal conviction
record, the record may be retained during the period allowed for requesting an informal review, and until the
review, if requested, has been completed. The record must then be destroyed promptly. The PHA must not
retain criminal conviction records for longer periods, even if the records are stored separately from the
family’s file.88

In addition, any information an individual submits regarding medical or other information to support an
individual’s reasonable accommodation request, including reasonable accommodation requests related to a
PHA’s decision to deny admission based on a criminal record, must be kept confidential.                   Additionally, if the
individual has represented that they are a victim of domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, or
stalking while invoking rights under VAWA, any information they submit must be kept strictly confidential.89




81 24 CFR § 5.903(b)(1)
82 Notice PIH-2009-39, Prohibition on Public Housing Agencies Charging Application Fees
83 24 CFR § 960.204(a)(2)
84 94 CFR § 960.205
85 24 CFR § 960.205
86 24 CFR §8§ 5.903(g)(3), 5.905(c)(1)  (iii)
87 24 CFR §§ 5.905(c)(L)(i) (ii) § 5.903(g)(1) and (2)
88 24 CFR §§ 5.905(c)(L)(iii), 5.903(g)(3)
89 24 CFR § 5.2007(c)

Eligibility Determination and Denial of Assistance
US Department of Housing & Urban Development
June 2022
                                                                                         PUBLIC HOUSING
                                                                                   OCCUPANCY GUIDEBOOK




                              PHA Options: Considerations for Screening Policies

  The minimum requirements for criminal background screenings and denial of assistance are outlined in
  this chapter. HUD has issued guidance encouraging PHAs to strike a balance between resident safety
  and the reentry needs of formerly incarcerated individuals and others with criminal history records. PHAs
  have broad discretion in setting their admission policies. PHAs’ policies must comply with federal
  nondiscrimination statutes, which may include an individualized assessment of a person’s criminal
  record and reentry needs. HUD encourages PHAs to allow individuals released from incarceration to
  rejoin their families when appropriate, and to obtain housing if they meet all other admission
  requirements. PHAs are also encouraged to consider other factors in their decisions such as
  rehabilitation and participation in social service programs.

                                                 Related Resources:
                It Starts with Housing: Public Housing Agencies are Making Second Chances Real

     PIH Notice 2015-19: Guidance for Public Housing Agencies (PHAS) and Owners of Federally-Assisted
                    Housing on Excluding the Use of Arrest Records in Housing Decisions

                           FAQs: Excluding the Use of Arrest Records in Housing Decisions

   Letter from Marcia Fudge, Secretary, United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, to
                                            PHAs, June 23, 2021




7.1.4    Denial of Assistance for Criminal Activity
PHA policies must ensure that adverse housing decisions based upon criminal activity are supported                       by
sufficient evidence that the individual engaged in such activity.           Specifically, before    a PHA denies admission
to, terminates the assistance of, or evicts an individual or household on the basis of criminal activity by a
household member or guest, they must determine that the relevant individual engaged in such activity.2°
PHAs are prohibited from denying admission or terminating assistance solely based on arrest records.?1 Prior
to evicting a tenant because of a guest’s criminal activity, the PHA may consider whether the tenant was
aware of the criminal activity or evidence that the guest is unlikely to return to the property. A tenant ina
housing program covered by VAWA may not be denied tenancy or occupancy rights solely on the basis of
criminal activity directly relating to domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, or stalking if the
criminal activity is engaged in by a member of the household, a guest, or a person under the control of the
tenant and the tenant or an affiliated individual?2 of the tenant is the victim or threatened victim.23

If the PHA decides to deny admission based on a criminal conviction record, the PHA must notify the family of
the proposed action and must give the family an opportunity to dispute the accuracy and/or relevance of the
record.24 A copy of the criminal conviction record must be provided to the head of household and to the
subject of the record (if not the head of household). If the family does not dispute the record, or if the family
disputes the record but the PHA rejects the families’ dispute, a denial notice must be sent. The notification of



90 24 CFR §§ 5.852(e), 5.861; 960.202(c)(3), 966.6(1)(5)(vii)(F)
91 Notice PIH-2015-19, Guidance for Public Housing Agencies and Owners of Federally-Assisted Housing on Excluding the Use of Arrest
Records in Housing Decisions
92 24 CFR § 5.2003
93 24 CFR § 5.2005(b)(2)
94 24 CFR § 5.903 (f); § 5.905(d); § 960.204(c)

Eligibility Determination and Denial of Assistance
US Department of Housing & Urban Development
June 2022
                                                                                          PUBLIC HOUSING
                                                                                    OCCUPANCY GUIDEBOOK




a proposed action on the basis of a criminal record is a regulatory requirement and is separate from the PHA’s
informal review procedures.

PHAs must deny admission when:

    1.   Any household      member     has been convicted of manufacturing methamphetamines on the premises of
         federally assisted housing.
    2.   Any household member is subject to a lifetime sex offender registration requirement.
              e   The PHA must check for sex offender registration in its own state and in any other state where
                the family has resided. Use of a nationwide database such as www.nsopw.org is
                recommended to conduct this required check.
    3.   The PHA determines that a household member is currently engaging in illegal drug use.
    4.   The PHA has reasonable cause to believe that other tenants’ health, safety or right to peaceful
         enjoyment may be threatened by a household member’s:
                e   |llegal drug use or pattern of illegal drug use, or
             e   Abuse or pattern of abuse of alcohol.
    5.   A household member has been evicted from federally assisted housing within the last three years for
         drug-related criminal activity.

The PHA may admit the family, however, if it determines that the household member who engaged in the
activity has successfully completed a supervised rehabilitation program, or the circumstances no longer exist
(for example, the household member has died or is imprisoned).25

The term “admission” includes and applies to a person seeking to become a new member of an already-
existing household. For example, PHAs must prohibit a person subject to a lifetime sex offender registration

requirement from becoming a new member of an already-existing household (e.g., being added to an already-
existing lease). Such addition to the existing household would constitute a new “admission” for the added
individual.26

Mandatory and discretionary denials of admission for criminal activity or drug abuse are summarized below.




95 24 CFR § 960.204   (a) and (b); Notice PIH-2012-28
96 Certain of the guidance herein - such as the foregoing guidance regarding admission of anew member to an already-existing
household - applies to all federally assisted housing, not just to the Public Housing program. See, e.g., 42 U.S.C. § 13663(a).

Eligibility Determination and Denial of Assistance
US Department of Housing & Urban Development
June 2022
                                                                                             PUBLIC HOUSING
                                                                                       OCCUPANCY GUIDEBOOK




            Type of Criminal Activity or Offense/Drug Abuse                                     Action
          Convicted of producing methamphetamine on the premises of                              Mandatory denial.2”
         federally assisted housing
          Subject to a lifetime registration requirement under a State sex                       Mandatory denial.
          offender program
          Determined to be currently engaging in illegal use of a controlled                     Mandatory denial
          substance
          Reasonable cause to believe that illegal use or pattern of illegal use | Mandatory denial
          of a controlled substance or abuse or pattern of abuse of alcohol
          may interfere with the health, safety or right to peaceful enjoyment
          of the premises by other residents
          Evicted from federally assisted housing for drug-related criminal                      Mandatory 3-year denial
          activity within the last three years, UNLESS                                           on admission, except if
                   e    The circumstances leading to the eviction no longer                      specified conditions are
                           exist, Or                                                             met then PHA may
                       e   The evicted household member has successfully                         exercise discretion
                           completed an approved supervised drug rehabilitation
                           program
          History of drug-related criminal activity                                              Discretionary denial

          History of violent criminal activity                                                   Discretionary denial

          History of criminal activity that adversely affects the health, safety,              | Discretionary denial
         or right to peaceful enjoyment of the premises by other residents,
         the owner, persons residing in the immediate vicinity of the
         premises, or public housing agency employees




8     EIV System Searches at Admission
The Enterprise Income Verification (EIV) System is a web-based application, which provides PHAs with
employment, wage, unemployment compensation and social security benefit information for tenants who
participate in the Public Housing and various Section 8 programs under the jurisdiction of the Office of Public
and Indian Housing. This system          is available to all PHAs nationwide. Information in EIV is derived from
computer matching programs initiated by HUD with the SSA and the U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services, for all program participants with valid personal identifying information (name, date of birth (DOB),
and SSN) reported on the form HUD-50058.




97 This ban is, of course, not permanent if the conviction that forms its basis is reversed following a successful appeal and the
applicant reapplies.
98 |f an individual successfully appeals the lifetime registration requirement and reapplies following the successful appeal, the offender
is not barred at the time of the reapplication because the individual is no longer subject to a lifetime registration requirement. See
“State Registered Lifetime Sex Offenders in the Housing Choice Voucher and Public Housing Programs FAQ” at 2.

Eligibility Determination and Denial of Assistance
US Department of Housing & Urban Development
June 2022
                                                                                          PUBLIC HOUSING
                                                                                    OCCUPANCY GUIDEBOOK




8.1    Existing Tenant Search and Avoiding Duplicate Subsidy
Prior to admission into the program, the PHA must search for each family member in the EIV Existing Tenant
Search. The search will show if any family member is currently assisted by another public housing agency.22


8.2    HUD-52675          Debts Owed           to PHAs and Terminations
Prior to admission to the program, the PHA must search for each adult family member in the EIV Debts Owed
to PHAs and Terminations database.1°° All adult household members must sign the form HUD-52675 once at
admission. 1°1 The form provides notification to adult household members that debt and terminations
information will be collected, shared with other PHAs and will be accessible by HUD staff, PHA staff, and
contractors to determine suitability for rental assistance. The Debts Owed to PHAs & Termination Report may
be generated in ElV as a standalone report; the information from the report also is contained in the Income
Report for each household.1°2

If any information on debts or terminations is returned by the search, the PHA will determine if the offenses
violate their respective admissions policies. The family has a right to request and obtain a copy of the report
from the PHA and dispute the reported information, providing any supporting documentation. To ensure the
availability of records, disputes of the original debt or termination information must be made within three
years from the end of participation date, unless a reasonable accommodation to this policy is made; otherwise
the debt and termination information will be presumed correct. Only the PHA who reported the adverse
information can delete or correct the record. The PHA has 30 days from receipt of the written dispute to
provide notification of its action—either to update or delete the record if the PHA determines the information is
incorrect or to provide an explanation as to why the information is correct.1°


8.3    120-day review of Income Report
Income information is typically not available in ElV for applicant families. If information is not available at the
time of income determination, the PHA must review the family’s EIV Income Report 120 days after the New
Admission (action code 1) is processed to identify any unreported or underreported                   income sources.1%



9     Notifications to Family

9.1    Emergency Contact
The PHA must notify the family of their right to provide an emergency contact and give the family an
opportunity to provide the emergency contact.1°° PHAs may use form HUD-92006 to meet this requirement,
however the family is not required to provide emergency contact information.



29 Notice PIH-2018-18, Administrative Guidance for Effective and Mandated Use of the Enterprise Income Verification (EIV) System
100 Notice PIH-2017-12, Administrative Guidance for Effective and Mandated Use of the Enterprise Income Verification (EIV) System;
form HUD-52675 Debts Owed to Public Housing Agencies and Terminations
101 Notice PIH-2017-12
102 Notice PIH-2017-12
103 Form HUD-52675
104 Notice PIH-2017-12
105 Section 644 of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1992, Public Law 102-550

Eligibility Determination and Denial of Assistance
US Department of Housing & Urban Development
June 2022
                                                                                   PUBLIC HOUSING
                                                                             OCCUPANCY GUIDEBOOK




9.2       Notification Requirements
At the time an application is filed, the PHA must notify all applicants for assistance about the rule restricting
assistance based on citizenship or immigration status and of the requirement to submit documentation of
eligible status or to elect not to claim eligible status. 1°° See section 5.4.1 of this Chapter for further detail.


9.3       Effective Communication and Limited English Proficiency Requirements
PHAs must ensure effective communication with individuals with disabilities, to include providing all
notifications and communications in accessible formats. PHAs must provide appropriate auxiliary aids and
services necessary to ensure effective communication, which includes ensuring that information is provided in
appropriate accessible formats as needed, e.g., Braille, audio, large type, assistive listening devices, and sign
language interpreters.1°” PHAs must also take reasonable steps to ensure meaningful access to their
programs and activities to individuals with limited English proficiency.      See HUD’s Final Guidance to Federal
Financial Assistance Recipients: Title VI Prohibition Against National Origin Discrimination Affecting Limited
English Proficient Persons (LEP Guidance) (72 FR 2732). This may entail the PHA providing information in
translated formats, or other language assistance services. LEP guidance and LEP information is available on
HUD’s website.



10 Denial of Assistance
The information in this section applies generally to all denials of assistance. The factors used in determining
denials of assistance include timing of denials, non-discrimination, and consideration of circumstances.


10.1 Timing of Denial
An applicant may be denied assistance under the public housing program only for violations of the program
requirements that are identified as grounds for denial of assistance.1°8        The PHA must promptly notify any
applicant determined to be ineligible for admission to a project, and must provide the applicant upon request,
within a reasonable time after the determination is made, an opportunity for an informal hearing on the
denial.1°9

10.1.1 Notice and Right to Dispute Denial
PHAs must send a formal notice of denial to an applicant who is denied admission.11°           The notice can be
drafted to address both denials for eligibility and screening on the same form.         If the household is denied
because of criminal activity, the notice would include language that offers the applicant and the person to
whom the criminal record applies (if different) a copy of the criminal records and an opportunity to dispute the
accuracy and relevance of the record.111       In addition, the denial letter should:

      e    Clearly state the reason for the denial


106 24 CFR § 5.508(f)(1)
107 See 24 CFR § 8.6 and 28 CFR 35.160
108 24 CFR § 960.203(a)
109 24 CFR § 960.208(a)
110 24 CFR § 960.208(a)
111 24 CFR § 960.204(c)

Eligibility Determination and Denial of Assistance
US Department of Housing & Urban Development
June 2022
                                                                                            PUBLIC HOUSING
                                                                                      OCCUPANCY GUIDEBOOK




    e      State the time period and process for requesting an informal hearing and
    e      Provide notice to the applicant that a person with a disability has the opportunity to request a
           reasonable accommodation
    e      Provide notice of the mandatory VAWA Notice of Occupancy Rights, along with form HUD-5382.,112

The informal hearing for denied applicants is not a Grievance Hearing.1143 The purpose of the hearing is to
permit the applicant to hear the details of the reasons for denial, present evidence to the contrary if available,
and claim mitigating circumstances when possible. The person who made the original decision to deny, or a
subordinate of that person, may not conduct the hearing.                  A written record of the hearing decision should be
mailed to the applicant and placed in the applicant’s file. If the hearing decision overturns the denial,
processing for admission should resume.


10.2 Non-discrimination
All decisions to deny assistance are subject to civil rights and antidiscrimination laws such as the Fair Housing
Act, Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (Section 504), the
Age Discrimination Act of 1975, the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA), and must comply with the
nondiscrimination and equal opportunity provisions of 24 CFR 5.105(a). Requirements under the Violence
Against Women Act (VAWA) and 24 CFR part 5, Subpart L also apply. The PHA must not deny admission solely
based on certain family characteristics, including families with children, single-parent families, families with
parents who are not married, or families with children born to such parents, families that receive public
assistance, or whether the family decides to participate in the Family Self-sufficiency (FSS) program. The PHA
is prohibited from denying admission on the basis of any protected class, including age, race, color, religion,
sex (including sexual orientation and gender identity), national origin, familial status, and disability. Consistent
with HUD’s Equal Access Rule, HUD-assisted and HUD-insured housing must be made available without regard
to actual or perceived sexual orientation, gender identity, or marital status.114

For households with a household member with a disability, a PHA must grant a reasonable accommodation
request made by an applicant unless it constitutes an undue financial and administrative burden, is a
fundamental alteration to the program, or results in a direct threat that cannot be reduced or eliminated,
including by granting another reasonable accommodation.                    This includes, for example, a reasonable
accommodation request made by an applicant who was denied admission due to criminal activity ora
previous eviction from housing assisted under the program for serious violation of the lease where the tenant
claims that the criminal activity, eviction or lease violation was related to that tenant’s disability. More
information on reasonable accommodations and fair housing requirements can be found                           in the Fair Housing
and Nondiscrimination Requirements Chapter.

If an applicant is otherwise eligible, admission to the program may not be denied to the program on the basis
or as a direct result of the fact that the applicant is or has been a victim of domestic violence, dating violence,
sexual assault, or stalking.145 PHAs must notify applicants that protections are available to victims under the




112 Notice PIH-2017-08
113 24 CFR § 966.51(a)(1); Only PHA residents are entitled to Grievance    Hearings
114 94 CFR § 5.105(a); Notice PIH-2014-20: Program Eligibility Regardless of Sexual Orientation, Gender Identity or Marital Status as
Required   by HUD’s   Equal Access   Rule
115 24 CFR § 5.2005(b)

Eligibility Determination and Denial of Assistance
US Department of Housing & Urban Development
June 2022
                                                                                           PUBLIC HOUSING
                                                                                     OCCUPANCY GUIDEBOOK




Violence Against Women Act (VAWA), as reauthorized, and 24 CFR part 5, Subpart L.146                    More information is
available in PIH’s VAWA Notice.117


10.3 Consideration of Circumstances
In deciding whether to deny assistance because of unfavorable actions by members of the family, PHAs have
discretion to consider the circumstances in each particular case and may be required to do So in certain
circumstances by fair housing and civil rights laws.            Circumstances could include, for example, the
seriousness of the case, the extent of participation or culpability of individual family members, mitigating
circumstances related to the disability of a family member, and the effects of denial or termination of
assistance on other family members who were not involved in the action or failure to act.118 Also, the PHA
may offer the family the opportunity to remove the ineligible family member from the application to become
eligible in certain circumstances.119

The PHA's admission actions must be consistent with fair housing and equal opportunity provisions of 24 CFR
5.105, and with the requirements of 24 CFR part 5, subpart L (Protection for Victims of Domestic Violence,
Dating Violence, Sexual Assault, or Stalking).12°




116   24 CFR § 5.2005; Violence Against Women   Reauthorization Act of 2013 (P.L. 113-4)
117   Notice PIH-2017-08.
118   24 CFR § 960.203(c), (d)
119   24 CFR §§ 5.825(b), 960.203(c)(3)(i).
120   24 CFR § 960.203(c)(4)

Eligibility Determination and Denial of Assistance
US Department of Housing & Urban Development
June 2022
                                                                                      PUBLIC HOUSING
                                                                                OCCUPANCY GUIDEBOOK




      Exhibit 1: Non-Citizen Rule Summary of Documentation
      Requirements

                                                                             DOCUMENTATION
                                                     Note: Expired documents are not an acceptable form of
                     STATUS                                               verification
 1)   Acitizen or national of the             DECLARATION: For each family member with this status, a declaration of
      United States                           citizenship, signed under penalty of perjury is required.

                                              For each adult household      member over age 18, the declaration must be
                                              signed by the adult.    For each child, the declaration must be signed by an
                                              adult residing in the assisted dwelling unit who is responsible for the child.

 2)   Anon-citizen claiming eligible          A Declaration AND: Proof of age
      immigration status who is 62
      years of age or older per 24
      CFR § 5.508(b)(2).
 3)   All other non-citizens claiming         DECLARATION: For each family member with this status, a declaration
      eligible immigration status.            of eligible immigration status signed under penalty of perjury is
                                              required.
 Categories of eligible immigration status:
                                              Adults must sign their own declaration
  a) a non-citizen lawfully
      admitted for permanent                  AND:
      residence as an immigrant as
      defined by section                      A verification form: For each adult, the adult must sign the form. For
      1101(a)(15) and (20) of title           each child, an adult member of the family residing in the unit who is
      8, excluding, among others,             responsible for the child must sign the form.
      alien visitors, tourists,
      diplomats, and students who             The verification form must state that evidence of eligible immigration
      enter the United States                 status may be released by the PHA to HUD and the CIS without
      temporarily with no intention           responsibility for the future use or transmission of the evidence by the
      of abandoning their                     recipient. The form must also notify the signer of the possible release of
      residence in a foreign                  evidence of eligible immigration        status by HUD.   Such evidence shall
      country;                                only be released by HUD to the CIS for the purpose of establishing
  b) a non-citizen who entered the            eligibility for financial assistance.
      United States prior to June
                                              AND:
      30, 1948, or such
      subsequent date as is
                                              CIS Primary Verification of eligible immigration status must be
      enacted by law, has
                                              conducted by the PHA through the CIS automated SAVE system. If this
      continuously maintained his             method fails to verify status, or, if the verification received indicates
      or her residence in the United          ineligible immigration status, the PHA must request Secondary CIS
      States since then, and is not           Verification within 10 days by sending to the local CIS Office
      ineligible for citizenship, but         photocopies of CIS documents receiving (front and back) attached to
      who is deemed to be lawfully            Form G-845S       - Document Verification Request.
      admitted for permanent
      residence as a result of an             AND:
                                                                                    _                       i
      exercise of discretion by the           The PHA must request and review an original CIS document of eligible
      Attorney General pursuant to            immigration status and must retain photocopies and return the original to
      section 1259 of title 8;                the individual.


Eligibility Determination and Denial of Assistance
US Department of Housing & Urban Development
June 2022
                                                                                   PUBLIC HOUSING
                                                                             OCCUPANCY GUIDEBOOK          PIA
                                                                                DOCUMENTATION
                                                       Note:   Expired documents are not an acceptable form of
                          STATUS                                                  verification
     a non-citizen who is lawfully present in the      Acceptable Original CIS Document:
     United States pursuant to an admission
     under section 1157 of title 8 or pursuant to          Form |-551 “Permanent Resident Card”
     the granting of asylum (which has not been
     terminated) under section 1158 of title 8;            Form     I-94 Arrival-Departure Record annotated with one of
                                                          the following:
     a non-citizen who is lawfully present in the
                                                          -         “Admitted as a Refugee Pursuant to Section 207”
     United States as a result of an exercise of          -         “Section 208” or “Asylum”
     discretion by the Attorney General for
                                                          -         “Section 243(h)” or “Deportation stayed by Attorney
     emergent reasons or reasons deemed                             General”
     strictly in the public interest pursuant to
                                                          -           “Paroled Pursuant to 9 CFR Section 221 (d)(5) of the
     section   1182(d)(5) of title 8;
                                                                      INS”
     a non-citizen who is lawfully present in the
     United States as a result of the Attorney             Form I-94 Arrival-Departure Record with no annotation
     General’s withholding deportation    pursuant        accompanied by:
     to section 1231(b)(3) of title 8;                    -    Afinal court decision granting asylum (but only if no
                                                                  appeal is taken);
     a non-citizen lawfully admitted for temporary
                                                          -        Aletter from a DHS asylum officer granting asylum
     or permanent residence under section
                                                                  (if application is filed on or after 10/1/90) or from
     1255a of title 8;
                                                                  a DHS district director granting asylum (application
     a non-citizen who is lawfully residing in the                filed before 10/1/90);
     United States and its territories and                -             A court decision granting withholding of deportation;
     possessions under section 141 of the                              or
     Compacts of Free Association between the             -       Aletter from an asylum officer granting withholding or
     Government of the United States and the                      deportation (if application filed on   or after 10/1/90).
     Governments of the Marshall Islands, the
     Federated States of Micronesia (48 U.S.C.             Form |-9 Employment Eligibility Verification annotated
     1901 note) and Palau (48 U.S.C. 1931                 with:
     note) while the applicable section Is in             -           Acceptable document from List A or,
     effect: Provided, That, within Guam any              -           Combination of one selection from List       B and one
     such alien shall not be entitled to a                            selection from List C
     preference in receiving assistance under
     this Act over any United States citizen or           A receipt issued by the DHS indicating that an application
     national resident therein who is otherwise           for issuance of a replacement document in one of the
     eligible for such assistance;                        above listed categories has been made and the applicant’s
     a non-citizen who is a human trafficking victim      entitlement to the document has been verified; or
     and certain family members who: (1) have a
     Certification Letter from the Department of          Other acceptable evidence. If other documents are
     Health and Human Services (including T-1             determined by the DHS to constitute acceptable evidence
     nonimmigrants and Continued Presence                 of eligible immigration status, they will be announced by
     recipients), (2) are noncitizen minors who have      notice published in the Federal Register.
     received a Child Eligibility Letter from the
     Department of Health and Human Services; or
     (3) are granted derivative T nonimmigrant
     status by USCIS (T-2 through T-6
     nonimmigrant status);
     a non-citizen who is a VAWA self-petitioner
     under 8 U.S.C. § 1101(a)(51), 8 U.S.C. §
     1641(c), 62 Fed. Reg. 61344, 61367 (Nov.
     17, 1997).



Eligibility Determination and Denial of Assistance
US Department of Housing & Urban Development
June 2022
