       CLACKAMAS COUNTY BOARD OF COUNTY COMMISSIONERS
                                Policy Session Worksheet
Presentation Date: 04/25/17    Approx Start Time: 1:30 pm         Approx Length: 45 minutes
Presentation Title: Americans with Disabilities Act Transition Plan for the Public Rights-of-
                    Way
Department:         Transportation & Development (DTD)
Presenters:         Mike Bezner, Assistant Director; Stephen Williams, Principal
                    Transportation Planner
Other Invitees:     Barbara Cartmill, DTD Director
WHAT ACTION ARE YOU REQUESTING FROM THE BOARD?
Placing the Americans with Disabilities Act Transition Plan for the Public Rights-of-Way (ADA
Transition Plan) on the agenda for the BCC business session agenda for May 4, 2017 for a public
hearing and consideration for adoption.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY:
The Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA) requires that all local governments and all their
programs and facilities, no matter the funding source, provide equal access for those with
disabilities. These requirements are enforced by the Department of Justice and the courts. One of
the requirements for all governments is the development and adoption of an ADA Transition Plan.
Typical practice in larger governments is the development of ADA Transition Plans by departments
to address the accessibility issues within the responsibilities of that department.
The DTD ADA Transition Plan has been developed by DTD to address accessibility requirements
within the public rights-of-way under county control, including those under county maintenance
within incorporated cities. This Policy Session is to inform the BCC of the findings contained in the
plan and request holding a public hearing and then adopting the DTD ADA Transition Plan.
The ADA Transition Plan focuses in the following areas:
   1) Providing information required by the ADA on the ADA Coordinator and Implementing
      Official, public notice and grievance procedures.
   2) Evaluation of existing ADA accessibility facilities within the public rights-of-way including curb
      ramps and pedestrian actuated traffic signals.
   3) Evaluation of DTD procedures and practices that result in the installation of new ADA
      facilities through either private development or public projects.
   4) Priorities for improvements to ADA facilities identified through involvement of those living
      with disabilities.
   5) Schedule for full removal of all barriers to accessibility based on recent rates of improvement
      to ADA facilities.
   6) Budget requirements for removal of all barriers to accessibility.

The Department of Transportation and Development has begun the process of implementing the
recommendations of the ADA Transition Plan by proceeding with staff training, and changes to
standards and procedures recommended in the plan. In addition, DTD is in the process of
developing a project to improve between 15 and 20 curb ramps along Oak Grove Boulevard
between Oatfield Road and River Road using funds for Curb Ramp Improvements included in the
FY2017 budget. Specific locations for improvements and schedule have not yet been determined.
ACTIONS TO DATE:
This is the first presentation by DTD to the BCC on the ADA Transition Plan or ADA accessibility
issues.
FINANCIAL IMPLICATIONS (current year and ongoing):
The FY2017 Budget and Work Program includes $180,000 for a Curb Ramp Improvement project.
The same sum was included in the Prospectus for FY2018, FY2019 and FY2020. Although a
number of other DTD projects include improvements to curb ramps or traffic signals within the scope
of a larger project, this is the only current or ongoing financial commitment.

STRATEGIC PLAN ALIGNMENT:
      How does this item align with your Department’s Strategic Business Plan goals?
       This plan will help DTD to meet the following goal as it applies to access to the transportation
       system by those with disabilities: “Provide repair, construction, preservation and emergency
       response services to the traveling public so they can live, work, conduct business, recreate
       and travel safely on a well-maintained County transportation system.”
      How does this item align with the County’s Performance Clackamas goals?
       The ADA Transition Plan aligns with Performance Clackamas goals to “Build Strong
       Infrastructure” and “Ensure Safe, Healthy and Secure Communities.”
LEGAL/POLICY REQUIREMENTS:
Adoption of the ADA Transition Plan is a legal requirement under the Americans with Disabilities Act
of 1990.

PUBLIC/GOVERNMENTAL PARTICIPATION:
DTD conducted two cycles of public/governmental involvement for the ADA Transition Plan. At the
beginning of the development of the plan in spring 2016 DTD conducted outreach to those with
disabilities. At that time DTD also meet with governmental agencies with responsibilities for those
with disabilities as well as with intergovernmental coordinating groups to secure input on this issue.
After completion of the draft plan a public/governmental review process took place during March
2017 that included news releases, public notice on the county website, and publication in the County
Weekly Update. In addition, a summary of the plan was sent to all the cities in the county as well as
TriMet and Oregon Department of Transportation, all senior centers, all libraries and those who
responded to the outreach in spring 2016.
OPTIONS:
   1) At the May 4 Business Meeting, conduct a public hearing and consider the ADA Transition
      Plan for the Public Rights-of-Way for adoption.
   2) Take no action.

RECOMMENDATION:
Staff respectfully recommends Option #1.


ATTACHMENTS:
   1) Draft ADA Transition Plan for the Public Rights-of-Way
SUBMITTED BY:
Division Director/Head Approval _________________
Department Director/Head Approval ______________
County Administrator Approval __________________
                  For information on this issue or copies of attachments, please contact
                            Mike Bezner, Assistant Director @ 503-742-4651.
                                   ADA TRANSITION
                                      PLAN FOR THE
                                            PUBLIC
                                    RIGHTS-OF-WAY


                                                         Draft
                                               April 17, 2017




Department of Transportation and Development
                                                           Acknowledgements


Clackamas County Board of County Commissioners
       Chair Jim Bernard
       Commissioner Martha Schrader
       Commissioner Paul Savas
       Commissioner Ken Humberston
       Commissioner Sonya Fischer




ADA Transition Plan Staff
       Barbara Cartmill, Director
       Mike Bezner, Assistant Director
       Ellen Rogalin, Community Relations Specialist
       Karen Buehrig, Transportation Planning Supervisor
       Stephen Williams, Principal Transportation Planner/ADA Coordinator
       Anthony Mills, Field Data Collection
       Andrew Sheehan, Field Data Collection




April 17, 2017                                                              i
                                                                                          Table of Contents

Executive Summary ............................................................................................ 1
Chapter 1 Introduction........................................................................................ 3
        People with Disabilities in Clackamas County .................................................................... 3
        Legal Requirements ............................................................................................................ 4
        The ADA Transition Plan ..................................................................................................... 5
        Designating an ADA Coordinator and Implementing Official ............................................. 6
        Providing Notice of ADA Requirements .............................................................................. 6
        Grievance Procedure .......................................................................................................... 7
        Development of Internal Standards, Specifications and Design Details ............................ 7

Chapter 2 Self-Evaluation .................................................................................... 9
        Introduction ........................................................................................................................ 9
        Self-Evaluation of Curb Ramps.......................................................................................... 10
        Self-Evaluation of Traffic Signals ....................................................................................... 14
        Summary of Self-Evaluation .............................................................................................. 16

Chapter 3 Removal of Barriers to Accessibility .................................................. 17
        Introduction ...................................................................................................................... 17
        State and Federal Requirements for Removal of Barriers to ADA Accessibility ............... 17
        County Programs Resulting in ADA Accessibility Improvements within
        the Public Right-of-Way .................................................................................................... 19
                 Land Use & Development Permitting ................................................................... 19
                 Transportation Maintenance ................................................................................ 19
                 Transportation Construction ................................................................................ 19
                 Health, Housing and Human Services – Community Development ..................... 19
                 Special Fund for ADA Curb Ramp Improvements ................................................. 20
                 Summary of County Programs .............................................................................. 20
        Schedule and Budget for Removal of Barriers to ADA Accessibility ................................. 20
                 Schedule ................................................................................................................ 20
                 Budget ................................................................................................................... 20
        Prioritization of Curb Ramp Improvements ...................................................................... 21
        Standards, Specifications and Procedures ........................................................................ 22
                 Standards and Specifications ................................................................................ 23
                 Procedures ............................................................................................................ 24
        Monitoring Removal of Barriers to Accessibility .............................................................. 25


April 17, 2017                                                                                                                               ii
       Action Plan for the Next Four Years.................................................................................. 25
              Design.................................................................................................................... 26
              Development......................................................................................................... 26
              Construction.......................................................................................................... 27




7442




April 17, 2017                                                                                                                          iii
                                                                Executive Summary
                   The 2017 ADA Transition Plan for the Public Rights-of-Way describes Clackamas
                   County’s plan for providing equal access for those with disabilities to all county
                   pedestrian facilities - curb ramps and traffic signals - as required by the Americans
                   with Disabilities Act of 1990.
The Department of Transportation and Development has been involved in assuring accessibility as
required by the ADA for all people throughout the county through enforcement of building codes and
other related laws and regulations. That same commitment will also be applied to achieving that goal for
our pedestrian facilities.
The ADA requires that the county’s ADA Transition Plan include a clear identification of deficiencies in
physical assets, policies and procedures, including the following components:
       A self-evaluation to identify all facilities that are barriers to accessibility.
       Guidance on the steps to be taken to remove accessibility barriers, and estimates the budget
        and schedule for the removal and barriers based on current resource commitments.
       Recommendations for a monitoring program to track progress, an annual progress report to the
        Board of County Commissioners and online information on the current status of all accessibility
        features to increase transparency.
       Identification of those responsible for leading the removal of barriers to accessibility and
       A process by which members of the public can request improvements or call deficiencies to the
        attention of the county.
The self-evaluation conducted for this plan found 4,745 locations requiring curb ramps within the public
rights-of-way in unincorporated Clackamas County.
       3,963 built before the passage of the ADA
       700 built after the passage of the ADA
Overall, there are 4,531 locations at which curb ramps must be installed, improved or replaced. If we
were to bring all 4,531 curb ramps up to current standards, at our current rate of improvement and
estimated costs, full improvement would require 70 years and $49.84 million in 2016 dollars. In
addition, there are 69 traffic signals system in unincorporated Clackamas County, 44 of which require
improvements to the ADA accessibility features. The total cost for those improvements is estimated to
be $4.4 million. Many of these accessibility improvements to traffic signals will take place during the
coming years through projects that are already funded and included in the five year Transportation
Capital Improvements Program.
The process to make the improvements required to provide equal access for all will require changes to
how the county carries out improvements within the public rights-of-way, including the following:
       Update county standards to be consistent with current federal standards.
       Training and improved checklists provided for county staff, consultants and contractors.



April 17, 2017                                                                                             1
       Updated procedures to create accountability for meeting the accessibility standards and
        required documentation.
       Revised approaches to select and scope transportation improvement projects to incorporate
        accessibility improvements.
       Providing information about the accessibility of pedestrian facilities as well as annual progress
        reports to the Board of County Commissioners to ensure public transparency for ADA
        accessibility.
The changes in county standards, procedures, project programming and reporting are estimated to take
12 to 18 months to accomplish. Removal of all barriers to accessibility will take much longer, with
improvements to traffic signals expected to take 10 years and improvements to curb ramps taking up to
70 years.
Nonetheless the management and staff of DTD are committed to making the changes necessary to
achieve the important goal of full accessibility.




April 17, 2017                                                                                              2
                                                           Chapter 1 Introduction
                    People with Disabilities in Clackamas County
                     People with disabilities make up the largest minority group in Clackamas County and
                     have unique transportation needs that are required to be addressed by Clackamas
County as a unit of government under the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990. According to the
2010-2014 American Community Survey (ACS), there were 45,777 people in Clackamas County with a
disability, over 1/8th of the total population. By way of comparison, only 40,406 people in Clackamas
County self-identified as being of any one or more non-white race or ethnic groups. Those 45,777 with
disabilities in Clackamas County break down by age as follows:
       8.5% are children below age 18 (3,874),
       48.5% are adults age 18 to 64 (22,211) and
       43.0% are senior adults age 65 and older (19,692).
Veterans and people age 65 and above have a much higher likelihood of having a disability than the
general population. The ACS found that:
       Of the 30,240 Clackamas County adults who are veterans, 8,186 (27.1%) have a disability,
        compared with 12.0% of the general population.
       Of the 56,694 Clackamas County residents who are age 65 or above, 19,692 or 34.7% have a
        disability.
Research shows that people with disabilities don’t do as well economically as the general population.
       People with disabilities are less likely than the general population to hold a job. The ACS found
        that of the 22,211 disabled adults age 18 to 64, only 8,201 (36.9%) were employed in 2014 while
        63.1% were either unemployed or not in the labor force. Of those who were employed, only
        4,963 (60.5%) were employed full time for the entire year.
       Those with disabilities also tend to have a lower income than the general population. The ACS
        found that the median income for a disabled individual in Clackamas County in 2014 was
        $26,481 while the median income for an individual with no disability was $35,395.
The daily transportation needs of those with disabilities are surprisingly high when compared to average
traffic volumes on Clackamas County roads. For example, the number of Clackamas County residents
with disabilities is 45,777, which exceeds the number served by the highest volume road section of the
unincorporated area, 41,165 vehicles per day on Sunnyside Road east of I-205.
People with disabilities have unique transportation needs that are not well understood by the rest of the
population, including planners and engineers. While those who go on foot can easily step off the curb,
the curb is an insurmountable barrier for those using wheelchairs or other mobility devices. Every
sighted child is taught early in life to “look both ways” before crossing the street, but those who are
blind or have low vision must find the safe places to cross the street by feel and determine when it is
safe to cross by hearing. Lack of accessibility facilities can force those with disabilities to enter the flow
of traffic on the street at great risk just to go to work, school or the store to meet their daily needs.



April 17, 2017                                                                                              3
As described below, Clackamas County has a legal mandate to provide equal access to pedestrian
facilities. But it could also be argued that providing equal access for those with disabilities is one of the
most important steps the county can take to improve the quality of life for this significant portion of the
county population.

Legal Requirements
For many years, there were no laws requiring equal access for those with disabilities. That changed with
the passage of two landmark laws mandating equal access for those with disabilities.
Rehabilitation Act of 1973 – This Act was the first, passed the House of Representatives on a vote of 400
– 0 and the Senate on a vote of 88 – 0 and signed into law by President Richard M. Nixon on Sept. 18,
1973. Section 504 of this Act made it illegal for the federal government, federal contractors and any
entity receiving federal financial assistance to discriminate on the basis of disability. Section 504
obligates state and local governments to
ensure that persons with disabilities have
equal access to any programs, services or
activities receiving federal assistance.
ADA of 1990 -- The second landmark
accessibility law, the Americans with
Disabilities Act (ADA) of 1990, greatly
expanded Section 504’s provisions requiring
equal treatment for those with disabilities.
The ADA passed the House of Representatives
by a vote of 377 – 28 and the Senate by a vote
of 91 – 6, and was signed into law by
President George H. W. Bush on July 26, 1990. The ADA requires that all state and local governments
and all of their programs and facilities -- no matter the funding source -- provide equal access for those
with disabilities.
Due to the fact that the ADA incorporates many specific standards for accessibility for many types of
public accommodations, it is often viewed only as a set of construction requirements. In reality, the laws
requiring equal access for those with disabilities are among the most sweeping civil rights legislation in
the history of this country. Since the ADA is a civil rights law, the lead entity for the ADA is the Civil
Rights Division of the US Department of Justice. It establishes standards for meeting the requirements of
the ADA, coordinates enforcement activities of other federal agencies and, as necessary, takes legal
action to require compliance with ADA by state and local governments.
The basic premise of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 and the ADA of 1990, the requirement of equal
access for those with disabilities, could be stated as follows:
        “No qualified person with a disability may be excluded from participation in, or denied the
        benefits of, the programs, services, facilities or activities provided by federal, state or local
        governments because of a disability.” (US Department of Justice, ADA Compliance Tool Kit,
        December 2006)



April 17, 2017                                                                                               4
Title II of the ADA sets out the steps that state and local governments must take to make public
transportation facilities accessible to those with disabilities. With the passage of the ADA, designing and
constructing facilities for public use that are not accessible by people with disabilities constitutes
discrimination. Under Title II, private citizens or groups can make an administrative complaint to the
Department of Justice or appropriate federal agency or file a lawsuit in federal district court. Potential
remedies could include injunctive relief to enforce the ADA, such as requiring the public entity to make
modifications to buildings or facilities to achieve full compliance with ADA standards, or requiring
compensatory damages for victims.
It is important to note that under the ADA each government is responsible for providing facilities
accessible to those with disabilities, including improvement of existing facilities regardless of when the
facilities were built. This requirement greatly effects the scope of Clackamas County’s effort to provide
accessible public rights-of-way. For example, the self-evaluation conducted during the development of
this plan shows that there are 4,745 curb ramps on county maintained roads. About 85% of those curb
ramps were built prior to the adoption of the ADA and accessibility standards. Nonetheless, to provide
equal access for all, the county must plan for the improvement of all curb ramps to the current
accessibility standards.

The ADA Transition Plan
Under the ADA, local governments are required to develop a plan for program access, called the ADA
Transition Plan. In the ADA Transition Plan the local government is required to do the following to
demonstrate the approach it will use to provide equal access for all:
    1) Conduct a self-evaluation to identify physical obstacles that limit the access to its facilities by
    individuals with disabilities;
    2) Describe the methods to be used to make the facilities accessible;
    3) Provide a budget and schedule for removing barrier to access, and
    4) Identify the public officials responsible for implementation of the Transition Plan.
The typical outline for an ADA Transition Plan is as follows:
    1)   Designation of an ADA Coordinator and the individual responsible for implementing the ADA,
    2)   Providing notice to the public about ADA requirements,
    3)   Establishment of an ADA grievance procedure
    4)   Developing the required self-evaluation to identify barriers to accessibility,
    5)   Development and implementation of internal standards, specifications and procedures,
    6)   Adoption of a schedule and budget for removal of barriers to ADA accessibility,
    7)   Monitoring progress on the implementation of the ADA Transition Plan
The requirements of the ADA apply to all public entities or agencies no matter their size or geographic
extent. Development of the ADA Transition Plan and achievement of program access has typically been
difficult for large local governments due to their large geographic extent and diverse facilities. Under the
ADA, public entities have the option of meeting ADA Transition Plan requirements by program. This is
the approach being used by Clackamas County for the ADA Transition Plan requirements. This document
is the ADA Transition Plan for providing equal access for those with disabilities as defined in the ADA for
facilities within county owned rights-of-way under the responsibility of the Department of


April 17, 2017                                                                                               5
Transportation and Development (DTD). Other county departments are responsible for meeting ADA
Transition Plan requirements for other facilities, services or program areas.

Designating an ADA Coordinator and Implementing Official
Each government developing an ADA Transition Plan must designate at least one responsible employee
to coordinate ADA compliance. The designated ADA Coordinator for DTD is:
        Stephen Williams, Principal Transportation Planner
        Clackamas County Development Services Building Room #325
        150 Beavercreek Road, Oregon City 97045
        503-742-4696, swilliams@clackamas.us
A recommended best practice when the designated ADA Coordinator is not a member of management is
the designation of an Implementing Official. This individual is selected because he or she has a broader
scope of responsibility and can recommend policy or budget actions necessary to implement provisions
of the ADA Transition Plan. The Implementing Official for DTD is:
        Mike Bezner, Assistant Director, Transportation
        Clackamas County Development Services Building Room #325
        150 Beavercreek Road, Oregon City 97045
        503-742-4651, mikebez@co.clackamas.or.us

Providing Notice of ADA Requirements
Each department must provide public notice about the
rights of the public and the responsibility of the
department under the ADA. Providing notice is not a
one-time requirement, but a continuing responsibility.
The audience of those who may have an interest in the
accessibility of department facilities is large and
diverse, and not readily identifiable. The DTD has
elected to provide public notice through an ADA
accessibility web page that is under the main DTD web
page. In addition, a poster has been developed and is
on display in the department’s four main public areas
providing the required notice in English as well as five
other languages (Spanish, Russian, Chinese, Vietnamese
and Korean). These are the language groups with a
population in Clackamas County over 1,000, meeting
the Department of Justice Safe Harbor requirements.
A best practice recommended by the Department of
Justice is providing online data showing the status of all
ADA accessibility features. This provides information to
the public on available accessibility features as well as
allowing the public to monitor the progress of the
county in removing barriers to accessibility.

April 17, 2017                                                                                        6
Grievance Procedure
The ADA requires that the DTD adopt and publish procedures for resolving grievances arising under Title
II of the ADA in a prompt and fair manner. The DTD has adopted a grievance procedure. The grievance
procedure and associated materials can be found in Appendix B of this Plan. Complaints would typically
be directed to the DTD ADA Coordinator, consistent with best practices that recommend an opportunity
to resolve a local issue at a local level. Use of this procedure is not a prerequisite for filing a complaint
with either a state or federal agency or a court, nor does it prevent such a filing.

Development of Internal Standards, Specifications and Design Details
A requirement of the ADA Transition Plan is the development of internal standards, specifications and
design details that will guide the development and alteration of accessibility features under county
jurisdiction. These items are critical for ensuring that new accessibility features and alterations to
existing features achieve full compliance with the ADA and eliminate barriers to accessibility. Review
and evaluation of current standards, specifications and internal procedures formed an important stage
in the development of this plan and resulted in several specific recommendations. A detailed discussion
of the evaluation of standards, specifications and procedures and of the recommendations can be found
in the Chapter 3 – Removing Barriers to Accessibility.




April 17, 2017                                                                                              7
                 This page intentionally left blank




April 17, 2017                                        8
                                                      Chapter 2 Self-Evaluation
                    Introduction
                     Title II of the ADA requires that all public entities complete a self-evaluation to
                     identify barriers to accessibility by those with disabilities. The standards used for this
self-evaluation are the 2012 Public Right of Way Accessibility Guidance (PROWAG) that were released
for use by public agencies on March 15, 2012. PROWAG establishes detailed guidance for accessibility on
public facilities within the right-of-way. The self-evaluation for this ADA Transition Plan applied the
PROWAG standards specific to public accessibility facilities within Clackamas County rights-of-way and
under county control.
There are different types of facilities for public access within the Clackamas County rights-of-way
including curb ramps, traffic signals, sidewalks/driveways and pedestrian crossings of railroad grades.
However, under Federal law, Oregon Revised Statutes and local ordinance, the county only has direct
responsibility for some of these facilities. The following describes the county responsibility for each type
of public access facility.
       Curb Ramps – Curb ramps within the rights-of-way for county-maintained roads are completely
        under county control and were included in this self-evaluation.
       Traffic Signals - Clackamas County owns 69 traffic signal systems. However, the county also
        maintains signals owned by cities and the Oregon Department of Transportation (ODOT) under
        agreements. The self-evaluation of traffic signals was carried out only for traffic signals owned
        by the County. ODOT and the cities that receive services from Clackamas County are responsible
        for assuring compliance of their facilities.
       Sidewalks and Driveways – The sidewalks and driveways on county-maintained roads are built
        by the county or by a property owner. However, under local ordinance the sidewalks and
        driveways are owned by the abutting property owner, and responsibility for maintaining
        sidewalks and driveways rests with the property owner. If a condition is identified by the public
        that creates a barrier to accessibility, the county has a process for notifying the property owner
        and requesting removal of access limitations. However, the county does not have a process to
        evaluate the sidewalks and driveways. Because Clackamas County is not responsible for fixing
        access limitations on sidewalks and driveways, these
        facilities were not included in the self-evaluation
        conducted for this Plan.
       Railroad grade crossings – At railroad grade
        crossings, public accessibility features such as
        sidewalks or multiuse paths cross the railroad grade.
        There are only 25 such pedestrian crossings of
        railroad grades in the county. While county road
        standards apply to most private facilities providing
        public access, that is not true of railroad grade
        crossings. Federal law substantially limits local
        authority over any aspect of the railroad grade. Since


April 17, 2017                                                                                               9
        Clackamas County does not have jurisdiction to carry out improvements to the railroad grade,
        crossings of the railroad grade by sidewalks or multi-use paths were not included in the self-
        evaluation. However, as improvements to pedestrian facilities crossing the railroad grade are
        undertaken, the county should work with the railroads to ensure that those facilities meet
        accessibility standards.
       Transit Stops – There are over 500 transit stops in the Clackamas County owned public rights-of-
        way. However, the facilities at these transit stops are owned by and are the responsibility of
        transit providers – TriMet, Canby Area Transit, Sandy Area Metro, South Clackamas
        Transportation District service in the Molalla area, Wilsonville’s South Metro Area Transit, and
        the Clackamas County operated Mt. Hood Express. As a result, the transit providers are
        responsible for meeting ADA accessibility requirements.
       Street Furniture – Clackamas County does not own any street furniture.
Given the above, this self-evaluation focused on the two accessibility features within the public rights-
of-way of unincorporated Clackamas County for which the county has direct responsibility - curb ramps
and traffic signals.

Self-Evaluation of Curb Ramps
Curb ramps are defined in the PROWAG standards as “sloped areas at any intersection having curbs or
other barriers to entry from a street level pedestrian walkway.” Curb ramps have been included in public
sidewalks in Clackamas County for at least 60 years. Virtually everyone uses curb ramps, so curb ramps
must be designed to meet mobility needs and to improve safety for all sidewalk users:
       For those with mobility limitations, curb ramps provide a safe route to cross the curb using
        wheelchairs or other devices.
       For those who are blind or have low vision, curb ramps guide their movements in a complex
        environment so that they can chose their path using non-visual cues and receive warnings of
        hazards.
       For those without mobility or vision limitations, such as those on foot, those pushing or pulling a
        cart or stroller, or those on a bike, curb ramps provide a safe and easy way to cross the curb.
Any location at which pedestrians are required to cross the curb where there is no curb ramp, where the
curb ramp is blocked, or
where it fails to meet
adopted standards is a
barrier to accessibility
under the ADA and
represents a safety
hazard for sidewalk
users.
The Curb Ramp Self-
Evaluation Process
For this self-evaluation,
all locations on county


April 17, 2017                                                                                          10
roads in unincorporated areas of the county were evaluated during July and August 2016 for compliance
with the PROWAG standards. This evaluation took place in two steps.
Phase 1 -- In the first step, all locations requiring a curb ramp per the provisions of the ADA and Oregon
Revised Statutes were identified and were given a curb ramp identification number for record keeping
and management purposes. Unique numbers were given to each curb ramp around an intersection, with
some intersections including up to 12 curb ramps.
An initial screening of the curb ramp locations was then conducted using Google Maps/Streetview. The
features evaluated in this manner were only those that could be reliably determined in the imagery.
Curb ramp features cannot be measured using imagery, but it is possible to view the curb ramps and
determine if required features are present.
The features identifiable in imagery are as follows:
       Presence of a curb ramp at a required location
       Structural issues in the curb ramp that make it non-functional. These can include the presence
        of a built obstruction blocking the ramp or landing, or a missing element like the top landing
        that makes the ramp unsafe for use.
       Presence of required texture contrast (truncated dome).
In Phase 1 of the self-evaluation 1,669 curb ramps were identified as requiring further evaluation and
were advanced into Phase 2 for measurement in the field.
Phase 2 -- Locations identified as having a curb ramp not blocked by a fixed object were advanced into
the second phase of the self-evaluation. In this process, employees from DTD went into the field in
August 2016 and measured all the features of each curb ramp. Depending on the type of curb ramp,
specific measurements were collected for 12 to 19 features. This field data was stored on DTD computer
servers in both spreadsheet and geographic information system formats to facilitate analysis of the data.
These measurements were then analyzed to determine compliance with PROWAG standards.
Results of the Curb Ramp Self-Evaluation
The following is a summary of the findings of the curb ramp self-evaluation:
       4,745 locations were identified where curb ramps are required in unincorporated Clackamas
        County.
       1,917 (39.0%) of locations that required curb ramps did not have a curb ramp present; 1,566 of
        these were at intersections or mid-block locations with a crosswalk.
       1,352 (26.4%) of locations that required curb ramps had a curb ramp that was not non-
        functional for those with disabilities due to lack of a required element or an obstruction by a
        fixed object such as a pole, hydrant or building.
       1,476 (31.7%) of locations that required curb ramps had a curb ramp that could be used to meet
        the mobility needs of those with disabilities since those ramps included all required elements
        and were not obstructed, but those ramps failed to meet one or more of the PROWAG ADA
        accessibility standards.
       132 (2.8%) of locations that required curb ramps had a curb ramp present that was fully
        compliant with all PROWAG standards.


April 17, 2017                                                                                           11
There was a wide variation in the points of failure identified for the 1,669 curb ramps that were field
measured and compared with PROWAG standards. However, some patterns do stand out:
       34.3% of measured curb ramps had a ramp slope in excess of the mandated standard of
        8.33%. The slopes above 8.33% are a problem for those using a manual wheelchair because it is
        difficult for many users to manually power a wheelchair up such a slope.
       51.6% of measured curb ramps had a ramp cross slope in excess of the standard of 2.0%. A
        cross slope is the slope perpendicular to the direction of travel. A cross slope in excess of 2.0% is
        difficult for a user of a manual wheelchair because the wheelchair will tend to steer toward the
        lower side of the cross slope. This increases the difficulty in controlling the wheelchair and using
        the curb ramp.

                                     Curb Ramp Self Evaluation Summary


                 Missing Curb Ramp




         Non-functional Curb Ramp




         Failed PROWAG Standards




                 Met ADA Standards



                                     0%   5%     10%      15%      20%     25%      30%      35%     40%


       22.2% of measured curb ramps had a top landing smaller than the required dimensions of 48”
        x 48” and/or 49.6% had a top landing cross slope in excess of 2.0%. All curb ramps are required
        to have a top landing to serve the needs of pedestrians and users of mobility devices. On the
        most common curb ramp designs, the top landing eliminates a tripping hazard by allowing
        pedestrians to pass around the curb ramp without the need to walk through it. The top landing
        also allows a user of a mobility device a space to make the turn between the curb ramp and the
        sidewalk. The top landing dimensions of 48” x 48” corresponds to a standard width requirement
        for pedestrian access and also provides sufficient space to turn a wheelchair. A cross slope in
        excess of 2.0% increases the difficulty of controlling the wheelchair while making a turn.
       41.1% of the bottom landings of measured curb ramps had a cross slope is excess of 2.0%. The
        bottom landing of certain types of curb ramps provides a level area for the wheelchair user to
        turn and align with the cross walk outside of the flow of traffic on the street. As with the ramp
        and the top landing, a cross slope in excess of 2.0% on the bottom landing increases the
        difficulty of controlling the wheelchair while making the turn.


April 17, 2017                                                                                             12
        52.9% of measured curb ramps had side treatments on the ramp that failed to meet PROWAG
         standards. Side treatments on curb ramps are primarily intended to limit tripping hazards for
         walking pedestrians. Many ramps have triangular sides called “flares.” The flares are not
         intended to facilitate access by those using mobility devices, but are intended to mitigate a
         tripping hazard for those that are walking. To reduce that tripping hazard flares are required to
         have a slope no greater than 10%. Instead of flares, some curb ramps have small “returned”
         curbs or even no treatment at all. In such cases the PROWAG standards require that the curb
         ramp be bordered by a built obstacle or a ground cover that discourages pedestrians from
         walking across the curb ramp and tripping on the returned curb or side of the ramp.
        55.1% of curb ramps did not have texture contrast (“truncated dome”). Texture contrast is an
         important safety aid for those that are blind or have low vision. It is intended to be felt through
         the soles of the feet and provide a warning of a hazard. Truncated dome panels of texture
         contrast are made of plastic to provide a contrasting sound when struck with a cane. The bright
         contrasting color is intended to help those with low vision notice the truncated dome.


                                                   Curb Ramp
                                      Reason for Failure to Meet Standards

            Steep Slope Into Street

               No Texture Contrast

        Ramp Side Tripping Hazard

        Bottom Landing Cross Slope

           Top Landing Cross Slope

             Top Landing Too Small

                 Ramp Cross Slope

                  Ramp Too Steep

                                      0%     10%     20%         30%        40%         50%        60%


        18.1% of curb ramps had a gutter slope in excess of 5.0% or a grade break from the ramp to
         the street in excess of 11.0%. A gutter slope in excess of 5.0% can make it difficult for the
         wheelchair user to maintain momentum and proceed either up the ramp or across the street. In
         addition to the maximum slope, the differential slope or “grade break” between the street and
         the curb ramp is vital in determining if the user will safely make that transition. Many types of
         wheelchairs and mobility devices have foot rests and other features that extend forward of the
         front wheels. In such cases those features can catch on the curb ramp or street if the grade
         break exceeds 11%. This can potentially cause the wheelchair to tip over.


April 17, 2017                                                                                            13
Overall, out of the 1,669 curb ramps measured to determine compliance, only 132 curb ramps, or 2.8%,
were found to be fully compliant with all PROWAG ADA accessibility standards. Although this rate of full
compliance is low, it is not unusual for the accessibility facilities within the public rights-of-way in many
localities. There are several issues that have resulted in this very low rate of compliance.
       Curb Ramps Built Before Current Standards - Data from the self-evaluation shows that about
        85% of all curb ramps on Clackamas County maintained roads were built before passage of the
        ADA and implementation of the PROWAG standards. About 3,963 out of the 4,745 on Clackamas
        County maintained sidewalks were built before the ADA standards were implemented.
       Limited Right-of-Way - Clackamas County roads and intersections are built in very limited
        spaces. In many cases Clackamas County roads were originally built with narrow right-of-way.
        Over time, those roads have expanded to serve higher traffic volumes. In addition, the space
        available in the road right-of-way is also used by critical features such as traffic signal masts or
        poles, overhead or underground utilities, storm water facilities, or fire hydrants. Space is also
        limited by the physical terrain or the presence of buildings. All the competing demands for space
        at intersections result in compromises that in some cases have sacrificed ADA accessibility to
        meet other system needs.
       Terrain – The varied terrain in Clackamas County can result in non-compliant curb ramps. Many
        sections of county roads with sidewalks have grades exceeding the maximum for a compliant
        curb ramp – 8.33%.
       Meeting Standards - The development of fully compliant curb ramps can be difficult within the
        context of typical project development procedures. All curb ramps include between 12 and 19
        features that all must meet specific ADA requirements. As with most public works projects, curb
        ramps are the result of the combined work of many parties including consulting engineers,
        contractors and Clackamas County staff. All must make multiple decisions in the course of
        project development that determine if the resulting curb ramp will be ADA compliant. A very
        small error on the part of any of the parties can result in a curb ramp that is not ADA compliant.
        For example, the standard for a ramp slope is 1:12 or 8.33%, requiring a ramp length of 72” (6
        feet) for a 6-inch curb height on level ground. If the ramp that is designed and built is 1 inch too
        short, 71 inches instead of 72 inches, the ramp will have a ramp slope of 8.5% and will fail to
        meet ADA standards.
Recognizing the complexity of building compliant curb ramps,
case studies were conducted as part of the development of
the ADA Transition Plan to identify the best approaches that
could result in construction of compliant curb ramps. The
results of that analysis were used to develop
recommendations for process improvements that are
described in Chapter 3, Removal of Barriers to Accessibility.

Self-Evaluation of Traffic Signals
The self-evaluation of traffic signals for ADA accessibility is
complex. Some of the ADA accessibility requirements for traffic signals can be found in the PROWAG
standards, but others are in the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD), which is
incorporated into the PROWAG standards by reference. The PROWAG standards only establish

April 17, 2017                                                                                             14
standards for reach distance, either forward reach or side reach. The MUTCD establishes other
standards for features such as accessible landings, location of pedestrian buttons, use of Accessible
Pedestrian Signal (APS) push button, and types of “ped heads” (the electronic warning signs that inform
pedestrians when the pedestrian cycle is occurring).
The self-evaluation of traffic signal ADA accessibility was carried out by DTD staff in October 2016.
Preliminary data was collected from the DTD traffic engineering staff to identify signalized locations, and
information on the signal system phasing and number of crosswalks. Staff from DTD then went into the
field to collect the required data for each signalized intersection.
There are 69 signal systems under county ownership of which 4 were under-construction at the time of
field data collection. Data was collected at the 65 intersections with traffic signal systems that were not
under construction to determine compliance. The following summarizes the findings from the traffic
signal self-evaluation:
       Accessible Pedestrian Signal (APS) – There were 406 pedestrian push buttons found. Of these,
        71 (17.5%) were APS push buttons; 82.5% were non-APS buttons.
       Push Button Height – Only 3 push buttons (0.74%) exceeded the maximum height allowed of 48
        inches and none were lower than the minimum of 15 inches.
       Reach Distance – Of the 406 pedestrian push buttons found, 88 (21.7%) had a reach distance in


                                            Traffic Signal
                                 Reason for Failure to Meet Standard
                   Clear Space Slope

               Clear Space Too Small

  Clear Space Obstructed/Not Present

              Reach Distance Too Far

          Pedestrian Button Too High

            APS Buttons Not Present

                                       0%   10%   20%   30%     40%    50%     60%     70%     80%    90%

        excess of 10 inches, the maximum under PROWAG for new facilities but within the standard for
        existing facilities.
       Clear Space at Push Button –360 locations required a clear space adjacent to the pedestrian
        push button. Clear space was provided in 315 of the required locations or 87.5%. In 33 cases
        (9.2%) the clear space was obstructed, meaning that a user of a wheelchair or other mobility
        device would not be able to reach the pedestrian push button. In 12 cases (3.3%) there was no
        clear space.




April 17, 2017                                                                                           15
       Clear Space Dimensions – As noted above, unobstructed clear space was provided for 315 of the
        push buttons. Of those, the clear space at 246 (78%) was a minimum of 48 inches x 48 inches,
        meeting the requirements. The remaining 69 (21.9%) were less than the minimum dimensions.
       Clear Space Slopes – Under ADA, pedestrian facilities such as sidewalks or curb ramps should not
        have a cross slope (perpendicular to the direction of travel) in excess of 2.0%. That 2.0%
        requirement applies to both directions (both parallel and perpendicular to the direction of
        travel) on the top and bottom landings of a curb ramp or the push button clear spaces at a
        signalized intersection. Of the 315 clear spaces provided for push buttons, 188 (59.7%) had a
        slope in excess of 2% perpendicular to the push button while 200 (63.5%) had a cross-slope
        parallel to the push button in excess of 2%.

Summary of Self-Evaluation
The self-evaluation demonstrated that Clackamas County must make considerable progress to achieve
the goal of equal access within the public rights-of-way. If we consider all facilities, including those built
before the ADA was enacted, more than 4,500 curb ramps and 44 traffic signal systems must be
improved or replaced to provide complete equal access per the requirements of the Americans with
Disabilities Act. The following chapter describes the steps recommended to be taken by Clackamas
County to achieve that goal.




April 17, 2017                                                                                              16
                                                         Chapter 3
                                Removal of Barriers to Accessibility
                    Introduction
As described in Chapter 1, the ADA provisions require all local governments to provide the same access
to all public facilities for those with disabilities that is provided for those without disabilities. This
sweeping requirement is difficult to meet for a large local government such as Clackamas County. Due to
the number of barriers to accessibility in the county rights-of-way and very limited funding, reaching a
state of full compliance, including facilities built before the ADA was enacted, will require many years.
This chapter, which describes the steps that Clackamas County will take to achieve full accessibility
within the unincorporated county right-of-way, focuses on four areas:
    1.   Adoption of a schedule and budget for removal of barriers to ADA accessibility,
    2.   Development and implementation of internal standards, specifications and procedures,
    3.   Monitoring progress on the implementation of the Transition Plan
    4.   Action Plan for the next four years
A required component of the ADA Transition Plan is the process for removing barriers to ADA
accessibility, including a schedule and budget. There are several related issues that must be considered.
These include:
        the state and federal regulations determining when removal of barriers to ADA accessibility
         must be incorporated other projects,
        county programs that typically result in accessibility improvements to facilities within the public
         rights-of-way,
        the rate of removal of barriers to accessibility in an average year, and
        an approach to prioritizing the removal of barriers.

State and Federal Requirements for Removal of Barriers to ADA Accessibility
The ADA Transition Plan must include a schedule and budget for removal of all barriers to ADA
accessibility. This includes improvements to any non-compliant facilities that have been built since the
passage of the ADA in 1990. But it also includes improvements to all facilities built prior to adoption of
the ADA that are not accessible. Although this requirement seems like a burden on local government, it
is in place due to the principle in the ADA of equality of access for all to any government facility,
program or benefit. As a result, Clackamas County is required to plan for improvements to all 4,531 curb
ramps that do not meet the ADA standards.
For local governments like Clackamas County, many of the improvements to ADA accessibility will be
part of other transportation system maintenance or improvement projects. The following state and
federal statutes provide direction regarding the removal of barriers to ADA Accessibility when other
improvements are taking place.
         Oregon Revised Statutes Chapter 447 – Standards and Specifications for Access by Persons with
         Disabilities – Section 447.310 sets minimum standards for curb ramps whenever a curb or

April 17, 2017                                                                                            17
        sidewalk is constructed, replaced or altered at any point in a block which gives reasonable access
        to a crosswalk.
        28 Code of Federal Regulations 35.151 – requires that whenever streets, roadways or highways
        are altered, local governments shall provide curb ramps where the street level pedestrian
        walkways cross the curb. On July 8, 2013, the U.S. Department of Justice and the U.S.
        Department of Transportation issued a Joint Technical Assistance memo further explaining the
        requirements to provide curb ramps when streets are altered through resurfacing projects. The
        following is quoted from the Joint Technical Assistance memo to help clarify Clackamas County’s
        responsibilities:
        “Where must curb ramps be provided? Curb ramps are needed whenever a sidewalk or other
        pedestrian walkway crosses a curb. Curb ramps must be located to ensure a person with a
        mobility disability can travel from a sidewalk on one side of the street, over or through any curbs
        or traffic islands, to the sidewalk on the other side of the street.
        When are curb ramps not required? The ADA does not require installation of ramps or curb
        ramps in the absence of a pedestrian walkway with a prepared surface for pedestrian use. Curb
        ramps are not required in the absence of a curb, elevation, or other barrier between the street
        and the walkway.
        What are the standards for alterations? An alteration is a change that affects or could affect the
        usability of all or part of a facility. Alterations of streets, roads, or highways include activities
        such as reconstructions, rehabilitation, resurfacing, widening and projects of similar scale and
        effect. Maintenance activities on streets, roads, or highways, such as filling potholes, are not
        alternations.
        When is resurfacing considered to be an alteration? Resurfacing is an alteration that triggers the
        requirement to add curb ramps if it involves work on a street or roadway spanning from one
        intersection to another, and includes overlays of additional material to the road surface, with or
        without milling. Examples include, but are not limited to the following treatments or their
        equivalents: addition of a new layer of asphalt, reconstruction, concrete pavement rehabilitation
        and reconstruction, open-graded surface course, micro-surfacing and thin lift overlays, cape
        seals, and in-place asphalt recycling.
        What kind of treatments constitute maintenance rather than an alteration? Treatments that
        serve solely to seal and protect the road surface, improve friction, and control splash and spray
        are considered to be maintenance because they do not significantly affect the public’s access to
        or usability of the road. Some examples of the types of treatments that would normally be
        considered maintenance are: painting or striping lanes, crack filling and sealing, surface sealing,
        chip seals, slurry seals, fog seals, scrub sealing, joint crack seals, joint repairs, dowel bar retrofit,
        spot high-friction treatments, diamond grinding, and pavement patching. In some cases, the
        combination of several maintenance treatments occurring at or near the same time may qualify
        as an alteration and would trigger the obligation to provide curb ramps.”




April 17, 2017                                                                                                 18
County Programs Resulting in ADA Accessibility Improvements
within the Public Right-of-Way
There are currently five county programs that can result in new or altered ADA accessibility features in
the public rights-of-way. These programs have a variety of legal mandates and funding sources.
Land Use & Development Permitting
The Land Use & Development Permitting Program in DTD reviews development applications to ensure
the proposals meet the transportation requirements of local codes and ordinances, including for
providing ADA accessibility features within public rights-of-way as required by the PROWAG standards
and state and county ordinances. Under this program, development plans are submitted by private
parties for permitting approval. These improvements must be provided on any proposed public right-of-
way, sidewalk or multi-use path proposed as part of the development. The ADA accessibility
improvements are required to be built to PROWAG and county standards and accepted by the county as
an addition to the public rights-of-way. This program can result in new ADA accessibility features on new
roads or facilities, the addition of ADA accessibility features where required and in some cases,
improvement of existing ADA accessibility features to full compliance with the county and PROWAG
standards. Traffic signals can also be improved as a condition of approval. During the past three years,
this program has resulted in 65 new or replacement curb ramps, an average rate of about 22 per year.
Traffic signal improvements occur on a case-by-case basis.
Transportation Maintenance
The Transportation Maintenance Program is responsible for maintaining the integrity and safety of the
entire county transportation system, including roads, bridges and signs. As noted earlier, sidewalks are
the responsibility of the abutting property owner. However, sidewalks and curb ramps within
intersections are fully within county right-of-way and fall under Transportation Maintenance
responsibility. Transportation Maintenance annually carries out road maintenance projects that trigger
requirements for ADA accessibility improvements. However, ADA accessibility improvements are only
required in locations with existing pedestrian facilities or when pedestrian facilities are added. In such
locations, curb ramps and accessible traffic signal features are required to be added or brought up to
PROWAG standards.
Transportation Construction
The Transportation Construction Program is responsible for development of projects on the five-year
Transportation Capital Improvement Program, which can be funded by federal, state or county funds.
The Transportation Construction Program can also serve as the project development/construction arm
of the Clackamas County Development Agency. Regardless of the funding source, the requirements for
ADA accessibility described previously apply for projects that either create or alter pedestrian facilities.
In recent years, the Transportation Construction Program has been the largest builder of new or altered
curb ramps and traffic signals with an average of 30 curb ramps per year improved or created and traffic
signals up-graded on a case-by-case basis.
Health, Housing and Human Services – Community Development
The Clackamas County Department of Health, Housing and Human Services (H3S) administers HUD
Community Development Block Grant funds to support programs or accomplish projects identified in

April 17, 2017                                                                                           19
the Five-Year Consolidated Plan. The Community Development Program works with local governments
and other organizations to provide funds to help develop public facilities (such as senior centers or
recreation facilities) as well as CDBG-eligible infrastructure improvements including water system, street
and sidewalk improvements. Curb ramps are an eligible project under CDBG and the Community
Development program has done several in recent years. Traffic signal improvements are not typically
eligible for CDBG funding.
Special Fund for ADA Curb Ramp Improvements
Anticipating the need for improvements to curb ramps, the Board of County Commissioners included in
the DTD budget for FY2016/17 a special fund of $180,000 for improvements to curb ramps that are not
programmed for improvement in any other project. This special fund was also proposed for inclusion in
the budgets for the upcoming three years. These funds will be sufficient to improve between 15 and 20
additional curb ramps each year beyond those included in other projects. Were this additional funding
allocation to be continued until all curb ramp improvements are complete it would reduce the time
required from 70 years to 54 years.
Summary of County Programs
Across all five county programs described above, an average of 85 curb ramps will be built or altered in
Clackamas County each year. There are 44 traffic signal systems under county jurisdiction requiring
improvement that will be addressed in the course of existing projects.

Schedule and Budget for Removal of Barriers to ADA Accessibility
Schedule -- The self-evaluation described in Chapter 2 determined that, as of August 2016 there were
4,531 curb ramps within Clackamas County unincorporated rights-of-way that must be replaced or
altered to remove all barriers to ADA accessibility. Assuming the county continues the current rate of 65
curb ramps per year, it would take 70 years to bring all curb ramps to full compliance with ADA
standards. If that program begins in 2017, it will be complete in 2087.
Budget -- Determining a budget for improving curb ramps that are barriers to accessibility is challenging.
To date, county practice has been to bring ADA accessibility features up to standard when other
improvements are underway. Since the budgets for such projects are based on unit costs, the individual
cost for the curb ramp is not identified.
Based on current rates for labor and materials, construction of a curb ramp may only cost around $7,500
each. However, curb ramps include a cost for design as well as higher costs for review and inspection by
County staff. Information from other localities is that average cost of construction per curb ramp --
including all administration, design, review, right-of-way, traffic control and inspection – is about
$11,000. Using that figure, the total budget for bringing all curb ramps (regardless of when they were
built) to full compliance with ADA standards would be $49.84 million in 2016 dollars. However, it should
be noted that since Clackamas County practice has been to improve curb ramps as part of other
projects, most of that cost won’t actually appear as a separate cost in the annual county budget,
although it will affect the bottom line.
It should also be noted that there are several hundred curb ramps identified during the self-evaluation
that met all PROWAG standards with the exception of the presence of required texture contrast
(truncated dome). The Oregon Department of Transportation and other localities in the Portland region

April 17, 2017                                                                                         20
have found that it is possible to retrofit curb ramps with truncated dome using maintenance staff, which
would decrease the time and cost estimates described above.
Estimating a future budget to bring traffic signals up to ADA accessibility standards is more complex.
Traffic signals have a broader variety of possible improvement types with greater cost variation. Our
analysis showed that there are three main points of failure for the traffic signals.
       Failure to provide an adequate push button clear space is the most common with 44 or 63.5% of
        traffic signal intersections failing to meet those requirements. DTD traffic engineering staff
        estimates that improvements to the push button clear space (including improvements to the
        associated curb ramps) would cost $100,000 per intersection, or $4.4 million for all 44
        intersections. At an average of 8 curb ramps per signalized intersection, that expenditure would
        have the added benefit of improving 352 curb ramps.
       There are 8 intersections that will require installation of APS buttons to meet ADA standards
        with a total cost for all 8 intersections of $100,000.
       Only 8 pedestrian push buttons failed to meet ADA standards for either reach distance or button
        height. Correcting these problems are inexpensive and can be carried out by transportation
        maintenance staff at an estimated cost of less than $10,000.
Overall, the estimated budget to improve the traffic signals under county jurisdiction to meet ADA
standards is $4.5 million. Given there are only 44 intersections with traffic signals under county
jurisdiction that require improvement, and the variation in the types of projects carried out by the
county each year, it is hard to identify an average rate at which improvements could take place. But
given recent history, it is anticipated that it will take no more than 10 years to bring all remaining
intersections up to full compliance with ADA standards.

Prioritization of Curb Ramp Improvements
The ADA requires that each local government identify priorities for making needed improvements to
accessibility features that do not comply with the ADA standards, but gives governments broad
discretion in the approach to the prioritization. Clackamas County DTD sought public input to help
establish the priorities for improvements to curb ramps. Between April and June 2016, a questionnaire
was distributed both online and as a paper handout to secure input from those with disabilities on their
priorities for improvements to curb ramps.
The highest priority identified was the lack of a curb ramp at a location where pedestrians are required
to cross the curb. Respondents identified the following priorities:
  First priority -- Curb ramps missing at intersections / mid-block crosswalks, due to the importance of
  those locations for pedestrian travel. The self-evaluation identified 1,566 locations at intersections or
  mid-block crosswalks in unincorporated Clackamas County right-of-way at which curb ramps are
  required but not present.
  Second priority -- Curb ramps with a fixed object obstructing the ramp or the landing. The self-
  evaluation identified 1,352 locations at which the curb ramps would not serve the needs of those with
  disabilities due to a fixed object that obstructed the ramp or landing, or the lack of a required
  element.


April 17, 2017                                                                                            21
  Third priority -- Curb ramps that were not obstructed and included all required elements but failed to
  meet ADA standards.
Those with disabilities were also asked the type of street
that should be the highest priority for improvement. A
majority selected high traffic arterial streets as the highest
priority, lower traffic collector streets as the second
priority and residential streets as the third priority.
The self-evaluation also identified 351 locations that lack a
required curb ramp on “orphan” sidewalk segments less
that one block in length. Such very short sidewalk
segments are not connected at either end to the sidewalk
network and do not enhance pedestrian mobility. Staff
identified locations requiring curb ramps on such orphan
sidewalk segments to be the lowest priority that should
not be improved until the sidewalk segment is connected
to the sidewalk network.
Based on the input received from those with disabilities,
the following table was created showing the broad priorities for improvements to curb ramps to be
undertaken outside scheduled projects. Within each of the priority groups, curb ramps facilitating access
to state and local government facilities, transportation facilities, places of public accommodation and
employers would have a higher priority over those serving other areas.

 Curb Ramp Priorities for Improvements – Priority (number of curb ramps)
 Street Functional         Curb Ramp           Non-Functional    Curb Ramp Failed       Curb Ramp
 Classification           Missing at an         Curb Ramps       to Meet PROWAG         Missing on
                         Intersection or                             Standards           “Orphan”
                            Mid-block                                                    Sidewalk
                            crossing                                                     Segments
 Arterial                    1 (350)               2 (566)           3 (789)              10 (84)
 Collector                   4 (193)               5 (244)           6 (222)              11 (31)
 Connector/Local            7 (1,023)              8 (542)           9 (465)              12 (236)

Standards, Specifications and Procedures
Standards, specifications and procedures must be in place to ensure that all curb ramps and traffic
signals are constructed to provide ADA accessibility consistent with the PROWAG standards. Given the
scarce resources available to Clackamas County for removal of barriers to accessibility, development of
every curb ramp and traffic signal to meet PROWAG standards is a very high priority. Recognizing this,
the efficacy of the standards, specifications and procedures used by DTD for designing and building curb
ramps and traffic signals was assessed during the development of this ADA Transition Plan. This was
accomplished by conducting case studies of recent projects. These case studies focused on curb ramps
as the area of greatest concern. The approach for the case studies was to compare both the final design
and the measurements of the curb ramps as built with the PROWAG standards. Project managers,

April 17, 2017                                                                                        22
construction managers and field inspectors
were then interviewed to identify the
sources of departure from the PROWAG
standards. Findings were discussed with the
Project Management Team for the ADA
Transition Plan to identify additional steps
that could be taken to improve DTD’s
success in building curb ramps that are
compliant with PROWAG standards. The
following describes areas for improvement
that were identified:
Standards and Specification
    1. PROWAG Standards
       The specific version of the PROWAG standards should be identified in the county Road
       Standards. There have been several versions of the PROWAG standards. The standards are
       incorporated into the county Road Standards by reference, but it is not clear which version of
       the standards are to be used. The case studies showed that some ramps were designed and
       built to the 2010 standards, rather than the 2012 standards currently in effect.
    2. County Road Standards
       The County Road Standards should correctly identify current requirements and present
       reasonable alternatives to achieve compliance. Several changes to the County Road Standards
       would result in improved compliance with ADA standards, including:
            a. Requiring the use of transition panels between the required curb ramp and existing
                sidewalks to reduce issues with non-compliant slopes and cross-slopes.
            b. Adding several curb ramp designs that are not common in the county, but would help
                address steep terrain and limited right-of-way -- the most difficult problems faced in
                Clackamas County. Presentation of additional alternatives should help consulting
                engineers to find alternatives that will result in compliant curb ramps in difficult
                situations.
    3. Training
       The PROWAG standards are complex and confusingly presented in published and online
       documents. Employees of DTD, particularly those with responsibilities for project management,
       design review and field inspection, should receive training to increase their knowledge of the
       standards and their application. Identification and training of ADA experts in design review and
       field inspection could also help improve compliance.
    4. Checklists
       Checklists should be developed for consultants and contactors as well as DTD staff in project
       management, design review and field inspection roles to help all parties more accurately assess
       curb ramp compliance at each step in the process. It would also provide better documentation
       and enable better communication on ADA compliance issues with consulting engineers and
       contractors.



April 17, 2017                                                                                       23
Procedures
Improving these procedural issues could increase the compliance rate for new curb ramps:
    1. Scoping
       A scoping meeting with consulting engineers and contractors at the construction site and
       resulting documentation would clarify the requirements for each curb ramp including expected
       design and approaches required to achieve compliance, as well as any issues that may call for
       special treatment.
    2. New curb ramps versus alterations
       The PROWAG standards for new curb ramps are somewhat different from the standards for
       alterations. Throughout the design and construction process both consultants and staff should
       clearly identify the curb ramps that are new in contrast to those that are alterations to help
       ensure application of the correct standards.
    3. Design review responsibility
       DTD policies should be revised to clarify who is responsible for review of curb ramp plans for
       compliance with PROWAG standards.
    4. Exceptions policy
       An exceptions policy for the PROWAG standards should be adopted that identifies
       documentation requirements and the approval process for exceptions. The PROWAG standards
       allow exceptions for new curb ramps or traffic signals under very limited circumstances and
       require those exceptions to be documented. The standard for exceptions on alterations are
       somewhat broader but still require documentation and specific sign-off.
    5. Field inspection
       Establish checkpoints and procedures for the field inspection process to ensure that properly
       designed, PROWAG-compliant ramps are constructed as designed. Even when design drawings
       show PROWAG-compliant curb ramps, they are often not built as designed, resulting in non-
       compliant curb ramps. There are two key check points identified by DTD engineering and field
       inspection staff at which county involvement can greatly increase the likelihood that ADA
       compliant curb ramps will be built.
           a. The first point is the “forms inspection.” The forms should be inspected prior to pouring
                concrete to ensure that they correspond to the approved design. Collection of specific
                measurements at this point would help determine if the curb ramp was being built as
                specified in the drawings.
           b. The second point is the “post-build inspection.” In this step the DTD field inspector
                should measure every aspect of each curb ramp to ensure that the built product actually
                complies with PROWAG requirements and the approved design.




April 17, 2017                                                                                      24
    6. Accountability for Consultants and Contractors
       Clackamas County should adopt a policy that clearly assigns cost responsibility in contracts to
       ensure that consultants and contractors are accountable for costs associated with re-designing
       or reconstructing curb ramps that do not meet PROWAG standards due to an error by the
       consultant or contractor.

Monitoring Removal of Barriers to Accessibility
Establishing processes for monitoring removal of barriers to
accessibility has been identified as a “best practice” for achieving
compliance with ADA standards by the Federal Highway
Administration. Achieving full ADA compliance is a large task that will
take many years to complete. Annual processes for tracking progress
can help Clackamas County and DTD remain focused on the goal.
Monitoring allows the process to move forward making best use of existing resources, and enables staff
to determine progress towards full compliance, identify issues as they arise, and report on progress to
the Board of County Commissioners and the public. Since the Clackamas County Transportation
Maintenance Division is the administrative owner of county transportation facilities, we recommend
that the monitoring files / databases and reporting responsibilities take place through that division.
The following activities have been identified as best practices for implementing and monitoring the
removal of barriers to ADA accessibility.
    1. Updated Inventory – As projects are completed that include curb ramps or traffic signal
       accessibility features, those features should be measured to ensure compliance and the data
       added to the computerized inventory established during the self-evaluation for this ADA
       Transition Plan.
    2. Updating the Online Accessibility Data – As improvements are made the county should update
       the online accessibility data to provide information to the public regarding progress in achieving
       ADA Transition Plan goals.
    3. Annual Evaluation Report – DTD should assess and report to the Board of County Commissioners
       and the public on progress toward removing barriers to accessibility.
    4. Review of Requests and Grievances – The ADA coordinator should review all requests for ADA
       improvements or grievances that have been received throughout the year and evaluate
       responsiveness and decision-making.
    5. Work Program – Each fall, a work program should be developed identifying the barriers to
       accessibility that will be removed in the coming construction season through all programs and
       funding sources.

Action Plan for the Next Four Years
The next four years are critical for Clackamas County in the long-term process of achieving full
accessibility within the public rights-of-way. During this period, changes to budget, programming,
standards and procedures must all be made and become part of the accepted annual work flow for DTD
and county decision-makers. The following describes the steps to be undertaken.



April 17, 2017                                                                                        25
Design
Develop changes to County Road Standards by working in partnership with all effected divisions. These
will include improvements in the measurements shown on design drawings, as well as improvements in
the drawings to include additional curb ramps types, and inclusion of PROWAG requirements that are
not current included.
    1) Policies
         The following policies should be developed:
                 Develop and adopt an exception policy. The ADA does allow exceptions to the
                  requirements for accessibility, but only under unusual circumstances. For new facilities
                  exceptions are allowed when extreme terrain or historic structures make it impossible
                  to meet the standards. In such cases, the accessibility feature is required to meet the
                  requirements in as many features as possible. The requirements for an exception to an
                  altered accessible feature are somewhat broader. In either case the exception must be
                  approved by the Implementing Official and documented in the files for ADA accessibility.
                 Policies requiring design engineers to change designs that are found to be not compliant
                  with the PROWAG standards, and
                 Policies requiring contractors to correct accessibility features that are properly designed
                  but incorrectly constructed, resulting in non-compliance with ADA standards.
         Consideration should be given to adopting standards below the PROWAG standards to provide a
         construction tolerance for new or altered accessibility features.
    2) Checklists
         Develop checklists for use by design engineers, county review staff, contractors and county field
         inspection staff to facilitate checking of every type of accessibility feature against the PROWAG
         standards for that feature.
    3) Training
         Conduct training for county staff, design engineers and contractors using the checklists to
         enable all participants to have a clear understanding of all the standards and their application in
         future projects.
    4) Inclusion of PROWAG requirements
         The review of County Road Standards identified several PROWAG standards not incorporated in
         the current version of the road standards. These included the PROWAG requirement of a top
         landing for every ramp, standards for bus stops within the public right-of-way, and for provision
         of ADA accessible temporary access when construction blocks the permanent Pedestrian Access
         Route.
Development
    1) Scoping
         Develop a scoping process specifically concerning the accessibility features of every project.


April 17, 2017                                                                                            26
    2) New or Altered Accessibility Features
        Due to differences in the standards, prior to procurement of engineering services and bid-letting
        identify every accessibility feature as “New” or “Alteration” to clarify the standards that will be
        applied for design review and field inspection.
    3) Review
        Alter the approach to assigning review responsibilities for accessibility features to ensure clarity
        regarding those responsibilities.
Construction
    1) Improvements to Curb Ramps and Traffic Signals through Currently Programmed Projects
        Proceed to improve 218 curb ramps that have been identified in the five-year Transportation
        Capital Improvements Program. Improvements to achieve accessible curb ramps and traffic
        signals have mainly taken place through projects by the DTD Transportation Construction and
        Transportation Maintenance divisions. An analysis of the adopted FY2014/15 to FY2018/19 Five-
        Year Transportation Capital Improvements Program shows that 218 curb ramps will be
        improved through projects currently programmed but not complete.
    2) Improvements to Curb Ramps through Special Budget Allocations
        Move forward as quickly as possible to select the locations to be improved based on the
        priorities identified in this plan and develop the procedures for designing and constructing the
        improved curb ramps. Recognizing the large number of curb ramps that would need to be
        improved, the Board of County Commissioners and county management included a special
        budget allocation of $180,000 per year for FY2016/17 for the development and construction of
        new curb ramps, with this budget item proposed to be included in the following three fiscal
        years as well. This budget allocation will enable DTD to improve between 15 and 20 curb ramps
        per year or around 70 for the four-year period. Continued budget allocation of similar amounts
        will reduce the length of time required to remove all curb ramp barriers to accessibility from 70
        to 49 years.




April 17, 2017                                                                                            27
          ADA
    Transition
Plan for Public
Rights-of-Way
             April 25, 2017
DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION
AND DEVELOPMENT
Mike Bezner, Assistant Director
Stephen Williams,
Principal Transportation Planner
                              Americans with
                      Disabilities Act of 1990
 Requires equal access for those with disabilities
    All state and local governments and all their programs and
     facilities no matter the funding source must provide equal
     access for those with disabilities.
    Any facilities or programs not accessible by those with
     disabilities are discriminatory.
 Different requirements for
  government and private sector
 Enforced by U.S. Department
  of Justice and courts
                         ADA Transition Plan
1. Accountability – Designate ADA coordinator
2. Transparency – Provide notice of ADA programs
   and accessibility status to the public
3. Public input – Provide ongoing request process
4. Self-evaluation - Identify barriers to accessibility
5. Areas for improvement - Evaluate standards,
   procedures and policies
6. Eliminate accessibility barriers - Develop plan and
   priorities
7. Ongoing process - Establish an annual process for
   identifying improvements
                                 Self-Evaluation
Three Parts:
1. Evaluation of all curb ramps - to identify those that
   do not meet standards
2. Evaluation of traffic signals – to identify those that
   are not useable by people with disabilities
3. Evaluation of DTD procedures and practices – to
   determine if they result in facilities meeting ADA
   standards
            Summary of Self-Evaluation
1. Evaluation of curb ramps - 4,745 curb ramp
   locations
    1,917 missing
    1,352 non-functional
    1,476 failed to meet standards
    4,745 curb ramps must be installed, improved or
      replaced
    3,963 were built
      prior to passage of
      ADA; these are not
      “grandfathered,”
      they must be fixed
            Summary of Self-Evaluation
2. Evaluation of traffic signals – 69 traffic signal
   systems, including 360 pedestrian buttons
    44 traffic signal systems require improvement
     with Accessible Pedestrian Signal (APS)
     buttons or improved clear space
     adjacent to pedestrian buttons
    Distance to reach 88 pedestrian
     buttons was too far
    Over 200 pedestrian buttons
     did not have required clear space
     at button for wheelchair users
            Summary of Self-Evaluation

3. Evaluation of DTD procedures and practices
    Standards should be updated
    Provide training on ADA standards to staff
     members
    Improve procedures for plan
     review and field inspection
    More clearly communicate
     DTD requirements for meeting
     ADA standards to consulting
     engineers and contractors
                   Priorities for Removing
                   Barriers to Accessibility
 The law recognizes it will take time to complete
  required improvements
 ADA allows local governments to set priorities for
  making improvements to fit the community
 Each local government can set its own priorities
 We reached out to those with disabilities last spring
  to determine their priorities for improvements
                                  ADA Transition Plan
                                  Proposed Priorities
Curb Ramp Priorities for Improvements – Priority (number of curb ramps)

Street            Curb ramp Non-functional     Curb ramp     Curb ramp
Functional        missing at  curb ramp due     failed to    missing on
Classification   intersection to obstruction      meet        “orphan”
                 or mid-block   or missing     PROWAG         sidewalk
                   crossing      element       standards     segments

Arterial           1 (350)        2 (566)       3 (789)        10 (84)
Collector          4 (193)        5 (244)       6 (222)        11 (31)
Connector
or Local          7 (1,023)       8 (542)       9 (465)       12 (236)
                             Schedule & Budget
Curb Ramps - replacement of 4,745 curb ramps will
require 70 years
      $49.84 million to improve all curb ramps
      Most curb ramp improvements will take place as part of
       other projects
      Retrofitting with truncated
       dome could reduce both
       schedule and cost
Traffic Signal - improvements
will take 10 years
      $4.5 million for all
       traffic signal improvements
                      DTD Implementation
                           Actions To Date
1. Outreach to developers and consulting engineers to
   review proposals and secure support
2. Training for employees in management, project
   leadership, design review and field inspection
3. New policies and procedures to improve
   communication of DTD requirements to consulting
   engineers and contractors
4. Design review checklists for ADA facilities to be
   used by consulting engineers and plan review staff
5. Updated conditions of approval for new
   developments
                     DTD Implementation
                          Actions To Date
6. Implementation of new construction inspection
   checklists and standards
7. Working with Transportation Maintenance to
   retrofit approximately 300 curb ramps with
   truncated dome panels to bring those into
   compliance
8. Initiating construction of 15
   20 new curb ramps on Oak
   Grove Blvd using funds
   authorized in FY16/17
   Budget. Specific location and
   schedule not yet known
                            Questions?


           Mike Bezner, Assistant Director
  MikeBez@Co.Clackamas.OR.US (503) 742-4651
Stephen Williams, Principal Transportation Planner
     swilliams@Clackamas.us (503) 742-4696
