             Oregon Buys
             Demographic Data Collection

    Category Definitions                            Am I required to provide this data?
Asian Pacific Islander American                     No, vendors are not required to self-identify by race, gender, or veteran status;
                                                    providing this information is totally voluntary. The Oregon Buys system       includes a self-
persons whose origins are from Japan, China,
  Taiwan, Korea, Burma (Myanmar), Vietnam,          identifying selection from the defined categories. “Prefer not to disclose’ is the first
       Laos, Cambodia (Kampuchea), Thailand,        available option and there is no reward or penalty for any selection.
  Malaysia, Indonesia, the Philippines, Brunei,
    Samoa, Guam, the U.S. Trust Territories of
     the Pacific Islands (Republic of Palau), the   If you are a government entity and have a vendor account (for example OrCPP            or a
       Commonwealth of the Northern Marianas
                                                    state agency), please select “Prefer not to disclose” and annotate your government
   Islands, Macao, Fiji, Tonga, Kiribati, Tuvalu,
      Nauru, Federated States of Micronesia, or     exception in the notes section.
                                      Hong Kong


                                                    Why is this information being collected?
        Black or African American
                                                    This information is being collected to measure engagement with each business
    persons having origins in any of the Black
                                                    audience and identify gaps in registration and contract awards for specific
                        racial groups of Africa
                                                    demographics.

      Hispanic or Latin American
    persons of Mexican, Puerto Rican, Cuban,        Who is asking for this information?
     Dominican, Central or South American, or
other Spanish or Portuguese culture or origin,      By Executive Order 22-15, the Governor directed the Department of Administrative
                            regardless of race      Services to electronically collect race and gender data for all contractors to ensure
                                                    accountability, improve transparency, and advance economic and entrepreneurial
         Native American, Alaskan                   equity policy.
                Native or Hawaiian
 American   Indians, Alaska Natives, Aleuts, or
                             Native Hawaiians       What information are you collecting?
                                                    Through vendor registration in Oregon Buys, the Department of Administrative
                           Subcontinent
                                                    Services will electronically collect race and gender data for all prime and
                        Asian American
         persons whose origins are from India,      subcontractors. Vendors will also be given the option identify their status as a veteran.
  Pakistan, Bangladesh, Bhutan, the Maldives
                  Islands, Nepal, or Sri Lanka


                                    White           Who is able to see and use this data?
                              (Caucasian)
 A person having origins in any of the original     Information submitted may be open to public view and is subject to disclosure under
       peoples of Europe, the Middle East, or
                                                    the Oregon Public Records Laws.
                                  North Africa




                                                    Who can I contact if I have questions?

                                                    Office of Procurement Equity
                                                    Oregon Department of Administrative Services
                                                    Enterprise Goods and Services
                                                    Email: DAS.ProcurementEquity@das.oregon.gov
