                                                        2023




Oregon State Governments
Veterans’ Preference Guide




PREPARED BY THE DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES
CHIEF HUMAN   RESOURCES OFFICE
Oregon State Government
Veterans’ Preference Guide


Contents
  INTRODUCTION            ........cecccccccesccccececceccesccceccsccececscccecennceccesccecceseccesensceceseceesesceccesseesenauecsesaceesenseceesenseeecensuseecauseceetessessuueceesesseeeetseeeeesseeecsttscerenseeesess 2

  JOB REQUIREMENTS               ........cccecccccceeccccececceccecsccceccaccecesseccceceuecesesseccesecesseascecssscceseuaueceeenscecsenseceesenseececsseesenaseeseesseceseussesesenseeeecssesscassecestsssessutssetesenseess 3

      DEFINING THE DESIRED ATTRIBUTES............:scccccceeccceceecececencceccensecesenccccceescceceenseceeenceeesenseceseasececeseceuseauecsesessecsennuecsessscesesttsceseraueeessesseesestsesessnters 3

      WHAT       DO JOB REQUIREMENTS                   HAVE TO DO WITH VETERANS’                        PREFERENCE?             ......csccsecescceccacececcsecscanccascesccuscasecsscauccaseaseceseuseaescaees 4

  QUALIFYING         FOR VETERANS’             PREFERENCE .......ccccecccoccescesccscesccoccceccsscessessvsecesucsscesscsseceesaessssasessesescssssassasesassescssssascssecascsssestessecascauscsesaueascatecsecatesees 5

  QUALIFYING         FOR AN INTERVIEW .......ccccccccceeccccccecccececsccceccsccecececccecenscecceseceeccesuecessenseecesucecesaaaeceeeaseeecesaesceseaseecsesseeessusueesessseeeeetaseeestssetectseesecstseereeses 6

      INTERVIEW SELECTION CRITERIA .........cccccccccecccccececceccenceccecenccecescccecensccecescceseenseccesnceesenseseecessceecesssseesaseesecenseeseneseseesseeseetseesensueeessesseesttseseessters 6

      INTERVIEW SELECTION                PROCESS. ........:cccccsccscescescesceseeseeseeseeeeeeeeeeee
                                                                     ees eee eee eee eee eeeeeeeeseeeeeeeestesseaeeesesseeseeseesestestestessestestestestestestengas 7

  SELECTION        PROCESS       .......ccccccccescccecceccceccecccecesccecceseccceceseccseccceceseccecessecseeaseesensusecesnseesenssseseesuseccessesessasueecesenseeseusesessesteeeseuseseecasecersessecenteeeserseeetens 8

      SCORED       EVALUATION           METHOD          .........c0..cccescccceeeccceceecccececccececsccceceecececsencecceseccscessceccesaecessnaseesesrseesenssseseesseeceutsecesenasecsesuseseseussesesenseeeestseeeecstteters 8

      UNSCORED          EVALUATION           MMIETHOD ........0...cccccccceeecccecenccccececcccccesececensccecesscceceenseceesenceeceeuecseeaseeececseseesauseesecnsecsenaseeseesseesestscessnsteeessesseeseasceeensters 9

  HIRE DECISION ....0.0..cccecccecececccececcceececcccccencececencceccesecescesseccesuscecseanaeceeaeeeceeuescecsasecceessecscnaneseeensecesensecsesenseeceueceesenuseceeenseeesansscsesuseesetieserecsatetsreness 10

      DOCUMENTING             THE SELECTION             ROCESS .........cccesecccecceccceceescceccenseccesenccecessecessesaceccesncecsenuaecsecsnceesensecceseasececenssecssaaseceusesseesenueeesesseeeettssesecnsteeeness 11

  VETERANS’        APPEAL RIGHTS. .....c.ccecccscesseeseesccscescessesseceresscssessecasesccaecsscsascassesccaucssvsassesesaesaucsausassaecassssasesssaesausasessesaecaucsascssecasesscueeessessscaseeseessens 12

  RESOURCES         ........ccccccecescccccececcceceececcececcccecetsceeceasceccensecessnaceceesessceseassceseenteeceenaescecuceccesnseesenasceesensececensecesssseeceessseescausesesenseessenssseesisseecestscesecsseeesensecs 13




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1|Page
Oregon State Government
Veterans’ Preference Guide


INTRODUCTION

Veterans’ preference in the hiring process recognizes the economic loss suffered by citizens who have served
their country in uniform, restores veterans to a favorable competitive position for government employment,
and acknowledges the larger obligation owed to disabled veterans.

Oregon state government complies with the veterans’ preference law in the hiring and promoting of veterans
and disabled veterans.

A consistent hiring process reduces confusion and frustration for the hiring manager, the recruiter and the
veteran applicant. This guide covers what is required when applying veterans’ preference in the employment
selection process.




                                                                                                        2|Page
Oregon State Government
Veterans’ Preference Guide


JOB REQUIREMENTS

There are several terms used to describe job requirements.

Minimum qualifications or MQs, are the
baseline qualifications an applicant must
meet to be eligible for a position. MQs
are classification specific. These typically
cannot be changed or modified.

Special Qualifications are also a baseline
                                                                   Desired    Attributes
qualification; although not common      and
                                                                               VY a
are specific to the job. Special
qualifications are licenses, legal             Minimum     Qualifications         Special Qualifications
requirements, or bilingual qualifications.

An applicant must meet the MQs and the special qualifications to qualify for the job.

Desired Attributes or requested skills and attributes are additional qualifications that are specific to the
job. There may also be a preference statement used to identify a skill or attribute highly desired for the
position. These are determined by the hiring manager when analyzing the job and team needs.

Identifying the desired attributes of the job takes careful planning before the job is even posted.

The desired attributes determine which applicants move forward to an interview and are ultimately
selected for the job.


DEFINING THE DESIRED ATTRIBUTES
Before posting a job for recruitment, it is important the recruiter and hiring manager meet and discussthe
needs of the position and the team, identify desired attributes critical for success in the job, and createa
strategy for finding qualified candidates.

By developing a clear understanding of the critical attributes needed for a person to be successful in the
position, it will be easier to write a job posting, and conduct screening throughout the selection process.

The more specific the critical attributes are, the better. When job seekers can easily identify what is
needed for the position and can quickly identify if the job is right for them, they know if it is worth taking
the time to apply. Most job seekers who don’t believe they have the qualifications, will not apply. This
leads to less frustration for the recruiter and hiring manager because the quality of applicants is greatly
increased and the number of applicants that do not qualify is less. This also results in less frustration for
applicants.

Limiting critical skills to five or six is about the right amount for the hiring manager to screen to and for
jobseekers to know if it is worth their time to apply.


                                                                                                                 3|Page
Oregon State Government
Veterans’ Preference Guide



WHAT DO JOB REQUIREMENTS HAVE TO DO WITH VETERANS’ PREFERENCE?
Veterans’ preference is only awarded when the veteran meets MQs and
special qualifications.

Only the qualifications, skills, and attributes as listed in the job posting,
may be used for screening a veterans’ preference applicant when
determining who to interview.

A veterans’ preference candidate has the right to ask for an explanation
for not being selected and this includes not getting an interview.




                                                                                4|Page
Oregon State Government
Veterans’ Preference Guide


 QUALIFYING                       FOR VETERANS’                    PREFERENCE

To qualify for preference, the veteran applicant must:

                                                                                                                   hires           Exam        5pt   10pt  Total
    e          Submit all required applicant materials and appropriate                                                             Score       Vet   DVet Score
               military documents; and
                                                                                                        Able, Ayna J          7   100                     100
    e          Meet the minimum qualifications (MQs) and special
               qualifications of the position                                                           Borey,     Bea Anne       100                     100

                                                                                                        Cella, Cotton M           100_                    100
A qualified veteran receives a 5-percentage points, and a qualified
disabled veteran receives a 10-percentage points.                                                     Cow          oat        7   90                 10   100

The recruiter is responsible for determining if the veteran is qualified                                Ealke, Earl J             80                      80

for veterans’ preference and will indicate the appropriate veteran
                                                                                                        Goodell,    Gabel C       80                      80
preference on the referred list that the manager receives.
                                                                                                        Fox, Fanielle S           75                      75
Hiring managers should only provide veterans’ preference to
                                                                                                        Hayes,     Harold         60                      60
applicants that the recruiter has identified qualify for veterans’
preference.                                                                                             Johnson, Jeff             55       5              60

If an applicant qualifies for veterans’ preference, either the 5 or 10                                  Kemper,     Kylie         40       5              45
percentage points will show on the referred list. If an applicant is not
                                                                                                        Livewell, Lewis           20                      20
showing 5 or 10 percentage points on the referred list, but shows
military service in the application, the applicant is not eligible for
veterans’ preference. Most likely the required military documents to
verify veterans’ preference were not submitted.




        TIP:     During     the    application      process,     the     applicant     will      be
        prompted      to request veterans’            preference        in Workday.     If they
        request     preference        but do not submit the required                documents
        and have not been             previously awarded         points, the recruiter can
        send     the applicant        a message     to remind       them    to submit         their
        documents.        The      recruiter     should    use    the    relevant    Workday
        template;     either External Candidate             Vet Pref Task Reminder,              or
        Internal Candidate Vet Pref Task Reminder. Be careful to select
        the appropriate template as the instructions differ depending on
        whether the applicant is an internal employee or not.

        Alternatively, applicants can email their documents directly to the
        recruiter    with     their    SSN     redacted.   Recruiters      then     attach     the
        documents     in the     candidate’s     Workday   profile under
        “Attachments”, “Other” using the category “Recruitment |
        Veterans Documents”. Be careful not to attach them to the
        “Application” section for confidentiality reasons.



                                                                                                                                                           5|Page
Oregon State Government
Veterans’ Preference Guide


 QUALIFYING FOR AN INTERVIEW

When determining who to interview, the hiring manager should first review applicants that meet MQs and special
qualifications and apply the predetermined evaluation criteria (desired attributes) to identify who to forward to the
interview.

Next the hiring manager should review all remaining veterans’ preference applicants that have not be forwarded to the
interview and also forward any veterans’ preference applicants who meet all desired attributes listed in the job posting.

Veterans’ preference candidates qualify for an interview when they meet all the minimum qualifications, special
qualifications, and all desired attributes as listed in the job posting. The veterans’ preference candidate who meet
all of these criteria, must be interviewed regardless of the veteran’s score or rank compared to other applicants.

When a veterans’ preference candidate is not forwarded to an interview, the reason must be clearly documented.




                               Qualifying for Interview
             Minimum                  Special                All Required &
                                                                           ;                         '
             Qualifications   cp      Qualifications   ca    Requested Skills &   —        | nte   rview
                                                             Attributes


INTERVIEW SELECTION CRITERIA
When screening a veteran applicant for job requirements, the following must be considered:

    e    Education
    e    Work experience
    e    Relevant life experience, i.e., experience where skills and attributes are obtained through unpaid activities such
         as volunteering or participating in an association or committee
    e   Transferable skills that are obtained through education and experience, including military education and experience.

The veteran must provide sufficient evidence in the requested application materials for the recruiter and hiring manager
to determine if the veteran possess the qualifications, skills and attributes for the position. Requested application
materials may include an application form, resume, cover letter, supplemental questions or work product sample.
Sufficient evidence is determined by the recruiter and hiring manager.

Do not overlook a veterans’ preference candidate because they do not have an initial score as high as other candidates.
Hiring managers will need to conduct and document a separate review of all qualified veterans’ preference candidates,
regardless of their score or rank compared to other candidates to ensure that veterans who possess all qualifications,
                                                                                                                   skills
and attributes listed in the job posting are interviewed.


INTERVIEW EXCEPTION - PREQUALIFIED APPLICANTS
The requirement to interview all veteran applicants who meet the MQ, special qualifications and all required and requested
skills does not apply when applicants are selected from a pre-established eligible list of prequalified applicants. Pre-existing
lists of pre-qualified applicants are most common for law enforcement and fire protection positions.




                                                                                                                        6|Page
Oregon State Government
Veterans’ Preference Guide




                                                                  Interview                          Selection
         Manager receives list of                                                      Process
        applicants who meet MQs
        and Special qualifications*
                     i

            Manager evaluates
        applicants and determines
        who to interview based on
         desired attributes in job
                  posting
                     i

            Manager forwards
          selected candidates to




            Are there veteran
            preference applicants
            not being forwarded
            to interview?




                                    Review for required and
                                        requested skills &              Do veterans have all
                                                                                                                  Do not consider further
                                   attributes listed in the job         required & requested
                                             posting                    skills & attributes?




                                                                                           Forward to interview




           *If Manager requests a list of applicants within a score
           range, then all veteran preference applicants who meet
           MQs and special qualifications also need to be sent to the
           Manager.




                                                                                                                                            7|Page
Oregon State Government
Veterans’ Preference Guide


SELECTION PROCESS

Veterans’ preference is applied at each evaluation stage of the selection process. For example, there may be a skills test
such as a typing test, and a first and second interview. Veterans’ preference is applied at each of these stages. A stage in
the selection process is when two or more candidates are compared and one or more is rejected for the position.
Where reference checks are used as a tie-breaker or to distinguish between candidates, veterans’ preference must be
applied. However, where reference checks are conducted only on a top candidate to ensure suitability, veterans’
preference does not apply.




                                                                                     + Veteran
                                                                                     Preference     a
                                                          + Veteran
                                                          Preference 4                                  4
                              + Veteran                                            and
                              Preference     dA                                                .
                                                        4st                        Interview

                             Skills Test                Interview



SCORED EVALUATION METHOD
Different evaluation methods may be used.

When     using a scored evaluation method, the applicable percentage (5 or 10) is calculated based on the total score
possible and added to the applicants total score after the evaluation stage is completed.

For example, if there are 80 possible points, calculate 5% or 10% of 80. Add that number to the applicant’s total
score.




                       80 X .05 = 4, so add 4 points to applicant's score
                       80 X .10 = 8 , so add 8 points to applicant's score




                                                                                                                    8|Page
Oregon State Government
Veterans’ Preference Guide




UNSCORED EVALUATION METHOD                                                             Disable Veteran
Unscored methods that may be used are sorting or ranking based on          Veteran     Two Levels
competencies, answers to questions or by comparing strengths and           One Level
weaknesses.

When   using an unscored evaluation method, a veteran is elevated one
level and a disabled veteran is elevated two levels.

The hiring manager may determine which level(s) to forward in the
selection process. For example, the hiring manager may determine to
invite all applicants in the substantially desirable pile and the highly
desirable pile to a second round interview.




                                                                                                         9|Page
Oregon State Government
Veterans’ Preference Guide


 HIRE DECISION

At the end of the selection process, after veterans’ preference has been applied and when there are equal candidates
and one is a veterans’ preference candidate, the veteran should be hired. A disabled veteran should be hired over the
veteran candidate when deemed equal.


                                          Veteran            ——
                                         Preference          —
                                         Candidate



                                                Hire Veteran


DOCUMENTING THE SELECTION PROCESS
It is important to document throughout the selection process for a complete and accurate record.

The documentation for the selection of applicants to interview should include:

    ¢   The required and requested skills and attributes used to screen

    *   How it was determined which candidates were interviewed

    ¢   That qualified veterans’ preferences candidates were reviewed for all required and requested skills and
        attributes who were not interviewed

    ¢   Reason(s) why a veterans’ preference candidate was not selected for interview

    ¢   Who was selected for an interview


The documentation for the entire selection process should include:

    ¢   Each evaluation stage

    *   The criteria and method used to evaluate the candidates

    ¢   The outcome of the candidate evaluation at each stage

    ¢   How it was determined which candidates were moved forward at each stage in the selection process

    ¢   That veterans’ preference was applied after each evaluation stage, either in a score or unscored method

    ¢   Who was selected for the position


Ultimately documentation needs to be clear and detailed to provide a veterans’ preference candidate with an
explanation if not selected for an interview or if not hired for the position.



                                                                                                                  10|Page
Oregon State Government
Veterans’ Preference Guide




To ensure documentation is sufficient, ask the following questions:

When selecting candidates for an interview, ask yourself:

    ¢   Wasa   review conducted on each veteran candidate that met MQs and special qualifications for the desired
        attributes?

    ¢   Were only the qualifications, skills, and abilities listed in the job posting used for screening?

    ¢   What qualifications, skills and attributes were not demonstrated that prevented a veterans’ preference
        candidate from being interviewed?



When determining who will be selected for the position, ask yourself:

    e   At each evaluation stage, was veterans’ preference given?

    ¢   At the final selection decision, after adding preference, how was the veterans’ preference candidate ranked
        compared to non-veteran candidates?

    *   Can the hiring decision be articulated and verified through evaluation forms and interview notes used
        throughout the selection process?

    ¢   Are the evaluation forms and interview notes easily accessible by the manager and the recruiter?




                                                                                                                  11|Page
Oregon State Government
Veterans’ Preference Guide


VETERANS’ APPEAL RIGHTS

Veterans’ preference candidates not appointed to a position may request an explanation. The hiring manager should
partner with human    resources when responding to a request for explanation.

The veteran candidate must request an explanation in writing. The response to the veteran must be in writing and
provide the reasons for not hiring the veterans’ preference candidate.

Good documentation throughout the selection process will ensure the response to the request will demonstrate
veterans’ preference was applied appropriately and the decision to not hire the veterans’ preference candidate was
based on the veteran’s skills and attributes with respect to the qualifications of the position.

Note: It is important to know a veteran may also file   a BOLI complaint or lawsuit in court within one year of an
alleged violation of ORS 408.230 (Veterans’ preference in public employment) or ORS 408.237 (Interviews of veteran
applicants for public service positions required; exception.)




                                                                                                                     12|Page
Oregon State Government
Veterans’ Preference Guide


RESOURCES

    ®   40.055.04 Candidate Preference in Employment

    ¢   ORS 408.225 to 408.237

    e   BOLI’s Veterans’ Preference Guidance

    ¢   OAR 105-040-0015

    e   Evaluation Tools

    e   Need help: CHRO.Policy@oregon.gov




                                                       13 |Page
