OREGON PUBLIC DEFENSE
SERVICES COMMISSION
REFERENCE DOCUMENT
82™ Legislative Assembly
Joint Ways and Means Subcommittee on Public Safety
Contents
    AGENCY OVERVIEW, ...........ccccccceceecceeeeneeeeeaneeeesenseneeaesenseenseneonesaees 3
       Mission, ViSION, ANG AUthOFity ...........cccccesscessseeseeecseeesseeceeecseeeceeeeseeeceeecseeesseesseeesseesaaeeesensseeesseeesaeessas 3
       Historical COMtCXt.........ccccssssscessssecseecssssseesseeseesseseseeseecsuecaessaessasssessseseaesanesanesuessaessaesaesseseaesanessntsneeaes 4
      FANG{=1010\)Ai = 100
                         (0 [-] een cere                                                                                                                       9

    AGENCY ORGANIZATION .....0.....cccccsccceecseeeneeeeeenscneceeeeneeeesenecneees 10

    AGENCY               PROGRAMG.............ccccsccesceeeeeeeeseeeneeeeeeeseneeaesoneeeeseneoneees 11
      Trial Criminal DiviSiOn...........ccscccscssssscsssecssecssesseessesseessnecesseeeseessessaeseaeseneseassaessaeseeasanessnesaessaeesaesanesas 11
       JUVENIIES DIVISION...........cccccescccsseceseeceeeeceeecsaeeceecseeecaeecsaeecsaeseaeecaeseaeecsaesaaeeseaescaeeeseeseaeessaessaeesseessaneeaas 15
      PAN 6) 62) | (clic BVA)(0) ee                                                                                                                     21
       Case Support Services (f/k/a Non-Routine ExXP@nSes)..........:ccsccsssesssssssssessseseesseesseesnssnsssnssneesaes 27
       Court Mandated Expenses ..........:cccsccsccsssessessecsecsaeseeessessnsssnecsesseesseeesessaessaesanesenesaessaeseessanseaneenesaaes 30
       Policy, Planning, and Administrative DIVISIONS ............:ccccccsscescecsseecseecseeeceeeeseeeceeeesaeeceetseeeseesaees 32


    AGENCY               INITIATIVES AND INVESTMENTS. ..................:ccesseeeeees 35
       AGO NCY INITIATIVES ooo. eee eee eee eee eee eeeetee eee eeeeeetae tees eeatae teas eaeesaeesaessee seas eaeseaeeaaegaeesaeesaesaesnaeseeeaeeeaeseeeas 35
       Proposed Investments and Policy PACk@QeS...........cceecceceeeceeeeceeceseceeeeeeeeeeceeeeeeaeeeaeeeaeeeeeeeeeaeeaee 37

    AGENCY               BUDGET                 ENVIRONMENT ..................ccccceeeseeeneeeeeeneeneees 45
       Budget Challenges and RISKS ..........:cccceccessecesseceeeeeeeeeeaeeeceeeaeeeeeaesaeeeesaeesaecaesaeeeeseessaesaeeaesneseaeeateaees 45
       The Covid-19 Impact ON Public DefENSE............cecccesececsseessecseesseeseseneceneseeesseseeesenssenesaessaeesaesanesss 46
       Pending LEGiSlAtiOn ..........cceeeceeceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee
                                                   eae eeaeeaeeeaeeaeeeaeeeaeesae seas eaeesaeesaesaeeeaesecaesaeseaeeneeseeeeeeneee 46
       Information Technology Projects — Current and UPCOMING ...........:ceccesceteeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaeeaeeaees 47
       Recent Audit FIndindS ...........cecccsccesceeseeeceeeeeeeeceeeceeeeaeeeaeeseeeaeesaeseee
                                                                                  seas saaeeaeesaeseeeaeeeaeeeaeeeaeenesseeeeeeneee 47

    SUPPLEMENTAL                            BUDGET                 INFORMATION ...............::cccseeeeeeeeeees 48
       Other Funds Revenues and Ending Balances ............:ccccccccecceceseeceeeeeeeeeeeeeaeeaeeeaeeeesaeeeeseeneesneaeeaes 48
       Fifteen Percent REGUCtION OPTIONS ............ccccescssesseesseeesesseecseeseecenecaeesseesenseecuesaesenessnesaesseesenesaness 49
       Long-Term Vacancy Information ...........:cccccccsececeeeceeeeeceeceeeeeeeeeeaecaeeeeseeeaesaesaeeeeseeesaesaeeaesneseaneaseaees 56
Agency Overview
The Public Defense Services Commission (“PDSC” or “the commission”) is responsible
for establishing and maintaining a public defense system that ensures the provision
of public defense services in the most cost-efficient manner, consistent with the
Oregon Constitution and the United States Constitution, as well as state and national
standards of justice. The commission is an independent body governing the Office of
Public Defense Services, as the administrative agency. The Chief Justice of the Oregon
Supreme Court appoints members to the commission. With the recent passage of
House Bill 2003 (2021), membership of the commission was expanded from seven to
nine members who demonstrate a record of supporting public defense. The PDSC
appoints the executive director for the Office of Public Defense Services (“OPDS” or
“the agency’).

The 2021-23 legislatively adopted budget included an agency reorganization to
orovide better transparency, program management, and oversight. Previously, the
commission had three divisions: the Appellate Division, the Contract and Business
Services Division, and the Professional Services Account. The recommended budget
maintains but reorganizes the Appellate Division, and structures the agency into
seven additional divisions to make service delivery and budget authority more visible.
The new divisions include the Executive Division, the Compliance, Audit, and
Performance     Division, the Trial Criminal  Division, Non-routine   Expenses, Court
Mandated Expenses, the Juvenile Division, and the Administrative Services Division.
The 81st Legislative Assembly added a new division in the even-year session, the
Special Program, Contracts, and Distributions Division, which currently serves the Civil
Protective Proceedings section.


Mission, Vision, and Authority
Mission Statement

The   Public Defense Services Commission's       mission   is to ensure that eligible
individuals have timely access to legal services consistent with Oregon and national
standards of justice. The state further mandates the commission to administer “a
oublic defense system that ensures the provision of public defense services in the
most cost-efficient manner consistent with the Oregon Constitution, the United
States Constitution, and Oregon and national standards of justice.” ORS 151.216.

Statutory Authority

The commission’s and agency's statutory authority is found at chapter         151   of the
Oregon Revised Statutes and chapter 400 of Oregon Laws 2021.
Historical Context

The Public Defense Service Commission was created by Senate Bill 145 (2001)
following recommendations       by House    Bill 5598 (1999).   The agency's primary
obligation is to ensure financially eligible individuals receive access to competent
counsel (public defense services) for eligible cases in Oregon's trial and appellate
courts.   The PDSC carries out its statutory mandate through the Office of Public
Defense Services.     In chapter 151 of the Oregon       Revised Statutes, the lawful
governance provisions of the PDSC, had remained largely intact since its inception
until the passage of House Bill 2003 in mid-2021.

That measure made several substantive changes to ORS Chapter 15] as a roadmap for
modernizing the state’s public defense system. Those amendments did not change
the relationship between the PDSC and OPDS.       Rather, the amendments modified
the membership and composition of the PDSC, and they provided specific direction
to the PDSC on the types of polices it needs to adopt to modernize trial-level public
defense services. Those policy areas include:

»   Public defense contracting systems;
»   Public defense compensation and resources;
»   Data collection;
»   Training; and
»   Equity and inclusion.

The policy areas listed above are the focus of the Commission and OPDS as it
navigates new challenges during the 2021-23 biennium and works to transform itself
into a higher functioning state agency; all while continuously improving the delivery
of public defense services.

Public Defense Contracting Systems

Due to the criticisms of the former case-credit contracting model, and arguably the
existence of constitutional problems, the PDSC directed OPDS to develop a new
contracting model. That new model was implemented on January 1, 2021. It is a full-
time equivalent (“FTE”)/Caseload contract model. Rather than paying entities to cover
an unlimited number of cases with a fixed fee per case, the agency is now funding
entities based upon the number of FTE attorneys under contract to cover a projected
caseload.

It is important to note that PDSC/OPDS does not provide direct criminal trial services
to clients. Client representation is provided by the “provider community” in one of
several forms depending on the case, client and geographic location. PDSC/OPDS
contracts with the provider community and relies on the non-profit public defense
provider, consortia providers and/or direct sole attorney providers to determine the
best representation necessary to fulfill the state’s constitutional requirements under
the U.S. and Oregon constitutions.

The provider community    is the employer for public defense attorneys and, as such, is
responsible for adherence to employment laws including laws related to leaves and
compensation. Some recently passed and implemented requirements for employers
have substantially increased the cost to the non-profit organizations, and thus
increased funding pressures on the PDSC. The contracted non-profit public defender
offices are often represented       union shops with their own internal bargaining
agreements as well. PDSC/OPDS supplies the primary source of funds to provider
entities so they can carry out their contractual obligations.

The number of attorneys in this contracting model is determined by dividing the
state’s projected total caseload need by the PDSC’s caseload standard policies, with
the result being the number of attorneys the agency needs to fund under contract.

HB 2003 requires the PDSC’s contracting system to be transparent and to include
stakeholder engagement.        To that end, OPDS spells out in detail the amount of
funding available per contracted provider, as well as the specific financial amount for
administrative costs. It’s also a requirement that all provider entity working pursuant
to the contract have an opportunity to review the contract before it takes effect, so
that the providers have transparent information on the amount of funding in the
contract.

Additionally, in 2021, OPDS created the Contracts Enhancement Workgroup as a
means to engage stakeholders on ways to improve the contracting model. The group
made     recommendations on caseload standards and weighting, data/reporting
requirements, pay differentials, support staff ratios, and administrative costs, amongst
other things. These recommendations have not yet been implemented but are under
consideration for new contracts, which will take effect July 1, 2022.

Provider Compensation and Resources

Public defense compensation and resources is one of the biggest challenges facing
the agency.    The American Bar Association and Moss Adams report revealed the
significant death in attorney resources to address the number of clients in need of
oublic defense services. And the agency's inability to ensure adequate compensation
for public defense attorneys has inhibited attorney recruitment and develop a
necessary workforce for the future.

The agency needs to engage in significant work to develop attorney caseload and
workload models that include price points for attorney compensation, support staff
compensation, support staff ratios, administrative costs, as well as all overhead costs
such as rent, utilities, IT, bar dues, continuing education costs, etc.    Because the
agency relied upon the case credit model since 1983, none of this work has been done
orior to 2020, when the agency began developing the FTE contract model.

There has been some recent work toward the goals of HB 2003.          As previously
mentioned, the Contracts Enhancement Workgroup began exploring workloads,
staffing ratios, and other administrative costs.  And the ABA has published its
recommended caseload standards. But it will take time for the agency to build out
new models, in both structure and budget, to meet the obligations of HB 2003.
One important note here — there are structural issues regarding compensation. To
the extent the PDSC relies exclusively upon independent contractors, the PDSC is
legally prohibited from directing entities on how they distribute their funds or
compensate individual employees of the provider. The agency can be transparent
about how much funding Is in the contract, but it cannot direct an independent
contractor on how to compensate its members or employees. Recent changes to the
contract structure, implemented on July 1, 2022, provide a structured tiering of
compensation by attorney qualification level.      Stated differently. if the provider
employs felony-qualified or murder-qualified staff, OPDS will pay a larger amount for
a full caseload than for misdemeanor caseloads. This recognizes that not all attorneys
have equal standing in the court system and that felony cases carry more value and
effort to handle.

Other Persistent Challenges

The commission also contends with other systemic and tangential hurdles in a robust
oublic defense system. While those hurdles may seem administrative in nature, long-
term strategic planning will be reactive in nature. Articulating answers and planning
for those hurdles now will be a significant advantage as the Legislative Assembly
makes investments in the commission's delivery model.

Data Collection

The agency has not historically gathered helpful data to ensure contract compliance,
monitor system performance, or make financial asks to ensure the agency receives
adequate funding.    For instance, the number of hours necessary for a provider to
defend the “average” felony case is Unknown because time spent on a case is not
methodically collected. This fundamental,  yet critical, tyoe of data collection prevents
accurate measures of historic and existing caseloads; elements that make measuring
contemporary problems like case backlog difficult to argue and defend. The lack of
robust data was highlighted in both the Sixth Amendment Center’s and the ABA's
reports on public defense in Oregon and is a problem that pre-dates the COVID-19
pandemic.

The new FTE contracting model provides more information than before on individual
attorney   caseloads   and  compensation.       But   the agency    needs   significant
improvements to data capacity in a host of areas, ranging from attorney qualifications,
case assignments, caseloads, and work completed in public defense cases, to budget
tracking and auditing. OPDS currently lacks software programs that would allow for
the meaningful collection of much of this data, and the agency will continue to work
with LFO on acquiring such programs.       A robust IT project was contemplated in
orevious biennium     but was subsequently put on hold until the Agency can
demonstrate credibility to manage such a project and develop a comprehensive and
sustainable restructure plan.
Training

The PDSC has a constitutional responsibility to ensure eligible individuals have timely
access to competent counsel. Yet, the PDSC lacks a statewide training program for
attorneys focused on public defense, nor is it funded to provide such robust training.
Some of the training can be provided by the PDSC/OPDS, but other types of training
critical to public defense is within the realm of other state agencies.    For instance,
investigations is a critical and required element of every felony case.

Additionally, PDSC is not the direct service provider for client representation. Thus,
individual employers are best suited to provide for direct training and/or request
develooment of training programs from which they can send employees. It is
incumbent on the Agency to assist and develop training programs that will benefit
the contracted providers and ultimately provide benefit to the represented clients.

Some public defense entities do provide training, but many do not.        Most public
defense attorneys receive continuing legal education (“CLE”), primarily through the
Oregon Criminal Defense Lawyer’s Association and the Oregon State Bar. But these
CLEs do not always provide the foundation for a career in public defense work, nor do
they aid in workforce develooment in a post-COVID economy.

HB 5030 (2021) authorized positions for a newly created Compliance, Audit, and
Performance Division, which will include a Criminal Trial Chief, and Juvenile Trial Chief,
with several deputies assigned to each. The agency is currently in the process of filling
these roles, and this Division will assume the agency's role of developing training
programs.

Equity and Inclusion

HB 2003 directs the agency to “establish operational and contracting systems that
allow for oversight, ensure transparency and stakeholder engagement and promote
equity, inclusion, and culturally specific representation.” Since then, OPDS created an
intra-agency Equity Workgroup composed of a cross-divisional representation of
agency staff. The workgroup is charged with creating an equity framework, which
requires the agency to align on its commitment to equity, core concepts, values, and
approach for future actions.

The equity framework will helo inform the Commission's strategic planning process,
which will further define how the agency and commission will operationalize that
commitment internally and in its external-facing policies and practices, including
contracting. It also brings the agency and commission into alignment with the State
of Oregon Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion Action Plan, released September 2021.

The PDSC and OPDS present unique, but not unusual problems and issues.         As
expected, there are communication problems and a complete restructuring of the
staff, budget and accounting.  There is a maturation process the agency is going
through as program staff are oriented into new policies and procedures that have
been proved and adopted throughout state government. This maturation process is
not unlike what many other state agencies have gone through over the past twenty
to thirty years.   The Commission and OPDS staff are dedicated to the continual
improvement and sustainability of the public defense profession for the benefit of
clients and all Oregonians.
Agency         Budget

                                                     Fund         Amount     Positions          FTE

                                                     General   438,160,372
2021 — 2023 Legislatively Approved Budget                                          114       107.81
                                                     Other      18,449,667

                                                     General   482,829,421
2023 — 2025 Current Service Level
(inclusive of packages 080 and 090)                                                106       105.80
                                                     Other      17,937,116

101: Provider Compensation                           General    40,120,612           0          0.00

102: Provider Comp. Staffing Expansion               General   152,028,480           0          0.00

103: Parent-Child Representation Program Expansion   General    10,187,974           2          1.01


104: Program Design and Delivery                     General     3,180,816          17       = 11.80

105: Financial Case Management System                General     7,864,650           5          4.76

107: Oregon Judicial Department ETS Services         General       929,720           0          0.00

108: Limited Duration Positions to Perm. Positions   General     2,343,092           8          8.00

109: Case Support Services Position                  General       235,394               1      1.00

112: Mandated Caseload for Juv. Representation       General     2,/05,261           0          0.00

114: Hourly Attorney Rate to Federal Parity          General    31,154,086               1      0.88

115: Unrepresented Persons Crisis                    General    33,505,182           0          0.00

                                                     General   767,084,238
2023 — 2025 Commission Funding Request                                             140       133.25
                                                     Other      17,937,116
Agency Organization




                                                       leeouet Organtcation|




                                                                                                                          Special
            Compliance,                                                         Court     J      il   Administrative     Program,
Executive    Audit, and   Appellate   Trial Criminal                           Mandated   Divic nie      Services      Contracts, and
 Division   Performance    Division      Division                              Expenses     Ivision      Division       Distributions
              Division
Agency          Programs

The commission       boasts three administrative   divisions—namely, the Executive
Division; the Compliance, Audit, and Performance Division; and the Administrative
Services Division—as well as four programmatic divisions that either provide (1) direct
legal representation in criminal appeals, (2) funding for trial-level public defense
oroviders, or (3) reimbursement to defray the expenses of third-party providers used
in the vigorous defense of criminally charged persons.


Trial Criminal     Division

The Trial Criminal Division, a discretely reported program within OPDS, is responsible
for delivering quality and efficient public defense services statewide by contracting
with various entities including public defender offices, consortia, firms, non-profit
organizations,    and  individuals. The    Trial Criminal   Division is critical to the
develooment,     implementation,     and   monitoring   of the contracts for attorney
compliance and performance.

As set forth under ORS 151.216, as amended by HB 2003, PDSC is directed to ensure
that financially eligible individuals receive competent court-appointed counsel for
eligible cases in Oregon’‘s trial and appellate courts. PDSC carries out its statutory
mandate through the Office of Public Defense Services (OPDS). The Trial Criminal
Division within OPDS Is responsible for providing public defense services in adult
criminal trial and appellate matters, including post-judgment eligible cases such as
post-conviction relief and habeas petitions, as well as civil commitment and other
mental health cases, in the most efficient manner consistent with the state and
federal constitutional mandates and national standards of justice.

Program Overview

During the 2021 session, the Oregon Legislature passed HB 5030, which established
the Public Defense Services Commission (PDSC) budget for the 2021-2023 biennium.
HB 5030 contained a provision that held back $100 million of General Fund and placed
it in a special purpose appropriation (SPA), appropriated to the Emergency Board for
PDSC. In June 2022, the Emergency Board released the SPA, and the budget request
includes a proportionate amount for Trial Criminal Division which was $70,250,989 for
the 2021-23 biennium.

The agency was also directed to move juvenile representation (delinquency and
dependency) expenses into the Juvenile Division. About 18 percent of trial level
representation costs (in counties not under the Parent Child Representation Program
which was already in the Juvenile Division) were in contracts budgeted in the Trial
Criminal Division. Accordingly, the current service level funding request for the Trial
Criminal Division was reduced by $34,969,383 and is now requested in the Juvenile
Division. In addition, a proportional share of the SPA (12,645,177) was not included In
the package O81 (E-Board actions) for Trial Criminal Division but Is instead                    requested
in the Juvenile Division in the Agency Request Budget.

Currently, OPDS delivers public defense services by contracting with various provider
types, Including public defender offices, consortia, law firms, non-profit organizations,
and individual attorneys. In January 2021, OPDS implemented a contract model based
upon Fulltime Equivalent (FTE — now referred to as Maximum Attorney Caseload or
MAC) attorneys as opposed to the previous case credit model. In July 2022, contracts
were converted to a fiscal year basis and the agency executed more than 100
contracts. Contracts for representation in adult criminal cases are reflected in the Trial
Criminal Division budget. Contracts for representation in juvenile dependency and
delinquency cases, as well as appellate level cases are represented in the Juvenile and
Appellate Division budgets, respectively.

Under the FTE/MAC model, additional non-contract attorneys are funded to represent
eligible clients who cannot be represented by contractors due to a conflict of interest,
or the contract entity is at capacity or does not have an attorney qualified to handle
the case. The non-contract attorneys are compensated at an hourly rate of $75.00 -
$105.00 per hour based on the case type. In July 2022, the PDSC authorized
compensation up to $158 per hour for attorneys not Under contract for representing
                                                                    clients that are in
                                                                    custody    and    for
                                                                    whom a contract
  100,000                                                           attorney has not
                                                                     been identified. In
  80,000                                                                         August 2022, the
                                                                                 PDSC           expanded
  60,000                                                                         the      $158         hourly
  40.000                                                                         Rate Program to
                                                                                 include providers
  20,000                                                                         contracting _ for
                                                                                 less    than   1.0
                                                                                 FTE/MAC.                This
                 Vn         nd       Ko           DD    PD   gd              f   program          sunsets
                                                                  WV   ob   VY
           Sr        gr gr         HK             MMH        Mw    ggg           on    December
                                                                                              3],
                                                                                 2022.

Figure 1: Criminal Trial   Cases by Fiscal Year                                  On      July     1,    2022,
                                                                 OPDS_   executed
more than 100 contracts with various contract entities.  Based on Oregon Judicial
Department (OJD) and OPDS data regarding current and past caseload trends, OPDS
orojected a slight increase in FTE amount from the previous contract period. In
consultation with the provider community, OPDS made notable changes to the
contracts, providing greater transparency and uniformity to the contract terms,
reducing caseload numbers and assigning a salary reimbursement scale tied to
attorney qualification for case types. Under the 2022-2023 contract terms, OPDS
adopted a salary reimbursement scale for a 1.0 FTE/MAC contract attorney ranging
from 195,850.00 (entry level attorney) to 226,450.00 (murder qualified attorney).
Contract attorneys will prioritize court-appointments for the most serious case type
the attorney is qualified to accept. The non-contract hourly attorney will continue to
be compensated at the rate of $75.00 - $105.00 per hour depending on the case type,
with the exception of the unrepresented clients.

Program Justification           and Performance

According to the Oregon Project: An Analysis of the Oregon Public Defense System
and Attorney Workloads Standards (Jan. 2022), prepared by the American Bar
Association Standing Committee on Legal Aid and Indigent Defense, based on
current caseloads and projected FTE, OPDS has a substantial deficiency in public
defense attorney FTE.       PDSC/OPDS     acknowledges that reducing and limiting
caseloads/workloads is critical to the public defense system and to providing quality
representation to clients. As such, PDSC/OPDS will continue to evaluate its public
defense service model, and to advocate for fair compensation and reasonable
caseloads/workloads. During the next contract period, PDSC/OPDS may determine
that the effective use of taxpayer monies is better used to adopt a statewide public
defender      system,    or
alternatively,        a      system      95 900
that makes efficient use
of both private and public               20,000
defenders. At the same
time, the Criminal      and
       .      ;     Loe                  15,000
Juvenile   Trial  Divisions
will  be  responsible    for
monitoring the caseload                  10,000
and workloads of contract
attorneys      to    ensure      the    — °%000
effective      assistance          of
counsel     to clients in adult
criminal       and          juvenile               2018    2019   2020    2021   2022*   2023*   2024*   2025*
dependency            and      other
delinquency matters.
The   Oregon        Legislature         Figure 2: Felony Cases by Fiscal Year

created PDSC in 2001,
and the agency assumed responsibility for public defense services in 2003. The
governing statutes are contained in Oregon Revised Statutes, Chapter 151.

The performance of legal representation is currently limited to compliance with the
PDSC Qualification Standards for Court-Appointed Counsel and by the Oregon State
Bar's Performance Standards for Criminal and Delinquency Cases.

Pursuant to ORS 151.216, PDSC is directed to adopt policies, procedures, standards and
guidelines regarding various aspects of providing the right to counsel, including the
orofessional qualifications for counsel. Under this new mandate, OPDS will develop
policies and procedures to supervise and systemically review defense counsel
performance for quality and efficiency and monitor counsel's ability, training and
experience to match the complexity of the case.

Commission Funding Request

                                           Fund         Amount     Positions   FTE

2021-2023        —Legislatively
                Approved Budget
                                           General   199,267,268           0   0.00

2023 — 2025     Base Budget                General   199,267,268           0   0.00


2023 — 2025     Current Service Level      General   180,964,555           0   0.00


 080            Emergency
                Packages
                          Board            General    56,061,890           0   0.00

 101            Provider Compensation      General    33,813,631           0   0.00


 102            Provider Compensation
                Staffing Expansion
                                        = General    114,397,713           0   0.00

 104            Program Design and
                Delivery
                                           General       518,037           3   2.26

2023-2025       Commission
                Funding Request
                                           General   385,755,826           3   2.26
Juvenile     Division

The Juvenile Division provides for trial-level representation of financially eligible
parents, children, and youth in juvenile dependency, termination-of-parental-rights,
juvenile delinquency, and contested adoption cases.      The Juvenile Division also
provides guardians ad litem for parents whose rights the juvenile court determines
need protection because they have a mental or physical disability that prevents them
from understanding and/or assisting counsel in a dependency or termination-of-
oarental-rights case.

During the 2021 session, the Oregon Legislature passed HB 5030, which established
the Public Defense Services Commission (PDSC) budget for the 2021-2023 biennium.
HB 5030 contained a provision that held back $100 million of General Fund and placed
it in a special purpose appropriation (SPA), appropriated to the Emergency Board for
PDSC. In June 2022, the Emergency Board released the SPA, and the budget request
includes a proportionate amount for Juvenile Division which was $10,192,365 for the
2021-23 biennium.

OPDS     was   also directed    to move juvenile     representation    (delinquency     and
dependency) expenses into the Juvenile Division. About 18 percent of trial level
representation (in counties not under the Parent Child Representation Program
which was already in the Juvenile Division) costs were in contracts budgeted in the
Trial Criminal Division. Accordingly, the current service level funding request for the
Trial Criminal Division was reduced by $34,969,383 and is now requested in the
Juvenile Division. In addition, a proportional share of the SPA (12,645,177) is included in
the budget request through package O81 (E-Board actions) for Juvenile Division and
transferred out of the Trial Criminal Division.

Program Overview

In Oregon, financially eligible parents are entitled have counsel appointed in juvenile
dependency proceedings when the nature of the proceedings and due process so
require, and financially eligible children are generally entitled to counsel in those
proceedings. The general practice of Juvenile courts is to appoint counsel for both
parents and children.     A financially eligible parent contesting an adoption is also
entitled to court-appointed counsel at state expense. Similarly, youth in delinquency
cases are entitled to court-appointed counsel at state expense, with no financial
eligibility requirement. Finally, Oregon's juvenile code authorizes the Juvenile court to
appoint a guardian ad litem, who must either be an attorney or licensed mental health
orofessional, for a parent whose rights the juvenile court determines need protection
because they have a mental           or physical disability that prevents them      from
Understanding      the  nature   of the   proceeding    and/or  assisting counsel    in a
dependency or termination-of-parental-rights case.

The PDSC Is responsible for compensating those attorneys appointed as counsel in
juvenile court proceedings and contested adoption proceedings and attorneys and
licensed mental health professionals appointed to serve as guardians ad litem for
parents in dependency and termination-of-parental-rights proceedings. The PDSC
satisfies that responsibility primarily by contracting with non-profit public defender
offices, consortia, law firms, and solo practitioners to provide for court-appointed
counsel in avariety of case types. Funding for those independent contractor attorneys
who serve as court-appointed counsel or as guardians ad litem in juvenile court cases
comes through OPDS's Juvenile Division, including through OPDS's Parent Child
Representation Program (PCRP).         The PCRP is an interdisciplinary model of legal
representation, and its fundamental components are (1) reasonable caseloads and
compensation for attorneys; (2) access to social work case managers to serve as part
of the legal team; and (3) enhanced support and oversight by OPDS.               These
components help ensure that attorneys have adequate time and resources to spend
on their clients and cases and that clients’ needs are served both in and out of court.
The PCRP has been implemented in ten counties: Benton (2020), Clatsop (2020),
Columbia (2016), Coos (2018), Douglas (2020), Lincoln (2018), Linn (2014), Multnomah
(2020), Polk (2020), and Yamhill (2014).

OPDS's ability to provide competent, zealous legal representation for indigent
parents, children, and youth in juvenile court proceedings is inhibited by the
independent contractor model currently employed to provide that representation. As
with any independent contractor relationship, OPDS cannot direct the work of
attorneys    providing  legal  representation   and   has   limited  ability to ensure
transparency and accountability in the provision of public defense services. Moving
to a model in which at least some of the legal representation for parents, children, and
youth involved in juvenile court proceedings is provided by OPDS employees subject
to OPDS's direct supervision would likely lead to improvements In representation in
juvenile court proceedings and increased transparency and accountability.

Program Justification and Performance

The United States Supreme Court has held that parents have a fundamental liberty
interest in the “care, custody, and management of their children” that is protected by
the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States
Constitution. Santosky v. Kramer, 455 US 745, '753-54 (1982). The Supreme Court has
further held that due process does not require the appointment of counsel for every
parent subject to a petition to terminate their parental rights but instead left “the
decision whether due process calls for the appointment of counsel for indigent
parents in termination proceedings to be answered in the first instance by the trial
court, subject, of course, to appellate review.” Lassiter v. Dept. of Social Services, 452
US 18, 31-32 (1981). And, although the United States Supreme Court has not addressed
whether children have a similar right to counsel in juvenile dependency proceedings,
the United States Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals has held that children have a
“constitutional interest in familial companionship and society” similar to that of
parents. Smith v. City of Fontana, 818 F2d 1411, 1418 (9th Cir 19877), overruled on other
grounds by Hodgers-Durgin v. de la Vina, 199 F3d 1037 (9th Cir 1999). Oregon’s statutes
require the appointment of counsel generally for financially eligible children and for
financially eligible parents when the nature of the proceedings and due process so
require. The general practice of juvenile courts is to appoint counsel for both parents
and children.
Like many states, Oregon has long sought to reduce the number of children who
enter foster care, to reduce the amount of time a child who enters foster care remains
in the state’s care, and to achieve permanency for children in as timely a fashion as
possible. Research has demonstrated that providing legal representation for parents
and children facing potential or actual juvenile court proceedings reduces entry into
the foster care system and the amount of time children remain in foster care. The
Justice in Government Project, Key Studies ad Data About How Legal Aid Helos Keep
Family Together and Out of the Child Welfare System (Mar 23, 2021), available at
https://legalaidresourcesdotorg.files.wordpress.com/2021/04/foster -care.pdf#

The Children’s Bureau, part of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, has
recognized the importance of high-quality legal representation in helping ensure a
well-functioning child welfare system. Given the profound decisions juvenile courts
must make regarding a family, It is critical that courts receive the most accurate and
complete information necessary for judicial decision-making and that the parties’
rights are protected, which is best achieved when all parties to a juvenile dependency
case are represented.      Moreover, evidence suggests that providing counsel for
parents, children, and youth contributes to or is associated with:

»   Increase perceptions of fairness;
»   increased engagement in case planning, services and court hearings;
»   more personally tailored and specific case plans and services;
»   increased visitation and parenting time;
»   expedited permanency; and
=   cost savings to state government due to reductions of time children        and youth
    spend In care.

Children’s Bureau, Administration for Children & Families, High Quality Legal
Representation    for All  Parties     in Child    Welfare    Proceedings    (Information
Memorandum),           1-2        (Jan         17,       2017),        available        at
https://www.acf.hhs.gov/sites/default/files/documents/cb/im1702.pdf.

Legal Representation in Juvenile Delinquency Cases

The United States Supreme Court held in /n Re Gault, 387 U.S. 1 (1967) that children
have a constitutional right to counsel when they are subject to a juvenile delinquency
petition. Oregon statutes codify this right and require that the court must appoint
counsel to represent a youth at all stages of a proceeding where the offense alleged
in the petition is classified as a crime; at any proceeding concerning an order or
probation; and in any case where the youth would be entitled to appointed counsel If
the youth was an adult charged with the same offense. Statutes further allow the
court to appoint counsel in any other proceeding within the jurisdiction of the juvenile
court. Finally, statutes prohibit the court from accepting a waiver of counsel from a
youth except in very limited and narrow circumstances.

Access to counsel is essential to due process. Treating youth fairly and ensuring that
they perceive that they have been treated fairly and with dignity contribute to the
positive outcomes in the normal process of social learning, moral development, and
legal socialization during adolescence. Research indicates that when adolescents feel
that the system has treated them fairly, they are more likely to accept responsibility
for their actions and embrace prosocial activities. Fairness in a legal proceeding is
evaluated by opportunity for voice, validation, participation, choice, accuracy of
outcomes and access to information. Meaningful participation in the legal process not
only allows the adolescent to feel like a valued member of society whose opinion is
worthy of consideration, but also allows him or her to influence the judge's final
decision and provides more confidence in the accuracy and legitimacy of the
outcomes.     Access   to competent,    well-trained, and   effective  counsel  allows
adolescents alleged to have committed a delinquent act these opportunities

National   Academy    of   Sciences,   Reforming   Juvenile   Justice:   A   Developmental
Approach, (2013), available at httpo://www.nap.edu/catalog.ohp?record_id=14685.

Attorneys defending youth in delinquency proceedings require additional knowledge
beyond that needed to represent adults charged with crimes, such as knowledge of
the science of adolescent develooment, collateral consequences of juvenile court
proceedings, and other child-specific systems, such as schools, that may impact or be
affected by delinquency proceedings. The National Juvenile Defender Center (NJIDC)
studied Oregon's access to and quality of juvenile defense in 2020.      NJIDC found,
among other things, that Oregon's system does not have the structure to provide
oversight or enforcement to ensure quality representation for youth, has a pay
structure and contracting system that does not support defenders specializing in a
delinguency caseload, and      has no comprehensive      guidance for procedure in
delinquency cases increasing the risk of inequity. Further, it found that justice and
fairness is often dependent on what jurisdiction and even what courtroom acase ends
up In.

National Juvenile Defender Center, Advancing Youth            Justice,   An Assessment       of
Access to and Quality of Juvenile Defense in Oregon           (August    2020), available   at:
https://njdc.info/wp-content/uploads/Oregon-Assessment-Web.pdf.

Program Performance

The Oregon Legislature created PDSC in 2001, and the agency assumed responsibility
for public defense services in 2003. The governing statutes are contained in Oregon
Revised Statutes, Chapter 151.

The chart on the following page shows the total number of non-PCRP Juvenile cases
reported by OPDS contracted attorneys each year through Fiscal Year 2021, and the
orojected cases for fiscal years 2022 through 2025.
The pandemic resulted in court operations slowing substantially in 2020 and reduced
some types of cases. Case numbers for non-PCRP cases have also been reduced by
the rollout of PCRP, which rolled out in Multnomah County in July 2020 and four more
                                                                    counties           in
  14,000                                                            January       2021.
  12,000                                                            Other  changes    in
                                                                    Oregon         law,
  10,000                                                            including    Ballot
   8,000                                                            Measure          110
                                                                    passed    in 2020,
  6,000                                                                                                have also reduced
                                                                                                       case numbers.
  4,000

  2,000
      [o)




            SHLL              LLL     HH HMM PD ODMe
               \  VY    nom   rw   MO   0
                              OND OND RS NPNKW   1D   1D     D   oO      GF
                                                                              aPP   FS~)wy
                                                                                                  of
                                                                                              )
                                                                                             a)



  m Delinquency        mDependency      Termination of Parental Rights


Figure 3: Juvenile (non-PCRP) Cases by Fiscal Year
Commission Funding Request

                                          Fund         Amount     Positions       FTE

                                          General    30,772,928
               Legislatively
2021 — 2023    Approved Budget                                            0       0.00
                                          Other      14,000,000


                                          General    30,989,734
2023 — 2025     Base Budget                                               0       0.00
                                          Other      14,000,000


                                          General    68,682,556
2023 — 2025    Current Service Level                                          1   1.00
                                          Other      14,000,000


080             Emergency
                Packages
                          Board           General    24,847,247           0       0.00

 101            Provider Compensation     General     6,306,981           0       0.00


                Provider Compensation
 102           Staffing Expansion         General    37,630,767           0       0.00


 103            PCRP   Expansion          General     9,896,652           0       0.00


 104            Program Design and
                Delivery
                                          General       291 320           2       1.00

 112            Mandated Caseload for
               Juvenile Caseload
                                        = Ganeral     2,705,261           0       0.00

                                          General   150,360,784
               Commission
2023 — 2025    Funding Request                                            3       2.00
                                          Other      14,000,000
Appellate Division
The    Appellate     Division  provides    constitutionally   and _ statutorily    mandated
representation     to financially   eligible   individuals  in criminal,    parole, juvenile
delinquency, juvenile dependency, and termination of parental rights cases on appeal
or judicial review. We provide this service through direct representation by attorney
orofessionals and legal support staff employed by OPDS in the Criminal Appellate
Section and the Juvenile Appellate Section.

Program Overview

The Appellate Division employs agency personnel, and it is the defense counterpart
to the Appellate Division of the Oregon Department of Justice. The centralization of
court-appointed direct appeals in one office establishes an institutional defense entity
in the appellate court system, promotes the consistent and rational develooment of
law, and facilitates the identification and implementation of system-wide efficiencies.
Examples of the practical impact of the Appellate Division's role in the Oregon
criminal   justice   system    include   spearheading       the  litigation  upholding the
constitutionality of House Bill 3078 (2017), in State v. Vallin, 365 Or 295, 434 P3d 413,
adh'd to as modified on recons, 564 Or 573, 43'7 P3d 231 (2019), and coordinating the
impact on hundreds of cases on direct appeal by the United States Supreme Court's
decision in Ramos v. Louisiana, 140 S Ct 1390, 206 L Ed 2d 583 (2020) (holding that
guilty verdicts for serious crimes must be Unanimous). An example of the practical
impacts of the Appellate Division's litigation on the child welfare system are the
Oregon Supreme Court's opinions in Dept. of Human Services v. P.D., 368 Or 627, 496
P3d 1029 (2021) and Dept. of Human Services v. J.S., 368 Or 516, 495 P3d 1245 (2021),
which clarified under what circumstances and what limitations of authority exist
when a juvenile court takes temporary emergency jurisdiction over children from
another state who are temporarily in Oregon, and in Dept. of Human Services v. T.M.D.,
465 Or 143, 442 P3d 1100 (2019), which held that a juvenile court may not terminate a
child's parent's parental rights unless it is in the child's best interests to do so.

The Appellate Division provides statutorily and constitutionally mandated             legal
representation to financially eligible persons in a wide variety of case types initiated
throughout the state. For example, whenever a state circuit court enters a judgment
of conviction after the criminal prosecution of a defendant, the circuit court must
inform the defendant of their right to appeal from the judgment to the Oregon Court
of Appeals. ORS 13'7.020(5)(a). If the defendant was financially eligible for court-
appointed counsel at trial, trial counsel must ascertain whether the defendant wishes
to pursue an appeal and, if so, must transmit to OPDS the information necessary to
perfect the appeal. ORS 137.020(6). Counsel fails to provide constitutionally adequate
assistance of counsel if they do not initiate an appeal upon the client’s request. Garza
v. Idaho, 139 S Ct ‘738, 203 L Ed 2d ‘77 (2019). Even if the defendant retained counsel at
trial, the state must provide a defendant with appellate representation if the
defendant no longer has funds to employ suitable counsel possessing skills and
experience commensurate with the nature and complexity of the case for the appeal.
ORS 138.500(1). Similar statutes provide for the representation of a person who seeks
judicial review of a final order of the Board of Parole and Post-Prison Supervision and
a parent who wishes to appeal from an appealable order or judgment in a juvenile
dependency or termination of parental rights case. These services are provided
through staff attorneys in the Appellate Division. Representation is primarily in the
Oregon Court of Appeals and the Oregon Supreme Court, although the Division
occasionally appears in the United States Supreme Court. The Appellate Division has
two sections: the Criminal Appellate Section, which represents criminal defendants In
appeals such as described        above, and the Juvenile Appellate Section, which
represents financially eligible parents in appeals from adverse judgments and orders
in juvenile dependency and termination of parental rights proceedings. Each section
is led by a Chief Defender. The sections also serve as a resource for trial-level counsel.

The Appellate Division has 59 employees, and its workload is driven by the number of
criminal cases, parole board decisions, juvenile dependency cases, and termination of
parental rights cases referred for appeal; the factual and legal complexity of the
appealed cases; and statutory changes, ballot initiatives, and United States and
Oregon appellate court decisions. The Division must provide appellate representation
in all cases in which a financially eligible individual requests review of an appealable
judgment or order because the right to appeal is largely unqualified.

Criminal Appellate Section (CAS)

This   section   provides   appellate  representation   to   criminal  defendants     in
misdemeanor and felony appeals (including capital cases), contempt cases, DNA-
testing-related appeals, and appeals by crime victims. The section also represents AIC
(adults in custody) or adults on supervision seeking judicial review of final orders by
the Board of Parole and Post-Prison Supervision. The right to appeal from appealable
judgments or orders is a matter of right and largely unqualified.

Juvenile Appellate Section (JAS)

This section provides appellate representation to parents in juvenile dependency
cases (including jurisdiction and permanency decisions) and termination of parental
rights cases. It occasionally provides appellate representation to parents and youth In
juvenile delinquency cases. The right to appeal from appealable judgments or orders
is a matter of right and largely unqualified.

Attorneys in the Juvenile Appellate Section cannot maintain cases on a backlog
because the cases are expedited; any case referred after the attorney's monthly case
assignment capacity has been met must be sent to a limited pool of qualified outside
oroviders. The pool is limited because the practice is highly specialized. Per biennium,
the section’s case referrals have increased from 500 in the 2011-13 biennium, 556 in
2013-15, 622 in 2015-17, 678 in 2017-19; and 677 in 2019-21. Probably due to the greater
availability of remote appearances in non-criminal matters, and the continued
develooment of the law precipitated by JAS litigation, referrals to the Juvenile
Appellate Section have not decreased during the COVID-19 pandemic. Case referrals
for 2021-23 are projected to again exceed 650.
Program Justification and Performance

The Appellate Division is an essential component to the agency's provision of quality
public defense services throughout the state. Criminal and juvenile justice are
specialized areas of law requiring particular knowledge, experience, and training.
Appellate practice, too, is a specialized area of law subject to numerous procedural
rules    and  substantive   law    not encountered    outside  of an     appellate   case.
Consequently, the division invests substantial time in its initial training of attorneys,
e.g., months under the close direction and supervision of a managing attorney; and at
least six months under the close direction and supervision of a senior deputy attorney.
A newly hired deputy defender may not be promoted to a senior deputy defender for
three to five years, if not longer. Apart from working in the Oregon Department of
Justice or a counterpart appellate agency in another state, there are few places where
an attorney can obtain comparable training to effectively litigate a full caseload of
appeals before the Oregon appellate courts.

Program Performance

Criminal Appellate Section — For case weighting purposes, the section identifies two
orimary case categories: 1) the trial-type case and 2) the plea-type case.

A trial-tyoe case includes jury trials, trials to the   court, conditional pleas, parole
appeals, appeals involving requests for DNA testing,    appeals initiated by the Attorney
General, mandamus actions, and appeals initiated        by crime victims. The transcript
length for trial-type cases may ranges from under 50    pages to several thousand pages.

A plea-type case refers to guilty pleas, no-contest pleas, probation violation hearings,
and re-sentencing proceedings. Transcript length typically ranges from 20 to 80
pages for plea-type cases.

Additionally, it is not uncommon for the section to receive multiple case referrals for a
single client who wants to appeal from several cases of the same type or of different
types. The section counts each case as a separate referral and as a separate case
assignment. After case assignment, those cases are typically consolidated into a single
case on appeal to measure case completion and case workload. In that manner,
approximately 15 percent of cases referred are consolidated into another case on
appeal.
CAS historically receives more than 3,500 case referrals per biennium: 3,600 cases In
the 2011-15 biennium, 3,767 cases in 2015-17; and 3,647 in 2017-19. Circuit court
shutdowns or slowdowns since March 2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic decreased
the number of cases referred in 2019-21 to 2,381]. The section received 1,507 case
referrals in the first year of the 2021-23 biennium. The temporary reduction in case
referrals has allowed the section's attorneys to reduce the historical backlog of cases,
which had many clients waiting more than seven months (210 days) for an attorney to
begin work on their case after the record has been settled. The section anticipates
case referrals will increase to historical levels as circuit courts resume full operation.

           Criminal Appellate Assingments by Month                   Criminal      Appellate        Section
 250                                                                attorneys     are    assigned       a
                                                                    significant number of cases and
 200                                                                complete a significant annual
                                                                    workload.    According     to    the
 150                                                                Institute for Law and Justice,
                                                                    the   annual    appellate     public
 100
                                                                    defender workload ranges from
  50                                                                 25-50      cases     per     attorney.
                                                                            Institute for Law and Justice,
   0                                                                        Compendium of Standards for
     HnnNnvdvouonmrhraAawanaannoeddcdoeae      AaAeNnNnNnNnmannrrtrst wy        .
     g¢d¢ddad dad dag IA a agg ag a qq gq                                   Indigent     Defense    Systems
     POSE       ET   ESSESTIT
     -6sOs zs seep tragqoszZs2eeche2  EO    EU      ESTES      ERTS         (2000).   Indiana   recommends
                                                                            appellate    caseloads   do   not
                     exe Assignments       Projected
                                                                            exceed more than 25 cases per
                                                                            attorney per year for appeals In
trial-tyoe cases, or 50 cases per attorney per year for appeals in plea-type cases.
Indiana Public Defender Commission, Standards for Indigent Defense Services In
Non-Capital Cases, 16 (2016). Texas sets maximum appellate caseloads that vary with
transcript length, but which equal an average of 31.2 cases per attorney per year. Tex
Admin      Code     § 174.21        (2018); Texas           Indigent     Defense     Commission,   Appellate
Addendum:         Guidelines for Indigent Defense Caseloads, 16 (2016). The State of
Washington sets the maximum appellate caseload at 36 cases per attorney per year.
Washington Supreme Court, CrR 3.1 Standards for Indigent Defense, Standard 3.4
(2015).

A non-management Criminal Appellate Section attorney historically is assigned
approximately 55 cases per year and the average annual workload or case completion
of a non-management Criminal Appellate Section attorney is approximately 35 case
per year. During the last two years (during the COVID pandemic), annual case
assignments have been closer to 30 cases per year. CAS has been able to reduce its
backlog from nearly 800 open unbriefed cases in January 2020 to just over 425 cases
as of the end of June 2022.

Juvenile Appellate Section — At the end of the 2007 session, the Legislature funded
the creation the Juvenile Appellate Section in the Appellate Division. The unit is
intended to centralize and enhance appellate representation for parents in juvenile
dependency and termination of parental rights cases, act as a resource to the trial bar,
and promote a more consistent state-wide         application   of the juvenile code through
oublished appellate opinions.

As with their counterparts in the         450
Criminal Appellate Section, Juvenile
                 .                        400
Appellate   Section    attorneys    are
assigned    a    significant    annual    350
workload.    The    average     annual    300
caseload foranon-managementfull-          250
time     Juvenile   Appellate   Section   2
attorney    is  currently    41  case
                                          150
assignments    per   year. It is not
                                          100
uncommon for the section to receive
multiple case referrals for a single       90
parent client who wants to appeal            0
from each of their several children’s            RO NN ANY RD Nn    NO KE DD    MD Dd ch % HD
cases. The section counts each child's           OS        WMO        RMR   LRG      ve
case as a separate referral and as a                                                    Ps
                                                                                     &h
separate case assignment. After case
assignment, those cases are typically
                                         Figure 4: Juvenile Appellate Case Referrals
consolidated into a single case on
appeal to measure case completion
and case workload (i.e. the number of briefs filed). The number of briefs filed by the
Juvenile Appellate Section in fiscal year ending June 30, 2021, is 97, which includes 3
briefs on the merits in the Supreme Court. The number of briefs filed by the Juvenile
Appellate Section in the fiscal year ending June 30, 2022, is 126, which includes 3 briefs
on the merits in the Supreme Court.

Dependency     cases   involve appeals from juvenile      court judgments   asserting
jurisdiction over a child or changing        a child’s permanency   plan away from
reunification with their family. The transcript length in dependency cases typically
ranges from 100 to 800 pages and often includes numerous documentary exhibits.
Termination of parental rights cases involve appeals from juvenile court judgments
terminating the parent’s parental rights to their child or from an order denying the
parent’s motion to set aside such judgment (when, for example, the parent was tried
in absentia and the judgment was entered in the parent's absence). The transcript
length in termination of parental       rights cases Involving an appeal from the
termination judgment typically ranges from 500 to 1200 pages and often includes
hundreds, if not thousands, of pages of documentary exhibits. The transcript length
in termination of parental rights cases involving an appeal from an order denying a
parent’s motion to set aside the termination judgment typically ranges from 50 to 200
pages.

Dependency and termination of parental rights appeals are expedited.            ORAP    10.15.
Consequently, the Juvenile Appellate Section never has a backlog.

The section represents parents in the majority of the dependency cases on appeal. It
retains the cases it can resolve within the established timelines. Cases that cannot be
kept in-house due to conflict or capacity are sent to a panel of appellate       attorneys
approved by the agency or to a defense provider pursuant to contract.

Case referrals have risen from 156 during the fiscal year ending 2010 to 429 during the
fiscal year ending 2021.

Commission Funding Request

                                            Fund         Amount      Positions        FTE


 2021 — 2023    Budget         Approved   = General   «26,068,312           58      «57.38

 2023 — 2025    Base Budget                 General   26,733,973            58      57.80


 2023 -— 2025   Current Service Level       General   25,992,983            58      57.80


 080            Paokegos. Board             General    _-1,360,000           0        0.00

 090            Adjustmen is                General        1,763             0        0.00

 2023-2025      Commission
                Request
                           Funding = General          24,631,220            58      57.80
Case Support Services (f/k/a Non-Routine Expenses)
During the 2021 session, the Oregon Legislature passed HB 5030, which established
the Public Defense Services Commission (PDSC) budget for the 2021-2023 biennium.
HB 5030 contained a provision that held back $100 million of General Fund and placed
it in a special purpose appropriation (SPA), appropriated to the Emergency Board for
PDSC. In June 2022, the Emergency Board released the SPA, and the request includes
a proportionate amount for Case Support Services which was $14,554,511 for the 2021-
23 biennium.

Program Overview

Case Support Services (CSS) provides timely review and pre-approval of reasonable
and necessary expenses that support public defense client’s cases. These expenses
can Include:

»   Investigation or mitigation services;
»   Psychologist, psychiatrist and other professional mental health services;
»   Drug and alcohol evaluations (ASAM);
»   Scientific evidence analysis and other expert services;
»   Discovery and litigation supports; and
»   Other services such as printing, transcription, and interpretation.

The CSS team works closely with the Trial Criminal Division    in the pre-approval and
determination that services requested are reasonable and       necessary for the cases
needing support.

CSS costs are driven by many factors as vendor costs are driven by market influences.
Cases that need case support services are determined by individual attorneys based
on the facts of each individual case. CSS costs may fluctuate as a function of law
enforcement and prosecution practices and policies which          impact pre-charge
investigation and formal charging decisions.

With courts slowly getting back to a more normal workflow after the pandemic,
additional resources are necessary to address the backlog of cases that would have
normally moved through the court system during 2020 and 2021.

Program Justification and Performance

This program is linked to ORS 135.055(3) requiring PDCS to pay the cost of “reasonable
and necessary” expenses for public defense cases. The public defense system strives
to provide clients a constitutionally adequate defense, thus, allowing case supported
services further the states’ efforts to provide marginalized and under-represented
clients timely access to quality representation.

The data below illustrate the number of requests for pre-approval of case supported
services over the last 5 years. The number has increased by almost 10,000 individual
requests over 5 years. The number of individual requests in 2020 was lower due to
COVID-19     related   court shut-downs.




                                                                            29,536
                                                              27,242
                             24,123             24,080
          20,883




           2018               2019               2020          2021          2022


Figure 5: Number of CSS Requests Approved by Fiscal Year

The data below illustrates the dollar amount of CSS pre-approvals over the last 5 years.
Note that approvals represent administrative work by the agency, but the amount
eventually paid is less than pre-approvals. The amounts pre-approved increased at
about the same rate per year from 2018-2022. The increasing dollar amount of pre-
approval slowed down in 2020, again due to the impacts of COVID-19 on the court
system.




                                                                          $53,322,421
                                                            $48,895,647
                                              $42,293,050
                           $39,024,003

       $30,616,516




           2018               2019               2020          2021          2022


Figure 6: Dollar Amount of CSS Approved by Fiscal Year
Commission Funding Request

                                         Fund         Amount      _ Positions   FTE


2021-2023       Legisiatively Approved = General
               Budget
                                                    «43,663,533             0   0.00

2023 — 2025    Base Budget               General    43,663,533              0   0.00


2023 — 2025    Current Service Level     General    52,049,933              0   0.00


080            Emergency
               Packages
                         Board           General     7,450,686              0   0.00

 114           Increase Hourly Rates     General    15,649,067              0   0.00


 115           Unrepresented Persons
               Crisis
                                       = General     «6,628,376             0   0.00

2023-2025      CommissionFunding
               Request
                                       = General _ 81,778,062               0   0.00
Court Mandated          Expenses

The Court Mandated Expenses Division funds trial and appellate representation for
the following (a) the provision of attorney services not funded through a normal
orovider contract; and (b) discovery, postage, photocopying, parking, mileage, basic
interpreter services, and costs associated with obtaining certain types of records (up
to $300). Court Mandated       Expenses exclude contract payments and NRE/CSS
Expenses.

The Court Mandated Expenses Division is subject to a mandated caseload and is to be
budgeted based on anticipated caseload changes for state constitution or court
actions.

During the 2021 session, the Oregon Legislature passed HB 5030, which established
the Public Defense Services Commission (PDSC) budget for the 2021-2023 biennium.
HB 5030 contained a provision that held back $100 million of General Fund and placed
it in a special purpose appropriation (SPA), appropriated to the Emergency Board for
PDSC. In June 2022, the Emergency Board released the SPA, and the request includes
a proportionate amount for Court Mandated Expense which was $5,002,135 for the
2021-23 biennium.

Program Overview

The Court-Mandated Expenses Division is organized into the following sections: (1)
Administration; (2) Appellate; (3) Trial Level; (4) Juvenile; and (5) the Application
Contribution Program (ACP). Counsel funded through the Court-Mandated Expenses
Division include (1) attorneys who serve on OPDS's criminal and juvenile appellate
panels and are generally paid set rates to represent clients on direct appeal in criminal,
juvenile dependency, termination-of-parental-rights, and juvenile delinquency cases
and (2) attorneys who do not have a contract with the PDSC but nonetheless accept
one or more court appointments due to conflicts and/or a lack of public defense
provider capacity and are generally paid an hourly rate between $75 and $105 per
hour, depending on the type of case.          This funding is essential to ensure the
appointment and payment of counsel for all individuals entitled to court-appointed
counsel under state and federal law.

Program Justification and Performance

Court Mandated Expense division is linked to ORS 135.055(3) requiring PDCS to pay
the cost of “reasonable and necessary” expenses for public defense cases. The public
defense system strives to provide clients a constitutionally adequate defense, thus,
allowing case supported services further the states’ efforts to provide marginalized
and under-represented clients timely access to quality representation.

Court Mandated     Expenses are all the non-contract, non-case support service
expenditures. Expenditures for the 2019-21 biennium were $47,654,547, up from
$41,514,019 in the 2017-19 biennium. The Legislatively Adopted Budget for Court
Mandated Expenses in 2021-23 is $39,567,492 although expenses in the category are
currently expected to be more than $48 million. In 2021-23, the expenses are primarily
for hourly attorneys (46%), psychiatric evaluations (40%), and transcription/deposition
(6%).

                                                              Over     the      past    decade,   the
          FY 22 COURT MANDATED EXPENSES                       budget and administration of
                              Discovery              |        the Court Mandated Expenses
                                 12% "Transcription;          has grown. Prior to this last
                                           _ Yeposition       budget         cycle,    OPDS   budget
                                                           categories    consisted        of the
                                       _ Interpreter       Appellate    Division,    Contracts
                                              3%           and Business Services, and the
                                            __ Travel      Professional Services Account,
                                                 Expenses  which was used to compensate
                                                     2%    all providers and routine and
                                               _ All Other non-routine fees and expenses.
         Attorney Fees                               4%    Beginning       in   the       2019-21
              72%                                          biennium,      the     Professional
                                                           Services Account Is divided into
                                                           separate    divisions:     (1)    Trial
                                                           Criminal Division; (2) Juvenile
Division; (3) Non-Routine Expenses (NRE/CSS); (4) Court Mandated Expenses; and (5)
Special Programs, Contracts & Distributions.

The non-contract attorney hourly rate has increased since 2013, with the current rate
for assigned   counsel  ranging   from   $75.00  to $105.00    per  hour.  With   the
implementation of SB 578 (Guardianship or Conservatorship), the courts may order
PDSC/OPDS to compensate counsel if the respondent has insufficient assets to retain
counsel.

Non-Attorney fees for other providers such as paraprofessionals, interpreters (certified
and qualified), and other routine expenses and fees (i.e., mileage lodging, per diem,
discovery, copies and other out-of-pocket expenses) have also increased over time.
Commission Funding Request

                                                 Fund              Amount         Positions         FTE

                                                 General        15,006,403
        _            Legislatively Approved
 2021   — 2023       Budget                                                                0        0.00
                                                 Other           4,449,667


                                                 General        15,006,403
 2023 — 2025         Base Budget                                                           0        0.00
                                                 Other           4,449,667


                                                 General        18,335,583
 2023 — 2025         Current Service Level                                                 0        0.00
                                                 Other           3,937,116


 080                 Emergency
                     Packages
                               Board             General        26,722,465                 0        0.00

 114                 Increase Hourly Rates       General        15,250,114                 0        0.00


 115                 cniePresented
                       risis
                                   Persons       General_~—-26,876,806                     0        0.00

                                                 General        87,184,968
                     Commission
 2023   — 2025       Funding Request                                                       0        0.00
                                                 Other           3,937,116




Policy, Planning, and Administrative Divisions

Executive        Division

The Executive Division contains the agency's core leadership team and has _ primary
responsibility for agency governance and ensuring compliance with ORS Chapter 151. ORS
151.216 directs the agency “to maintain a public defense system that ensures the provision of
public defense services consistent with the Oregon       Constitution,   United   States Constitution,
and Oregon and national standards of justice.”
Compliance, Audit, and Performance        Division

The Compliance, Audit & Performance (CAP) Division provides oversight of and support to
court-appointed counsel in criminal, juvenile dependency, juvenile delinquency, civil
commitment,   post-conviction   relief, and   habeas corpus cases.


Administrative Services         Division

The Administration Services Division includes the Budget and Finance, Contract
Services/Non-routine Expense, Human       Resource Management, and Information
Technology    sections  responsible  for agency     leadership   and   central agency
administration ensuring compliance with ORS Chapter 151. ORS 151.216 directs the
agency “to maintain a public defense system that ensures the provision of public
defense services consistent with the Oregon Constitution, United States Constitution,
and Oregon and national standards of justice.”.        Effective management of this
orogram allows the agency's service delivery staff to focus on providing excellence in
core business program delivery and customer assistance.

Special   Programs,     Contracts, and          Distributions

The Special Programs, Contracts, and Distributions Division is currently comprised of
the Guardianship Program, which is a statewide program that provides appointed
counsel    to  eligible respondents    or  protected    persons  in  guardianship  or
conservatorship cases. The agency received this program through SB 578 during the
2021 session. Operations and Policy Analyst FTE for this program began July 2022.

Divisions’ Justification and         Performance

All together the Executive Division, CAP Division, Administrative Division and the
Special   Programs,   Contracts and   Distributions Division  provide administrative
support to the agency's programs. This is necessary to effectuate a healthy, vital, and
sustainable public defense system. The legal services funded by OPDS Is the largest
coordinated law effort in the state of Oregon, serving indigent people in criminal,
juvenile, civil commitment, contempt, probate, and other cases, at the trial and
appellate level. Consistent leadership and governance are critical to the effective
operation of these programs. The scope of these combined programs includes the
responsibility for ensuring that the agency continuously meets its obligation to
orovide high-quality, zealous legal representation for those in Oregon entitled to
court-appointed counsel by monitoring the delivery of public defense services and
oroviding guidance to the PDSC and agency regarding policies and procedures that
will support and promote high-quality representation.
Commission Funding Request

                                           Fund        Amount     Positions        FTE

2021-2023        —Legisiatively Approved
                Budget
                                           General   22,661,206          54       «49.68

2023 — 2025     Base Budget                General   22,688,843          45       45.00


2023 — 2025     Current Service Level      General   22,749,211          46       46.00


                Emergency Board
080             Packages                   General      384,445               1    1.00


090             Statewide
                Adjustments
                                           General      50,370            0        0.00

 103            PCRP     Expansion         General      291,322           2        1.01


 104            Program Design and
                Delivery
                                           General    2,371,459          12        8.54

 105            FCMS                       General    7,864,650           5        4.76


 107            OJD ETS Services           General      929,270           0        0.00


                Limited Duration to
 108            Permanent Positions        General    2,343,092           8        8.00


 109            Case   Support Services
                Position
                                           General      235,394               |    1.00

 114            Increase Hourly Rates      General      254,905               1    0.88


2023-2025     | Commission
                Request
                           Funding         General   37,373,378          76 = 71.19
Agency Initiatives and Investments
The Commission adopted a number of novel initiatives during the 2021-23 biennium
in response to the unrepresented persons crisis. The initiatives also provided insight
into promoting the recruitment and retention of talented public defenders. As such,
the lessons learned shaped the proposed 2023-25 biennium budget request.

The Commission put forward several policy option packages that represent decisive
investments that will (1) stabilize existing providers, (2) recruit additional providers, (3)
increase efficiency and (4) prioritize data collection. Without those investments made
by this Legislative Assembly, the agency and public defense system may not be able
to tolerate further attrition and the mounting body of unrepresented persons.


Agency Initiatives
The Public Defense Services Commission (PDSC) has identified a cycle of burnout and
attrition that needs to be addressed. The following initiatives have been implemented
to address that cycle.

Actions to Increase Capacity and Mitigate the High Caseloads

The agency has focused on increasing the number of attorneys by increasing the
number of new contracts and by using a tiered contracting model which has since
been implemented to better incentivize attorneys with greater compensation.
Additionally, the agency is working on attracting more attorneys to Oregon to work In
oublic defense to help address the unrepresented persons crisis.

To better support attorneys and helo mitigate high caseloads, PDSC works with
nonprofit public defender offices to provide resources and the necessary training and
supervision for public defenders with complex cases. The agency also works with
communities and stakeholders to exchange ideas and find more creative ways of
addressing the unrepresented persons crisis. This includes partnering with other state
agencies like the Oregon Judicial Department, to gather vital data necessary for
quantifying the number of unrepresented persons.

The agency received $10 million of Emergency Funds in the December Emergency
Board, which has helped with investments to stabilize the public defense workforce.

Increased and Tiered Hourly Rate Structure for All Unrepresented Persons

Goal: Increase capacity by investing $5,000,000 of the Emergency Fund allocation to
increase the hourly rates for non-contract attorneys who accept assignment of cases
from the Oregon Judicial Department's “OPDS Unrepresentea” list and implementing
a tiered rate structure to target the greatest needs.

Public   Defense   Services’   hourly   rates   have   not   been   competitive.   With   the   rate for
murder cases being $105 an hour and the rate for all other case types being $75 per
hour, this does not adequately incentivize attorneys. The following tired rate model
will be implemented to allow for better compensation for public defenders:

   e   $125 per hour for misdemeanor, contempt, and probation violation cases
   e   $158 per hour for Class C felony and felony drug possession cases
   e   $164 per hour for Class A and B felony, juvenile dependency, termination-of
       parental-rights, juvenile delinquency, habeas corpus, post-conviction relief, civil
       commitment, and Psychiatric Security Review Board cases
   e   $175 per hour for Ballot Measure 11 and felony sex offense cases; and
   e   $200 per hour for murder and Jessica’s Law cases

Strategic Reserves

Goal: Set the Agency up to be as strategic and adaptable as possible for the remainder
of the biennium by setting aside $2,500,000 of the Emergency Fund allocation for
investment in programs that are proven to reduce unrepresented people

The agency has funded multiple programs for more than six months and has been
reevaluating the effects of these programs for future implementation. There is a
reasonable degree of uncertainty regarding what additional investments might be
necessary if the unrepresented persons crisis should deteriorate. As a result, there is
an increased importance for strategic reserves.

Supervised Civil Attorney Program

Goal: Increase capacity by expanding the pool of attorneys available to represent out
of custody persons charged with misdemeanors and minor felonies by investing
$394,200 of the Emergency Fund allocation in a Supervised Civil Attorney Program

The Supervised Civil Bar Attorney Program will provide Supervising Attorneys to
maintain oversight of attorneys who are appointed to represent qualified defendants
in misdemeanor cases. Additionally, this arrangement will provide a framework that
requires data collection on performance and time records on all relevant work.

Existing Attorney Retention Incentive Program

Goal:  Stabilize existing  contractors  and   increase  accountability by investing
$6,000,000 of existing agency funds and $2,105,800 of the Emergency Fund Allocation
in aretention incentive program

There is a high attorney attrition rate that is a leading cause for defendants being
unrepresented. Any savings from attrition is used to retain existing contractors with
the retention incentive payment program. All funds are received under the condition
that the remaining attorneys maintain reporting of caseload and information on how
the funds are spent. Retention incentive payments will total $15,000 per full-time
attorney, with 12.5% of the funds dispersed each month between February and May
2023 and 50% of the funds dispersed in June 2023.
Proposed           Investments and Policy Packages

The commission is proposing the following investments above CSL to address the
current critical issues and to address the problematic future issues. These proposals
will allow the commission to continue capitalizing on the current investments from
the 2021-2023 biennium and to provide improved services and representation to
Oregonians.

Policy Option      Package   081:   Permanent   Funding   of June   2022   Joint   Emergency   Board
Actions

The Emergency         Board's actions to create a modified Current Service Level:

=   Transfer      $19,558,954 in General Fund to Court Mandated Expenses from Trial
    Criminal       Division  ($10,602,500); Appellate Division ($1,250,000); Non-routine
    Expenses ($7,706,454).
»   Allocate $413,011 in General Fund from Joint Emergency Board’s Emergency Fund
    to the agency's Administrative Services Division.
»   Allocate $100,000,000 in General Fund from the Special Purpose Appropriation
    (SPA)   provided   in House   Bill 5030 (2021) for the Public Defense Services
    Commission to the Trial Criminal Division ($70,250,989); Non-routine Expenses
    ($14,554,511); Court Mandate Expenses ($5,002,125); Juvenile Division ($10,192,365).
»   Mandated caseload inflation and other inflationary adjustments to the SPA are
    included.
»   Allocate $94,155 in General Fund from the Joint Emergency Board’s Emergency
    Fund to the agency's Administrative Services Division for position reclassification.

Policy Option      Package   082:   Permanent   Funding   of September     2022,   Joint   Emergency
Board Actions

The Emergency         Board's actions to create a modified Current Service Level:

»   Allocate $91,907 in General Fund from the Joint Emergency Board’s Emergency
    Fund to Trial Criminal Division for Family Treatment Court.
»   Allocate $121,649 in General Fund from the Emergency Fund to the agency’s
    Compliance, Audit, and Performance Division to establish one permanent position
    (1.00 FTE).

Policy Option Package 083: Permanent Funding of December 2022 Joint Emergency Board
Actions

The Emergency         Board's actions to create a modified Current Service Level:

=   Transfer      $12,000,000 in General     Fund to Court Mandated Expenses from Trial
    Criminal       Division  ($5,000,000);   Appellate  Division ($2,000,000); Non-routine
    Expenses ($5,000,000).
»   Establish $4,000,000 in other funds expenditure limitation in Trial Criminal
    Division for the reimbursement of juvenile expenses from federal Title IV-E funding
       transferred from the Oregon Department of Human Services.
=      Transfer $4,000,000 in other funds expenditure limitation from the Juvenile
       Division to the Trial Criminal Division for the reimbursement of juvenile expenses
       from federal Title IV-E funding transferred from the Oregon Department of Human
       Services.
»      Allocate $10,000,000       in General  Fund    from the Joint Emergency     Board's
       Emergency Fund to the commission for the unrepresented defendant/persons
       crisis. This is a one-time allocation.

Policy Option Package 091: Additional Analyst Adjustments

This package adjusts the commission's state government service charges such that
they are commensurate to the Department of Administrative Services’ 2023-25 price
list.

Policy Option Package 092: Statewide Attorney General Fee Adjustment

This package adjusts the commission's attorney general fees               such   that       they    are
commensurate to the attorney general's biennial rate setting.

Policy Option Package 101: Provider Compensation

PDSC proposes to implement a competitive compensation structure for all contract
entities. This compensation structure will be introduced as a comparative structure to
how the state currently compensates defenders and senior defenders in the PDSC
appellate division and with assistant attorney general and senior assistant attorney
general positions in the Department of Justice. While increased funding will not fix all
the problems with the current service delivery model for public defense services,
attorney salary and resource parity with the prosecution is critical to addressing the
escalating number of attorneys leaving public defense, improving the current public
defense service delivery model, and promoting and maintaining a fair and just
criminal Justice system. The public defense system must be adequately resourced to
participate as equals in Oregon's criminal justice system. This package assumes the
inclusion of package O81.

                                                Funds

                                    General        Other          Total    Positions               FTE
    Trial Criminal Division       33,813,631            0    33,813,631                 0          0.00

    Juvenile Division              6,306,981            0     6,306,981                 0          0.00

                                40,120,612              0   40,120,612                  0          0.00



Policy Option Package 102: Provider Staffing

PDSC proposes to implement a competitive pay structure for all contract entities. This
pay structure will be introduced as a comparative structure to how the state currently
compensates PDSC defenders and senior defenders and with assistant attorney
general and senior assistant attorney general positions in the Department of Justice.
Package 102 Is a continuation and Is in addition to the funding of Policy Package 10I.
Therefore, in addition to creating parity at the attorney compensation level, this
package takes the next step by providing a menu of options to provide funding for
support staffing, supervision, training, and administrative costs. The importance of
support staff, investigators, case managers, social workers dedicated supervision
cannot be overstated. By funding these critical positions in a non-profit PD office or
consortium, the overall attorney workload will be reduced, and case outcomes
improved. This package assumes the inclusion of package O81.

                                            Funds

                                General         Other               Total   Positions   FTE
 Trial Criminal Division    114,397,713              0        114,397,713           0   0.00

 Juvenile Division           37,630,767              0         37,630,767           0   0.00

                           152,028,480               0       152,028,480            0   0.00


Policy Option Package 103: Parent-Child Representation Program Expansion

 In 2015, the Oregon legislature established the Task Force on Legal Representation in
Childhood Dependency to “recommend models for legal representation in juvenile
court proceedings” that would, among other things, “improve outcomes for children
and parents served by the child welfare system.” SB 222 (2015). This package Is
intended to provide for high-quality legal representation for parents, children, and
youth      in  juvenile court    proceedings     consistent  with   the  Task _ Force's
recommendations across the state. Based on reports from providers, the presence of
the PCRP      in neighboring jurisdictions has caused/exacerbated       problems with
recruitment and retention in counties where PCRP has not yet been implemented
due to inequities in workload and services available in PCRP versus non-PCRP
jurisdictions. This package would also helo ensure the equitable delivery of legal
services to Indigent clients involved in juvenile court proceedings. This package also
includes two permanent Program Analyst 4 positions (1.01 FTE) positions as case
contract administrators.

                                             Funds
                                                                            Positions   FTE
                                General         Other               Total

 Juvenile Division           10,187,974                  0    10,187,974            2   1.01



Policy Option Package 104: Program Design and Research

The package is requesting 17 positions (11.80 FTE) so the agency can produce written
policies, procedures, and processes for both the agency and public defense providers
to adhere and be consistent with legislative directives. The establishment of needed
policies and procedures will allow the agency to measure caseloads, workloads, and
other metrics to ensure enhanced caseload forecasting, and to establish performance
measures and methods for the monitoring compliance with state and national
practice standards, client and system outcomes, internal financial controls, and
standards applicable to court supported services needed for quality representation.
The agency will be better equipped to provide oversight of these functions, increasing
agency capacity to support high-quality, zealous legal representation, provide
oversight of legal representation for indigent clients, and engage in robust data
collection and analysis to inform appropriate procurement methods to contract with
oublic defense providers around the state. These efforts will result in increased
leadership, better communication, and more transparency to the agency’s work.
Positions, costs, and justifications are attached.

                                               Funds

                                 General         Other           Total   Positions        FTE
 Executive Division               839,755               0     839,755            4        2.88

 Compliance, Audit, and Perf.    1,303,060              0    1,303,060               7    4.78

 Trial Criminal Division          518,037               0     518,037            3        2.26

 Juvenile Division                291,320               0     291,320            2         1.00

 Administrative Services Div.     228,644               0     228,644                1    0.88

                                3,180,816               0   3,180,816           17       11.80



Policy Option Package 105: Financial and Case Management System

The Public Defense Services Commission (PDSC), through its Office of Public Defense
Services (OPDS), seeks to procure an integrated financial and case management
system designed to support the agency's mission to ensure that eligible individuals
have timely access to legal services, consistent with Oregon and national standards of
justice. The FCMS will provide a reduction in manual data entry through integrations
with partner agencies, allow for the ability to manage payment requests in a timely
manner, and produce data so caseloads can be monitored more efficiently and
analyzed to better understand the services provided to individuals that qualify for
counsel. Without an integrated financial and case management system, the ability to
effectively evaluate public defense services is significantly diminished which impacts
case management, collection of program data and performance metrics, and the
ability to conduct timely and cost-effective research. This package is requesting 3 new
positions (2.76 FTE) and 2 limited duration positions from HB 5202 (2022) to be
established as 2 permanent full-time positions (2.0 FTE).

                                                Funds
                                                                         Positions        FTE
                                     General    Other            Total
 Administrative Services Div.     7,864,650            0   7,864,650           5      4.76



Policy Option Package 107: Oregon Judicial Department ETS Services

This policy package would support the implementation of a Hybrid approach with the
continuation of the Oregon Judicial Department’s inter-agency agreement and
internal   staff Supporting   new    technological  advancements     for the  agency.
Continuation of the OJD IAA would be considered status quo and would have no
impact on services currently provided. As the agency continues to grow and
incorporate new functionality, specifically the FCMS internal staff will support this
effort and ensure that adequate training and technical assistance is provided to
internal and external users of the system. Carrying forward of the OJD IAA would take
place immediately and scheduled to begin July 1, 2023, to start the 2023-25 biennial
service contract.

                                               Funds                       7
                                               Other           Total   Positions       FTE
                                    General

 Administrative Services Div.       929,270        0        929,270            0       0.00



Policy Option Package 108: Limited Duration Positions to Permanent Positions

The agency lacks sufficient infrastructure support in operations of the agency. The
investment of appropriate resources is necessary in the agency making the transition
from being a pass-through agency to becoming a regulatory agency, advancing
modernization efforts. This package is to provide stability by making permanent the
limited duration positions authorized under HB 5030 (2021) to address deficiencies In
the administration of OPDS.        All positions have or will be filled through open-
competitive recruitments and         have demonstrated     a permanent and ongoing
workload need addressing capacity within the agency's infrastructure.            Positions,
costs, and justifications are attached. This package is for 8 positions (8.0 FTE).

                                               Funds                       _

                                    General    Other           Total   Positions       FTE

 Administrative Services Div.     2,343,092        0       2,343,092           8       8.00



Policy Option Package 109: Case Support Services Position

Case supported services (CSS) are pre-approved services by the agency, when
attorneys need case supported services such as an expert, a doctor, or other
evaluations, prior to the service being performed. The agency has a 4-person team
that processes intake and pre-approval of these requests. There are on average 150 of




ee
these requests that are sent into the agency each day. The workload currently is ata
level that requires 2 Program Analyst 1's completing the intake process at all times.
Intake is a Manual process that requires reaching out to the requesting attorney for
clarifications. This is a time sensitive process for the attorneys that requested the CSS,
the work can't be completed until the agency has pre-approved the work.               This
package requests the reestablishment of one permanent Program Analyst 1 that was
mistakenly removed from the 2021-2023 budget.

                                               Funds                       _

                                   General    Other            Total   Positions      FTE

 Administrative Services Div.      235,394             0    235,394             1    1.00



Policy Option Package 112: Mandated Caseload for Juvenile Representation

The commission seeks to have the legislature designate legal representation in
juvenile delinquency, juvenile dependency, and termination-of-parental-rights cases
aS a Mandated caseload, that is, representation required by the state or federal
constitutions or statutes or as a result of court actions. The United States Supreme
Court held in /n Re Gault, 387 U.S. 1 (1967) that children have a constitutional right to
counsel when they are subject to a juvenile delinquency petition. The United States
Supreme Court has held that parents have a fundamental liberty interest in the “care,
custody, and management of their children” that is protected by the Due Process
Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution. Recognizing
juvenile representation as mandated caseload provides an alternative to ongoing
biennial requests to fund the required services.

                                               Funds                       _.

                                   General    Other            Total   Positions      FTE

 Juvenile Division                2,705,261            0   2,705,261            0    0.00



Policy Option Package 114: Increase Hourly Rates

This request has three components: the to increase hourly attorney pay from $75 to
match the federal rate of $164 per hour; second to increase the investigator rate from
$40 per hour to $75 per hour to be competitive with the federal rate; and third to
request an additional accountant (accountant 4) to enable the agency to maintain
and handle the increased accounting workload as the agency continues to grow at its
current pace.

]. This request will align our private bar attorneys with the federal rate of pay from $75
to $164/hour and bring new attorneys to public defense. Oregon is experiencing a
oublic safety crisis, which includes unrepresented individuals. The systemic under
sourcing of public defense and high caseloads has led to shortages of public defense




ee
attorneys. This increased attorney pay will hopefully continue to attract and retain
attorneys. The return on investment is enough attorneys at the pay equal to the
federal rate. Increased hourly pay will reduce the unrepresented crisis in Oregon and
preserve the defendant's constitutional right to receive counsel. ($15,250,114 GF)

2. One of the most important pieces of any case is investigation. To stay competitive
and maintain a health supply of qualified investigators, PDSC must increase the level
of compensation it provides to investigators. PDSC Is proposing to increase the rate of
investigation from $40 per hour to $75 per hour. While $75 is not equal to the federal
rate it is a healthy increase that should keep Oregon competitive and prevent vendors
from leaving this occupation. ($15,649,067 GF)

4. The package also includes an Accountant 4 position to maintain and oversee the
higher volume of expenditures to accuracy for reporting and analysis. This position
will provide sub-system oversight, adaptations, and corrections as necessary for our
new financial case management system and will ensure the financials interface
seamlessly with the statewide financial management system. This position is needed
to help design or enhance this new complex system, be the subject matter expert, set
up and align all new accounting structures, internal controls, financial reporting, and
analysis. Request is for one position (0.88 FTE) ($254,905 GF)

                                              Funds

                                  General     Other          Total   Positions       FTE
 Case Support Services (NRE)     15,649,067       0     15,649,067           0       0.00

 Court Mandated   Expenses       15,250,114       0     15,250,114           0       0.00

 Administrative Services Div.      254,905        0       254,905                1   0.88

                                31,154,086        0   31,154,086             1       0.88


Policy Option Package 115: Unrepresented Persons Crisis (Special Purpose Appropriation)

Oregon's public defense system is currently facing a crisis due to a lack of public
defenders. As a result of this crisis, the state cannot guarantee a public defender to
every eligible person in need of public defense services leading the prosecution of
unrepresented    persons. The constitutional crisis caused      by the prosecution of
unrepresented individuals has been one of the main issues the Public Defense
Services Commission has focused on addressing during the 2021-2023 biennium.

The Legislature has made numerous investments to target the unrepresented
persons crisis and the Public Defense Services Commission has repurposed agency
savings  to target    additional resources   to obtain    lawyers for unrepresented
persons. These investments have been used to hire and retain and better support
oublic defenders and to increase hourly rates for attorneys and investigators who are
appointed to unrepresented persons cases.
Moving    forward,  Oregon's     public defense   system   needs  comprehensive  and
structural modernization to move beyond the current crisis and ensure consistent,
timely access to a public defender for all eligible persons. Until comprehensive and
structural modernization is achieved Oregon will continue to have a constitutional
crisis of unrepresented persons, and the Public Defense Services Commission will
continue to focus Its efforts to mitigate the problem.

The agency struggles to estimate exactly how the continuing crisis will unfold mainly
because of the latency of the data and the dynamic movement of cases through the
system. However, the agency is confident that the crisis will continue to grow this
biennium as many contracted providers are reaching the end of their contractual
obligation to the State and a wave of cases return to the trial courts following the
Oregon Supreme Court's decision in Watkins v. Ackley. Undoubtably, Oregon will
finish the 2023 fiscal biennium with a large number of unrepresented persons and the
oroblem will persist into the 2023-2025 biennium.

The agency is requesting a special purpose appropriation of $33.5 million be
established to pay for increased hourly rates for attorneys ($26.9 million) and
investigators ($2.5 million) who are appointed to unrepresented persons cases. There
is an additional amount requested for other case support services costs ($4.1
million). The agency is using the same methodology to forecast the cost that was
employed to forecast the expenditures for the $10 million appropriation from the
December 2022 Emergency Board.

                                             Funds
                                                                   Positions     FTE
                                  General    Other         Total
 Case Support Services (NRE)     6,628,376       0     6,628,376           0     0.00

 Court Mandated   Expenses      26,876,806       0    26,876,806           0     0.00

                               33,505,182        0   33,505,182            0    0.00
Agency Budget Environment
Here, we talk about the big budget drivers and risks. We should probably also discuss
pending legislation that will materially shape the commission and agency in future
periods. Probably worthwhile to discuss how Covid-19 affected the judicial branch at
large and inside the agency...

In this section, we need to talk about   IT projects too.



Budget Challenges and Risks
The agency faces unique circumstances which makes it very difficult to fulfil its
constitutional obligations. These challenges further complicate things, given that
there are many proposed changes that will drastically affect the agency's budget for
the 2023-25 biennium. It is vital that these issues are addressed while still maintaining
a fully operational agency. The following is a list of those challenges; they are broken
up between several different categories: economic factors, demographics, legal
changes, and available resources & logistics.

Economic   Factors:

   e   Shortage of qualified attorneys, and shortage of providers who are willing to
       orovide services at the current compensation levels.
   e   Rising costs associated with inflation that is affecting vendors (investigation,
       mitigation, psychological services, etc.).
   e   The condition of Oregon's economy and its rates of unemployment and
       poverty.

Demographics:

   e   Demographic trends such as increases in population, particularly of the “at risk”
       population.
   e   Recidivism rates in Oregon's correctional population.
   e   Rates of removal of children from their homes by the Department of Human
       Services.
   e   Oregon's crime rate.

Legal Changes:

   e   Legislative and voter-initiated changes to criminal and juvenile laws that create
       new offenses, enhance penalties, alter procedures.
   e   Case law changes in the state and federal appellate courts.
   e   Changes in law enforcement and district attorney policies, practices, and
       staffing levels.
   e   Changes in court procedures and schedules; creation of specialty courts such
       as drug, mental health, and domestic violence courts.
Available   Resources   & Logistics:

   e   Availabilityof jail space.
   e   Access to social services such as drug treatment and family support services
       that can reduce criminal behavior and the need for court intervention in
       families.
   e   Changing prevailing norms for adequate representation and overall case
       complexity.


The Covid-19 Impact on Public Defense
The global coronavirus pandemic offered an opportunity for state government and
courts to utilize technology and communications in new ways. Courts in every
jurisdiction confronted a disease, which caused a rash of social and economic
consequences that was hitherto unimaginable. In Oregon, shortly after the governor
declared an emergency (“Executive Order No. 20-3 of March 8, 2020, Declaration of
Emergency Due to Coronavirus (COVID-19) Outbreak in Oregon.”), the chief justice
issued the first of at least a dozen orders significantly curtailing court operations.
Justice Orders mandated       public health protocols such as the personal use of
protective face coverings, social distancing, and vaccines; and eventually providing
some means for courts to conduct business to the extent it was reasonably safe and
practicable. Presiding judges substantially exercised discretion in the conduct and
scheduling of both criminal and civil proceedings pursuant to the chief justice's
orders.

Some jurisdictions adopted unique solutions and precautions for their circumstances.
The public defenders found it necessary to adapt to each unique courthouse and
courtroom. The overall pandemic had an impact on the operations and future of the
justice system in Oregon.   Public defenders were now carrying cases for a longer
period of time before reaching a final disposition or outcome. This made caseload
projections much more difficult to project.



Pending Legislation
The Public Defense Services Commission is currently included in Senate Bill 337-1
which involves major agencywide changes which, if passed, will likely result in
additional need for funding.  This legislation would be making changes to the agency's
overall authority provided in ORS 151.

Other important legislation includes Senate Bill 528-2 and House Bill 2467-2. Senate
Bill 528-2 directs the agency to contract out the provision of at least three qualified
attorneys for protective hearings, while House Bill 2467-2 creates a new student loan
repayment assistance program for public defense providers.
Information Technology Projects - Current and Upcoming
The Public Defense Services Commission (PDSC), through its Office of Public Defense
Services (OPDS), seeks to procure an integrated Financial and Case Management
System (FCMS). This system is meant to support the agency's mission to ensure that
eligible individuals have timely access to legal services, consistent with Oregon and
national standards of justice. The FCMS will provide a reduction in manual data entry
through integrations with partner agencies, allow for the ability to manage payment
requests in a timely manner, and produce data so caseloads can be monitored more
efficiently and analyzed to better understand the services provided to individuals that
qualify for counsel.



Recent Audit Findings
The budget report to House Bill 5030 (2021) directed the commission to report to the
Joint Committee on Legislative Audits [. . .] the establishment of the [clommission’s
internal audit function[.]” The commission hired Kernutt Stokes, an independent
auditor, to review the financial management and overall financial performance of the
Office of Public Defense Services. As part of that review, the independent auditor
tested the agency's (1) policies and procedures; (2) accounts payable; (3) case support
services; (4) attorney contracts; (5) service contracts; and (6) procurement. The
commission presented the auditor’s report to the Joint Committee on Legislative
Audits on December 8, 2022.

Kernutt   Stokes   made    eleven findings, four observations, and seven process
improvement recommendation (PIR). Management concurred with and agreed to all
findings, observations, and PIRs.

 Audit Area                             Findings           Observations            PIR
 Policies and Procedures                        3                             -              -
 Accounts Payable                                      -              2              2

 Case Support Services                             1                      1          2

 Attorney Contracts                             2                         1          2

 Service Contracts                              2                             -          1

 Procurement                                    3                             -              -

                                              11                      4              7
Supplemental                Budget Information

Other Funds      Revenues and Ending            Balances
Other Funds are sourced from Title IV-E Federal Funds, received as Other Funds from
the Department of Human          Services, and fees associated with the Application
Contribution Program (ACP). In 2019, federal policy was revised, allowing Oregon to
claim Title IV-E funds for administrative reimbursement of costs associated with legal
representation of a child or parent in foster care proceedings. Reimbursement for
training of contracted legal services providers is also included. In the 2021-23
biennium, PDSC received $14.0 million Federal as Other Funds for Title IV-E as
reimbursement for state expenses.

Other Funds revenue for ACP is collected in accordance with ORS 151.487, which
provides judges the authority to order those who apply for court-appointed counsel
to pay the administrative costs of determining their eligibility and a “contribution
amount” toward the anticipated cost of the public defense prior to conclusion of the
case. The Judicial Branch Verification Specialists assist the courts in determining
whether a person must pay these costs. This revenue is deposited in the Public
Defense Services Account and used to fund the operating expenses of the ACP.
Anticipated ACP revenues for the 2021-23 biennium is approximately $4.4 million
Other Funds. Of that amount, $3.6 million will be transferred to the Judicial
Department (OJD) to fund the verification specialist positions.
Fifteen Percent Reduction Options
                         Funds

                                             Positions
Program /                                       and
Division       General     Other     Total         FTE          Reduction Impact
                                                                The elimination of the Special Programs, Contracts, and Distributions would
                                                                eliminate the funding for approximately 391 case hours (budgeted at $75 per hour)
Special                                                         in the Guardianship and Conservatorship program. This program was established
Programs,      293,198             293,198     0         0.00   by the 2021 Legislative assembly and is still in its infancy. The program operates in
Guardianship                                                    Multnomah and Lane County currently and is expected to expand into Columbia
                                                                County in January of 2023 and to then be deployed statewide in January of 2024.
                                                                This will require Legislative Action.
                                                                This reduction in the Executive Division targets Legislative Affairs Manager which is
Executive                                                       a Deputy General Counsel Position. What the agency loses is the necessary link to
Division       192,223             192,223     0         0.50   the legislative body. This will mean that the Director and the Deputy Director will
                                                                have to increase their level of engagement with the Legislative Body.
                                                                This reduction in the CAP division represents the elimination of an Internal Auditor.
                                                                Eliminating this position will severely limit the agency's ability to conduct the
                                                                necessary research to move solve the problems and provide solutions to move the
                                                                agency programs forward and to evaluate the policies, procedures and best
                                                                practices of the agency. Although these positions are crucial to the forward
Compliance,                                                     progression of the agency and the continued improvement of constitutional defense
Audit. and     265.236             265,236     1         1.00   ‘ePpresentation of Oregonians, it is more favorable than the elimination of the
Performance        ,                                            General Counsel and the Deputy General Counsel positions who are working to
                                                                create the framework for the agency programs.
                             Funds

                                                   Positions
Program /                                             and
Division          General      Other       Total      FTE        Reduction Impact
                                                                 A reduction in the Administrative Services represents the elimination of essential
                                                                 positions that are crucial to the operational success of the agency. The elimination
                                                                 would touch every section within the division and limit the agency's ability to process
                                                                 payments and requests for services, provide essential reporting for the PDSC and
Administrative                                                   the Legislature, and to maintain the technological support services necessary for the
Services          647,961               647,961           3.00   agency to operate its numerous systems and databases. The agency is sparsely
Division                                                         resourced in the administrative area and is just starting to get on its feet
                                                                 operationally, so a cut here would send the agency backward to a place that may not
                                                                 be recoverable. This reduction action will abolish an Operation and Policy Analyst 3
                                                                 in the IT Services Unit, an Accounting Tech 3 in the Accounts Payable Unit and a
                                                                 Program Analyst 1 in the Case Support Services Unit.
                                                                 A 5% reduction ($4.13 million GF; $0.7 million OF) of the Juvenile Division
                                                                 represents the level of funding required for approximately one and one-half months
                                                                 of public defense services. Unless the 2023 Legislature acts to either decriminalize
Juvenile                                                         some behavior or reduce the seriousness level of some offenses and thereby reduce
                 4,134,128   700,000   4,834,128          0.00   the number and cost of the cases on which counsel must be appointed, or funds this
Division
                                                                 caseload, PDSC will have to cease payment for appointed counsel and related
                                                                 expenses during the last quarter of the 2023-25 biennium. Generally, if counsel is
                                                                 not available, the cases will be dismissed or held in abeyance.
                                                                 The reduction to the agency’s current service level for the Appellate Division would
                                                                 require the elimination of three attorney positions (2 Deputy Defenders, 1 Senior
Appellate                                                        Deputy Defender). Appellate cases would become backlogged and the average
                 1,218,573             1,218,573          3.00   length of time an appeal is pending would increase. The Court of Appeals may order
Division
                                                                 the dismissal of pending cases that exceed 350 days from the date the record
                                                                 settles to the filing of the opening brief.
                                                                 A 5% reduction ($2.6 million GF) of Case Support Services (Non-Routine Expenses)
                                                                 represents the level of funding required for approximately one and one-half months
                                                                 of vendor payments for public defense related reasonable and necessary support
                                                                 services. The related case costs include transcriptionists, investigators, interpreters,
                                                                 mitigators, socials workers, psychologists, polygraph examiners, forensic, firearms
Non Routine                                                      and DNA experts and medical experts. Unless the 2023 Legislature acts to either
                 2,602,497             2,602,497          0.00   decriminalize some behavior or reduce the seriousness level of some offenses and
Expenses
                                                                 thereby reduce the number and cost of the cases on which counsel must be
                                                                 appointed which directly drives the needs for related support services, or funds this
                                                                 caseload, PDSC will have to cease payment to vendors for related expenses during
                                                                 the last quarter of the 2023-25 biennium. Generally, if counsel is not available, the
                                                                 cases will be dismissed or held in abeyance.
                              Funds

                                                     Positions
Program /                                               and
Division           General      Other        Total      FTE          Reduction Impact
                                                                     A 5% reduction ($1.11 million GF. $0.2 million OF) of the Court Mandated Expenses
                                                                     represents the level of funding required for approximately one month of public
                                                                     defense services. Unless the 2023 Legislature acts to either decriminalize some
                                                                     behavior or reduce the seriousness level of some offenses and thereby reduce the
Court                                                                number and cost of the cases on which counsel must be appointed, or funds this
Mandated          1,113,635   222,483    1,336,118            0.00   caseload, PDSC will have to cease payment for appointed counsel and related
Expenses                                                             expenses during the last quarter of the 2023-25 biennium. Generally, if counsel is
                                                                     not available, the cases will be dismissed or held in abeyance. The reduction in
                                                                     Other Funds will result in reduction to the monies that are passed through to the
                                                                     Oregon Judicial Department for the payment of staff that process the requests for
                                                                     the Application Contribution Program.
                                                                     A 5% reduction ($9.05 million GF) of the Trial Criminal Division represents the level
                                                                     of funding required for approximately one and one-half months of public defense
                                                                     services. Unless the 2023 Legislature acts to either decriminalize some behavior or
Trial Criminal                                                       reduce the seriousness level of some offenses and thereby reduce the number and
                  9,048,228              9,048,228            0.00   cost of the cases on which counsel must be appointed, or funds this caseload,
Division
                                                                     PDSC will have to cease payment for appointed counsel and related expenses
                                                                     during the last quarter of the 2023-25 biennium. Generally, if counsel is not
                                                                     available, the cases will be dismissed or held in abeyance.

                 19,515,679   922,483   20,438,162            7.50   First five percent reduction
                                                                     This reduction in the Executive Division abolishes the Legislative Affairs Manager
                                                                     which is a Deputy General Counsel Position. What the agency loses is the
Executive
                    192,223                192,223            0.50   necessary link to the legislative body. This will mean that the Director and the
Division
                                                                     Deputy Director will have to increase their level of engagement with the Legislative
                                                                     Body.
                                                                     This reduction in the CAP division represents the 0.50 FTE reduction of     a Research
                                                                     Analyst 4 in the Data Unit and 0.25 of a Deputy General Council position in the Trial
                                                                     Division. Reducing these positions will severely limit the agency's ability to conduct
                                                                     the necessary research to move solve the problems and provide solutions to move
Compliance,                                                          the agency programs forward and to evaluate the policies, procedures and best
Audit, and          279,330                279,330            0.75   practices of the agency. Although these positions are crucial to the forward
Performance                                                          progression of the agency and the continued improvement of constitutional defense
                                                                     representation of Oregonians, it is more favorable than the further elimination of the
                                                                     General Counsel and the Deputy General Counsel positions who are working to
                                                                     create the framework for the agency programs.
                             Funds

                                                   Positions
Program /                                             and
Division          General      Other       Total      FTE        Reduction Impact
                                                                 A reduction in the Administrative Services represents the elimination of essential
                                                                 positions that are crucial the operational success of the agency. The elimination
                                                                 would touch every section within the division and limit the agency's ability to process
                                                                 payments and requests for services, provide essential reporting for the PDSC and
Administrative                                                   the Legislature, and to maintain the technological support services necessary for the
Services          779,444               779,444           3.00   agency to operate its numerous systems and databases. The agency is sparsely
Division                                                         resourced in the administrative area and is just starting to get on its feet
                                                                 operationally, so a cut here would send the agency backward to a place that may not
                                                                 be recoverable.    This reduction action will abolish a Fiscal Analyst 3 in the Budget
                                                                 Unit, an Accounting Tech 2 in the Accounts Payable Unit and an Information
                                                                 Technology Specialist 2 in the IT Services Unit.
                                                                 A 10% reduction ($8.2 million GF; $1.4 million OF) of the Juvenile Division
                                                                 represents the level of funding required for approximately three months of public
                                                                 defense services. Unless the 2023 Legislature acts to either decriminalize some
Juvenile                                                         behavior or reduce the seriousness level of some offenses and thereby reduce the
                 4,134,128   700,000   4,834,128          0.00   number and cost of the cases on which counsel must be appointed, or funds this
Division
                                                                 caseload, PDSC will have to cease payment for appointed counsel and related
                                                                 expenses during the last quarter of the 2023-25 biennium. Generally, if counsel is
                                                                 not available, the cases will be dismissed or held in abeyance.
                                                                 The reduction to the agency’s current service level for the Appellate Division would
                                                                 require the elimination of three attorney positions (1 Chief Deputy Defender, 1
Appellate                                                        Deputy Defender, and 1 Senior Deputy Defender). Appellate cases would become
                 1,441,162             1,441,162          3.00   backlogged and the average length of time an appeal is pending would increase.
Division
                                                                 The Court of Appeals may order the dismissal of pending cases that exceed 350
                                                                 days from the date the record settles to the filing of the opening brief.
                                                                 A 10% reduction ($5.2 million GF) of Case Support Services (Non-Routine
                                                                 Expenses) represents the level of funding required for approximately three months
                                                                 of vendor payments for public defense related reasonable and necessary support
                                                                 services.   The related case costs include transcriptionists, investigators, interpreters,
                                                                 mitigators, socials workers, psychologists, polygraph examiners, forensic, firearms
Non Routine                                                      and DNA experts and medical experts.       Unless the 2023 Legislature acts to either
                 2,602,497             2,602,497          0.00
Expenses                                                         decriminalize some behavior or reduce the seriousness level of some offenses and
                                                                 thereby reduce the number and cost of the cases on which counsel must be
                                                                 appointed which directly drives the needs for related support services, or funds this
                                                                 caseload, PDSC will have to cease payment to vendors for related expenses during
                                                                 the last quarter of the 2023-25 biennium. Generally, if counsel is not available, the
                                                                 cases will be dismissed or held in abeyance.
                              Funds

                                                     Positions
Program /                                               and
Division           General      Other        Total      FTE          Reduction Impact
                                                                     A 10% reduction ($2.22 million GF. $0.4 million OF) of the Court Mandated
                                                                     Expenses represents the level of funding required for approximately two months of
                                                                     public defense services. Unless the 2023 Legislature acts to either decriminalize
                                                                     some behavior or reduce the seriousness level of some offenses and thereby reduce
Court                                                                the number and cost of the cases on which counsel must be appointed, or funds this
Mandated          1,113,635   222,483    1,336,118            0.00   caseload, PDSC will have to cease payment for appointed counsel and related
Expenses                                                             expenses during the last quarter of the 2023-25 biennium. Generally, if counsel is
                                                                     not available, the cases will be dismissed or held in abeyance. The reduction in
                                                                     Other Funds will result in reduction to the monies that are passed through to the
                                                                     Oregon Judicial Department for the payment of staff that process the requests for
                                                                     the Application Contribution Program.
                                                                     A 10% reduction ($18.1   million GF) of the Trial Criminal Division represents the level
                                                                     of funding required for approximately three months of public defense services.
                                                                     Unless the 2023 Legislature acts to either decriminalize some behavior or reduce
Trial Criminal                                                       the seriousness level of some offenses and thereby reduce the number and cost of
                  9,048,228              9,048,228            0.00
Division                                                             the cases on which counsel must be appointed, or funds this caseload, PDSC will
                                                                     have to cease payment for appointed counsel and related expenses during the last
                                                                     quarter of the 2023-25 biennium. Generally, if counsel is not available, the cases will
                                                                     be dismissed or held in abeyance.
                 19,590,647   922,483   20,513,130            7.25   Second five percent reduction
                                                                     This reduction in the Executive Division reduces the Executive Assistant Position at
Executive                                                            the Public Defense Resource Center in Portland. The agency loses some level of
                     62,892                 62,892            0.25   direct commissioner support and a reduced level of customer support at the
Division
                                                                     Multnomah County Courthouse.

                                                                     This reduction in the CAP division represents the elimination of a Research Analyst
                                                                     4. Eliminating this position will severely limit the agency's ability to conduct the
                                                                     necessary research to move solve the problems and provide solutions to move the
                                                                     agency programs forward and to evaluate the policies, procedures and best
Compliance,                                                          practices of the agency. Although these positions are crucial to the forward
Audit, and          174,556                174,556            0.50   progression of the agency and the continued improvement of constitutional defense
Performance                                                          representation of Oregonians, it is more favorable than the elimination of the
                                                                     General Counsel and the Deputy General Counsel positions who are working to
                                                                     create the framework for the agency programs.
                             Funds

                                                   Positions
Program /                                             and
Division          General      Other       Total      FTE        Reduction Impact
                                                                 A reduction in the Administrative Services represents the elimination of essential
                                                                 positions that are crucial to the operational success of the agency.   The elimination
                                                                 would touch every section within the division and limit the agency's ability to process
                                                                 payments and requests for services, provide essential reporting for the PDSC and
Administrative                                                   the Legislature, and to maintain the technological support services necessary for the
Services          515,417               515,417      2    2.00   agency to operate its numerous systems and databases. The agency is sparsely
Division                                                         resourced in the administrative area and is just starting to get on its feet
                                                                 operationally, so a cut here would send the agency backward to a place that may not
                                                                 be recoverable. This reduction action will abolish an Program Analyst 4 in the Trial
                                                                 Division, a Program Analyst 2 in the Case Support Services Unit.
                                                                 A 15% reduction ($12.4 million GF; $2.1 million OF) of the of the Juvenile Division
                                                                 represents the level of funding required for approximately four and one-half months
                                                                 of public defense services. Unless the 2023 Legislature acts to either decriminalize
Juvenile                                                         some behavior or reduce the seriousness level of some offenses and thereby reduce
                 4,134,128   700,000   4,834,128     0    0.00   the number and cost of the cases on which counsel must be appointed, or funds this
Division
                                                                 caseload, PDSC will have to cease payment for appointed counsel and related
                                                                 expenses during the last quarter of the 2023-25 biennium. Generally, if counsel is
                                                                 not available, the cases will be dismissed or held in abeyance.
                                                                 The reduction to the agency’s current service level for the Appellate Division would
                                                                 require the elimination of three attorney positions and two support positions (3
Appellate                                                        Deputy Defenders, 2 Legal Secretaries). Appellate cases would become
                 1,367,721             1,367,721     5    5.00   backlogged and the average length of time an appeal is pending would increase.
Division
                                                                 The Court of Appeals may order the dismissal of pending cases that exceed 350
                                                                 days from the date the record settles to the filing of the opening brief.
                                                                 A 15% reduction ($7.8 million GF) of Case Support Services (Non-Routine
                                                                 Expenses) represents the level of funding required for approximately four and one-
                                                                 half months of vendor payments for public defense related reasonable and
                                                                 necessary support services. The related case costs include transcriptionists,
                                                                 investigators, interpreters, mitigators, socials workers, psychologists, polygraph
                                                                 examiners, forensic, firearms and DNA experts and medical experts. Unless the
Non Routine                                                      2023 Legislature acts to either decriminalize some behavior or reduce the
                 2,602,497             2,602,497     0    0.00
Expenses                                                         seriousness level of some offenses and thereby reduce the number and cost of the
                                                                 cases on which counsel must be appointed which directly drives the needs for
                                                                 related support services, or funds this caseload, PDSC will have to cease payment
                                                                 to vendors for related expenses during the last quarter of the 2023-25 biennium.
                                                                 Generally, if counsel is not available, the cases will be dismissed or held in
                                                                 abeyance.
                               Funds

                                                       Positions
Program /                                                 and
Division           General        Other        Total      FTE        Reduction Impact
                                                                     A 15% reduction ($3.33 million GF. $0.6 million OF) of the Court Mandated
                                                                     Expenses represents the level of funding required for approximately three months of
                                                                     public defense services. Unless the 2023 Legislature acts to either decriminalize
                                                                     some behavior or reduce the seriousness level of some offenses and thereby reduce
Court                                                                the number and cost of the cases on which counsel must be appointed, or funds this
Mandated          1,113,635    222,483     1,336,118     0    0.00   caseload, PDSC will have to cease payment for appointed counsel and related
Expenses                                                             expenses during the last quarter of the 2023-25 biennium. Generally, if counsel is
                                                                     not available, the cases will be dismissed or held in abeyance. The reduction in
                                                                     Other Funds will result in reduction to the monies that are passed through to the
                                                                     Oregon Judicial Department for the payment of staff that process the requests for
                                                                     the Application Contribution Program.
                                                                     A 15% reduction ($27.14 million GF) of the Trial Criminal Division represents the
                                                                     level of funding required for approximately four and one-half months of public
                                                                     defense services. Unless the 2023 Legislature acts to either decriminalize some
Trial Criminal                                                       behavior or reduce the seriousness level of some offenses and thereby reduce the
                  9,048,228                9,048,228     0    0.00
Division                                                             number and cost of the cases on which counsel must be appointed, or funds this
                                                                     caseload, PDSC will have to cease payment for appointed counsel and related
                                                                     expenses during the last quarter of the 2023-25 biennium. Generally, if counsel is
                                                                     not available, the cases will be dismissed or held in abeyance.

                 19,019,074    922,483    19,941,557     8    7.75   Third five percent reduction



                 58,125,400   2,767,449   60,892,849    22   22.50   Fifteen percent reduction
Long-Term Vacancy Information


Program/           Position   Position           Position                     Vacant
Division           No.        Title              Type       FTE    Budget        Date   Reason for vacancy
Compliance,        2320302    Internal Auditor   PF         1.00   265,236   7/1/2022   Position is being held vacant as the funds are being used to pay
Audit, and Perf.                                                                        for a contracted internal auditor. Several recruitments have failed.
Div.                                                                                    Agency will post another recruitment as early as January 2023.



Compliance,        2320301    Internal Auditor   PF         1.00   265,236   7/1/2022   For disclosure purposes, this position was eliminated in the
Audit, and Perf.                                                                        Agency Request Budget reduction exercise and the agency does
Div.                                                                                    not submit a governor’s budget. Agency has had several failed
                                                                                        recruitments this biennium for this position. In January 2023,
                                                                                        agency chose to overfill this position to meet a direct need in the
                                                                                        agency. As of January 1, 2023, the agency has overrfilled the
                                                                                        position with a 50/50 split responsibility to the director’s office and
                                                                                        the Trial Division.
