2015

Race Reporting
Guide
A RACE FORWARD MEDIA REFERENCE

• Guidelines for covering key issues
  with a racial lens

• Reporting on specific racial and
  ethnic groups

• Harmful racial discourse practices
  to avoid

• Key terms and concepts

• Online resources
Version  1.1
© Race Forward June 2015

Acknowledgements
Thank you to W. K. Kellogg Foundation for their generous
support of Race Forward’s work.  

This guide is used by Race Forward and Colorlines.

Race Forward’s Race Reporting Guide guide will be regularly
updated and is available online at:
http://raceforward.org/reporting-guide

For more information, contact media@raceforward.org.

RACEFORWARD.ORG          RACEFORWARD   


NEW YORK                                 OAKLAND
32 Broadway, Suite 1801                  900 Alice Street, Suite 400
New York, NY 10004                       Oakland, CA 94607
p 212.513.7925 / f 212.513.1367          p 510.653.3415 / f 510.986.1062
Introduction
When we talk about education, health care, voting rights, and
many other topics, there is often an aversion to talking about
race. Though some suggest we are “post-racial,” we find that race
still plays a defining role in a person’s life trajectory, experiences,
and outcomes. In addition, shifting demographics make even
more urgent our need to speak openly about racial bias and
inequity, and their deep roots in our history, culture, and institu-
tions. This system of racialization—which routinely confers
advantage and disadvantage based on skin color and other
characteristics—must be clearly understood. However, when race
enters our public conversations about these important national
issues, the dialogue is too often dehumanizing and racially
charged. Language matters, and we need more tools to move our
race conversations forward in more accurate, fair, and productive
ways. Race Forward’s Race Reporting Guide aims to provide crit-
ical support for the use of responsible language and story fram-
ing that reflects ethical and rigorous journalistic standards and
affirms the dignity and human rights of people of all races.  

For over 30 years, Race Forward has been teaching and writing
about race. We publish the award-winning daily news site
Colorlines, conduct original research on pressing racial justice
issues, present the biennial Facing Race National Conference, and

                                   i
“Language matters, and we need more
tools to move our race conversations
forward in more accurate, fair, and
productive ways.”

provide training and consulting services. One of our recent re-
ports, Moving the Race Conversation Forward, revealed key findings
and recommendations on how mainstream can address
racial issues to reshape and reform the way we talk about race
and racism in our country. It found that most coverage of race
and racism is not “systemically aware,” meaning that it focus-
es on racism at the level of the individual, dismisses systemic
racism, or refers to racism in the past tense. This kind of report-
ing leaves out important contextual information such as the role
of history, institutional policies, and inequitable practices, and
it rarely features prominent, robust coverage of racial justice
advocacy or solutions.

The purpose of this race reporting guide is to serve as an acces-
sible and concise tool for journalists and thought leaders in the
United States talking about race, racism, and racial justice in
the media. It aims to provide context and guidelines to inform
reporting and language, and to encourage more conversation and
understanding. Language is ever-evolving, so this is not meant
to be comprehensive, or to reflect all perspectives and important
thinking that has been done on these issues. Questions and
suggestions related to this guide are welcome, and we invite
journalists and media-makers to consider Race Forward a
resource in story-development, experts available, and talking
about race in the media. Contact us at media@raceforward.org.




                                 ii
THE GUIDE INCLUDES:    THE GUIDE



Covering Key Issues    1
With a Racial Lens


Seven Harmful Racial   19
Discourse Practices


Key Terms &            31
Concepts


Online Resources       35



Appendix               36
C OV E R I N G K E Y I SS U ES




          Covering Key Issues
          With a Racial Lens
          It is critical that media coverage on race bring an explicit racial
          lens to breaking news, investigative reporting, and multimedia
          storytelling. This means that reporting on subjects impacted by
          race should include a component that looks at systems, not just
          individuals. A systemic analysis means we examine the root
          causes and mechanisms that feed into patterns. It makes for
          good journalism and opens up new avenues of inquiry and
          storytelling. This section highlights pressing, and often under-
          reported, issues that disparately impact people of color, and
          provides tips and guidelines to help avoid pitfalls often found in
          media coverage.



                                           1
GENERAL REPORTING TIPS

•   Be explicit about race.

•   Avoid stereotypes.

•   Use a multiracial lens, and consider all communities    
    of color.

•   Investigate issues from a systemic (“Is there an institution or
    a practice at work that has race-based consequences?”) over
    an individual (“Is this person a racist?”) perspective.

•   Focus on actions and impacts, rather than attitudes
    and intentions.

•   Place the humanity and leadership of people of color
    at the center.

•   Feature prominent, robust coverage of racial justice
    advocacy and solutions.

•   Ensure headlines, images, captions, and graphics are fair and
    responsible in their depiction of people of color, and
    coverage of the issues.

•   Give proper credit to the owner/creator of the
    media you are sharing, and request permission
    when appropriate.




                                 2
ISSUE-SPECIFIC TIPS:


CHANGING DEMOGRAPHICS & MILLENNIALS

•   Familiarize yourself with changing racial and ethnic demo-
    graphics in the geographic areas you’re covering, and report
    with them in mind.  

•   By 2044, the United States is projected to be a plurality
    nation, as no race or ethnic group is projected to have greater
    than a 50 percent share of the nation’s total.

•   Beware of using terms like “majority-minority” as they do
    not give a nuanced or accurate picture of the demograph-
    ic changes occurring in a particular community. Instead
    describe the change, with figures and a sense of how things
    have changed over time and why.

•   The “Millennial Generation” (born 1981-1993) is the largest,
    most racially and ethnically diverse generation the U.S. has
    ever known.

•   The fastest growing racial groups are “Two or More Races,”
    (expected to triple in size by 2060), Asian population, and
    Hispanic population (expected to comprise 29% of the United
    States population by 2060).

•   More than half the growth in total population of the U.S. be-
    tween 2000 and 2010 was due to the increase in the Hispanic
    population.

    (continued on following page)




                                    3
•   There were 11.2 million unauthorized immigrants in the U.S.
    as of 2012.

•   In 2014, 13.3% of the U.S. population was foreign-born, with a
    rate of growth expected to account for an increasing share of
    the total population, reaching 19 percent in 2060.

•   The federal government is considering allowing those of
    Middle Eastern and North African descent (MENA) to
    identify as such on 2020 Census (previously classified as
    White by default).



ONLINE RESOURCES
See Race Forward’s reports on Millennials
http://raceforward.org/millennials




SOURCES
https://www.census.gov/content/dam/Census/library/publications/2015/
demo/p25-1143.pdf
http://www.census.gov/prod/cen2010/briefs/c2010br-04.pdf
http://www.pewresearch.org/key-data-points/immigration/




                                     4
CRIMINAL JUSTICE
KEY ISSUES
#BlackLivesMatter, racial profiling, mass incarceration, drug pol-
icy reform, torture, wrongful conviction, grand jury, police shoot-
ings, community protests, for-profit prisons, racial disparities.

ONLINE RESOURCES
See Colorlines coverage of criminal justice
http://www.colorlines.com/criminal-justice


IMPORTANT GUIDELINES
•   Don’t take police reports at face value.

•   Move beyond presenting disparities (e.g. Black babies are still
    almost 2.5 times more likely to die before reaching their 1st
    birthday) and investigate the systemic reasons that influence
    those disparities, locally and nationally.

•   Avoid sensational headlines and “COPS”-like news coverage
    that dehumanizes and exploits racial stereotypes (“Black-
    on-Black crime” is no more a phenomenon than “White-on-
    White crime”).

•   Identify people as those who have done something, not as
    a person who is identified only by the acts he or she has
    committed. For example, instead of “ex-felon,” use “formerly
    incarcerated person,” “returning citizen,” or “person with a
    criminal record.”

•   Don’t make assumptions about people who live in a high-
    crime area. People with criminal records can have as valid
    and important a perspective on crime and the criminal
    justice system as representatives of law enforcement or other
    community residents.




                                  5
ECONOMY, EMPLOYMENT, AND
WORKER’S RIGHTS
KEY ISSUES
Unemployment rates, “ban the box” background checks, min-
imum wage, segregated workplaces, racial wealth gap, worker
strikes, income disparities, job protections, unions, low-wage
labor.

ONLINE RESOURCES
See Colorlines coverage of Economy & Employment
http://www.colorlines.com/economy
and Workers Rights
http://www.colorlines.com/labor

Race Forward’s multimedia tool “Clocking-In”
http://clockingin.raceforward.org


IMPORTANT GUIDELINES
•   Use an explicit racial and systemic analysis that highlights
    the link between race and poverty.

•   Reflect the fact that unemployment and poverty are circum-
    stances faced by everyone, not just people of color and their
    respective communities.

•   Beware of myths such as the “Welfare Queen” and
    stereotypes that are so prevalent surrounding employment
    and economics.

•   Avoid terms that may subtly, yet profoundly, evoke and
    reinforce racial stereotypes, such as “urban,” “lazy,” “hard-
    working,” “entitlement,” and others.  

•   Consider barriers to mobility, including practices that appear
    race neutral in intent, but have racialized impact.




                                    6
EDUCATION, SCHOOLS, AND YOUTH
KEY ISSUES
Education/school reform, school-to-prison pipeline, extreme
discipline, charter schools, testing, college admissions, access to
higher education, school curriculum, segregation, education
disparities, affirmative action, student loans, school closures,
budget cuts.

ONLINE RESOURCES
See Colorlines coverage of Education, Schools & Youth
http://www.colorlines.com/categories/schools-youth


IMPORTANT GUIDELINES
•   Allocate time and resources for on-the-ground local and state
    reporting; although a national issue, education disparities
    and reform measures differ from community to community.

•   Look at patterns over time: history of segregation, inequitable
    funding, roots of laws and policies, and the impact on the
    current situation, with severe racial disparities, from budget
    cuts to children of color being subject to more extreme
    disciplinary measures.

•   Speak in depth with all players, beyond politicians, policy
    makers, and paid experts.

•   Talk to parents and students, teachers, advocates on the
    ground who have been working on these issues, and commu-
    nity members affected.  

•   Investigate funding inequities and the systemic impact of
    those inequities.

•   Avoid racial stereotypes such as “model minority.”




                                  7
HEALTH
KEY ISSUES
“Obamacare,” uninsured, health disparities, racialized medical
treatment, maternal health, HIV & AIDS, trauma & PTSD.

ONLINE RESOURCES
See Colorlines coverage of Health
http://www.colorlines.com/health


IMPORTANT GUIDELINES
•   Report on health care issues from a systemic perspective. For
    example, the costs associated with healthcare are a leading
    contributor to financial instability, and the effects are more
    pronounced among groups who have relatively low savings
    or access to health insurance.

•   Include the role that factors like stress, environment (pollu-
    tion, etc.), and lack of access to mental health care have on
    health issues within communities of color.

•   Investigate the history of discriminatory experiences people
    of color have had with medical care providers, including dif-
    ficulties with language barriers, leading to racial disparities
    in health outcomes and a level of distrust towards the health-
    care system.

•   When discussing health care issues faced by people of color,
    it is important to note that the disparities are not isolated to a
    particular period of one’s life. These disparities exist as early
    as prenatal care and continue throughout life.




                                   8
IMMIGRANTS & IMMIGRATION REFORM
KEY ISSUES
Policy reform, detention centers, mass deportation, child welfare
& families, undocumented immigrants.

ONLINE RESOURCES
See Colorlines coverage of Immigration
http://www.colorlines.com/immigration

See Race Forward’s Drop the I-Word campaign
https://www.raceforward.org/practice/tools/drop-i-word-campaign

See Race Forward’s report “Shattered Families: The Perilous
Intersection of Immigration Enforcement and the Child
Welfare System”
http://raceforward.org/shatteredfamilies


IMPORTANT GUIDELINES
•   Report from a multiracial perspective. Most Latinos in the
    U.S. are not immigrants, and immigrants come to the U.S.
    from every country in the world.

•   Examine the ways immigration issues intersect with systems
    and institutions across society, such as child welfare and local
    law enforcement.

•   Avoid racially charged, dehumanizing language (e.g. “illegal”
    when describing immigrants). See “racial slur” in the section
    Key Terms & Concepts.

•   Cover immigration as a civil issue, familiarize yourself with
    current policies and laws, and accurately report on immigra-
    tion reform legislation.

    (continued on following page)




                                    9
•   Move beyond immigration reform and include immigrants
    in stories about all issues, as part of the fabric of the United
    States.

•   Familiarize yourself with the range of categories describing
    a person’s citizenship and immigration status: nationality,
    country of origin, citizen, permanent resident,
    undocumented/unauthorized.




    MEDIA, ARTS & CULTURE
    KEY ISSUES
    Media representation, film, television, visual arts, books,
    music, fashion, comedy, hip-hop culture, sports, net neutrali-
    ty, media reform, social media.

    ONLINE RESOURCES
    See Colorlines coverage of Media
    http://www.colorlines.com/categories/media
    and Arts & Culture
    http://colorlines.com/categories/arts-culture

    See Race Forward’s report “Moving the Race
    Conversation Forward”
    http://raceforward.org/moving-race-conversation-forward


    IMPORTANT GUIDELINES
•   Include people of color in any survey of developments in arts
    and culture, whether it is a Top Ten list, an investigation, or
    highlights of trends within an industry or event.

•   Campaigns or expressions that originated within a commu-
    nity to reflect its concerns should be discussed in context. Be
    sensitive when reporting on the appropriation of phrases
    and movements like #BlackLivesMatter, to refer to outside




                                   10
    groups as it may confuse what the action or analysis was
    attempting to highlight.

•   When reporting on cultural and media products, look at who
    is in decision-making positions and consider how the power
    dynamics between different parts of the creation, promotion
    and distribution often disadvantage people of color.




POLITICS & ELECTIONS
KEY ISSUES
Candidate positions, campaign issues, electoral politics, confir-
mation hearings, election results, ID restrictions, restrictions on
voting rights.

ONLINE RESOURCES
See Colorlines coverage of Politics
http://www.colorlines.com/categories/politics
and Voting Rights
http://www.colorlines.com/categories/voting-rights


IMPORTANT GUIDELINES
•   Familiarize yourself with and report on local and state restric-
    tions on voting rights, and their impact on communities of
    color. Report on key issues for communities of color, locally
    and nationally.

•   Cover elections with a racial lens, highlighting racial dispar-
    ities and reporting on the racial dimensions of attacks on
    candidates or their supporters.

•   Ensure coverage of candidates avoids stereotypes and de-
    humanizing language when exploring their racial/ethnic
    background, their family histories, or the groups they affili-
    ate with.

•   Highlight political organizing within communities
    of color.  
                                   11
WOMEN AND LGBT COMMUNITY
KEY ISSUES INCLUDE:
Sexuality, gender norms, reproductive justice, sexual assault,
violence, harassment, marriage equality, homelessness,
coming out.

ONLINE RESOURCES
See Race Forward’s “Better Together” reports on bridging LGBT &
racial justice
http://raceforward.org/better-together

See Colorlines coverage of Gender & Sexuality
http://www.colorlines.com/gender-sexuality
Reproductive Rights
http://www.colorlines.com/tags/reproductive-rights
and LGBT
http://www.colorlines.com/tags/lgbt-0



IMPORTANT GUIDELINES
•   Address how sexism, homophobia, and transphobia contrib-
    ute to racial disparities across all issue areas.

•   Report on the long history of laws and policies that have
    regulated the bodies of women of color.

•   Highlight racial disparities, such as violence against Native
    American women, or that Black mothers are three
    times as likely to die during childbirth.

•   Ensure that stories focused on the LGBT community include
    a racial lens, and when covering issues focused on race and
    racism, consider the impact on LGBT people of color.




                                   12
Reporting On Specific Racial and
Ethnic Groups
There are countless data collection systems that ask people to
report their race and ethnicity, from the U.S. Census, to political
polls, to surveys conducted by think tanks, marketing firms, hu-
man resource departments, and so on. However, there is no con-
sensus on which categories to use, how categories are defined,
and category options may change over time. The U.S. Census it-
self hasn’t been consistent and is considering new categories and
ways to ask Americans about their race or origin in 2020, in order
to minimize confusion and allow people to accurately describe
their identity.

Data on all racial and ethnic groups is critical to highlight ra-
cial disparities, and provides a foundation for systemic change
through allocation of funding, resources, and political seats.
Reporting that is inclusive of all racial and ethnic groups, even
when data is limited, is essential for an complete and accurate
understanding of the racial dimensions of a story.

See “Changing Demographics” in the section Covering Key Issues
and “Race” and “Racial & ethnic categories” in the Key Terms &
Concepts section.

See “Race” and “Racial & ethnic categories” in the Key Terms &
Concepts section.

IMPORTANT GUIDELINES
•   Use racial and ethnic identification when it is pertinent to a
    story, fairly (across all racial categories, including identifying
    persons as “White”) and appropriately (without relying on
    stereotypes).

•   Ask people about their heritage and strive for respectful
    accuracy that observes how people self-identify racially and
    ethnically, and that allows for multiple categories.



                                  13
•   Use consistent terms for racial and ethnic groups that are de-
    scriptive and accurate, rather than reductive, and be prepared
    to respectfully communicate to your subjects the style for
    racial and ethnic categories used in your outlet.

•   Except when referencing surveys or polls that use other
    language, Race Forward uses the following racial and ethnic
    categories: American Indian and Native American, Asian
    American / Pacific Islander (AAPI), Black and African Amer-
    ican (terms are not necessarily interchangeable, as many
    Black people in immigrant communities do not call them-
    selves African American), White, and Latino rather than
    Hispanic (except when data sources specifically use “Hispan-
    ic,” the term “Latino” is preferred as less derivative of colonial
    lineage).

•   Note the limitations of data sets you use: what is missing or
    potentially misleading about communities of color. Broad
    generalizations that treat communities as a monolithic group
    can have an enormous impact on subpopulations with differ-
    ing socioeconomic and cultural experience.

•   Familiarize yourself with the key terms and concepts of race
    and ethnicity, and how categories that describes these can
    intersect (“White Argentine,” “a person of mixed Choctaw and
    African American descent,” Latinos who identify as “some
    other race”).

•   Specify, whenever possible, a person’s tribe or ethnic group
    (Cherokee, O’odham, Mayan, Xhosa), and their region of or-
    igin (people from India, Pakistan, Bangladesh and Sri Lanka
    are South Asian; people from Honduras, Panama, El Salvador
    and Guatemala are Central American).




                                  14
•   Capitalize proper names of nationalities, peoples, races,
    tribes, etc. Race Forward capitalizes Black and White, but
    avoids and does not capitalize brown, red, yellow or similar
    descriptors sometimes used for racial and ethnic groups. We
    avoid using the term “brown” whenever possible and believe
    it is a better practice to actually name the group/ethnicity
    being referenced. For example, instead of saying, “Black and
    Brown,” we would recommend saying, “Blacks and Latinos,” if
    in fact, Latinos were the group being referred to in this case.
    “People of color” can in some cases serve as a collective term
    for non-Whites.

•   Don’t use geographic descriptors interchangeably with reli-
    gious or other terms to describe specific groups of people. For
    example, “Muslim” is not synonymous with Arab, and African
    Americans are the largest Muslim population in the United
    States.

•   New categories enter everyday language as communities
    change and people organize themselves, but there is a danger
    with conflation and avoiding the issue of race by using terms
    that are not race-explicit.

•   Avoid terms like “lighter-skinned” or “darker-skinned”
    without a specific point of comparison. All groups of people
    — White, African American, Latinos, Asian American, Native
    American — show wide variation in skin tone, and should not
    be characterized in general in comparison to other groups.




                                15
Notes on the AP Stylebook
The Associated Press Stylebook is one of the industry standards
on language and usage in media outlets. It has several entries re-
lated to race, covering the basics, but is missing entries on terms
and concepts we think are important, such as “racism” or “hate
crime.” Race Forward offers a differing perspective on the use of
the term “minorities” (see Key Terms & Concepts “minorities” and
“people of color”) and capitalization of Black and White (see
Covering Key Issues “Reporting on Specific Racial and Ethnic
Groups”). Race Forward’s race reporting guide aims to provide
more context and guidelines to inform reporting and language
used when reporting on issues impacted by race. However,
language is not static and can change over time; for example, the
AP changed their style book in 2013 to “Drop the I-Word” and no
longer use “illegal” to describe immigrants. Listed here are some
of the AP’s current race-focused guidelines:


•   The term “minorities” is usually acceptable in news stories.

•   Only using identification by race or ethnicity when it is perti-
    nent, such as in:

       - Biographical and announcement stories that involve                
          significant, groundbreaking or historic events.

       - For suspects sought by the police or missing per-                   
          son cases using police or other credible, detailed    
          descriptions. Such descriptions apply for all races.
          The racial reference should be removed when the
          individual is apprehended or found.

       -  When reporting a demonstration or disturbance
          involving race or such issues as civil rights or slavery.




                                    16
•   Covering specific racial groups: follow the person’s prefer-
    ence, use a more specific identification when possible.

•   Do not capitalize Black or White.

•   Avoid slurs: if necessary, use in quotes, or better to identify
    as “a racial slur” or replace the offensive word with a generic
    descriptive in parentheses, e.g., (vulgarity) or (obscenity).

•   Do not stereotype in negative or “positive” ways related to
    hygiene, intelligence, skills, physical attributes.

•   Use illegal only to refer to an action, not a person: illegal
    immigration, but not illegal immigrant. Do not use the terms
    illegal alien, an illegal, illegals or undocumented.




                                 17
18
        SEVEN HARMFUL PRACTICES




Seven Harmful
Racial Discourse
Practices to Avoid
In a demanding news cycle with ever-tightening budgets and
fluctuating staff, it can be challenging to cover news from a
perspective that thoughtfully addresses race. The best coverage
moves beyond personal prejudice and hate to systemic problems
and solutions; focuses on actions and impacts rather than atti-
tudes and intentions; adds a racial lens to our conversations on
class, gender, sexuality, and so on; and cultivates discourse that
honors the humanity and leadership of people of color. At a mini-
mum, however, it is important that journalists and media-makers
avoid seven harmful racial discourse practices commonly found
in news media.




                                19
1. INDIVIDUALIZING RACISM
Concentrating attention exclusively on thoughts or acts of
personal prejudice.

EFFECT ON RACIAL DISCOURSE
Reinforces the common misconception that racism is simply a
personal problem that should be resolved by shaming, punish-
ing, or re-educating the individual offender. Often leads to long,
inconclusive debates about what is in a person’s “heart,” and
whether or not they intended to be hurtful or discriminatory.
Perpetuates false notions of individual agency in our national
consciousness.

EXAMPLE
A celebrity or prominent business owner is surreptitiously
recorded using racial slurs or otherwise demeaning people of
color, particularly a group he or she relies upon as employees,
consumers, and/or sources of substantive content or inspiration.
Media and general public focus moral indignation on the hurtful
words rather than any corresponding record of discrimination in
their business practices or impact.




2. FALSELY EQUATING
INCOMPARABLE ACTS
Drawing a parallel between an act or expression of racial bias
from privileged Whites and one from that of comparatively
disadvantaged people of color, without taking into account any
power differentials between the two.

EFFECT ON RACIAL DISCOURSE
Provides an excuse for, or otherwise seeks to absolve, an indi-
vidual who has expressed a racist idea or committed a racist act.
Encourages the audience to apply a blanket standard of “color-
blindness” without acknowledging that the biases of Whites have



                                 20
a broader impact and get reinforced by institution and systems of
power in ways that the biases of people and communities of color
do not.

EXAMPLE
Cell phone footage is released of two Latino young men using
racially charged language against White and African American
police officers in response to an incident of racial profiling that
quickly escalates into violent police brutality. Media and pundits
on the left and right of the political spectrum focus time and
attention on discussing and condemning the “reverse racism” of
the youth rather than the history of systemic racism and commu-
nity complaints about the department.  




3. DIVERTING FROM RACE
The practice of asserting that other social identities besides race,
such as class, gender, or sexual orientation, are the predominant
determining factors behind a given social inequity.

EFFECT ON RACIAL DISCOURSE
Ranks systems of power and dismisses racism as a primary, or
even legitimate, determinant of social inequity. This logic inhibits
an understanding of how bias and discrimination against groups
for one reason – race, gender, sexuality, socioeconomic class – in-
tersects with others and works together. This promotes an either/
or instead of a both/and framework. The latter offers an import-
ant sociological and historical perspective, rather than a single
identity or non-racial analysis.

EXAMPLE
A statewide LGBT non-profit organization releases a report that
includes findings on rising rates of LGBT youth homelessness.
Media coverage fails to take into account and report on how race/
ethnicity and immigrant status have differing impacts on the
experience of homelessness for LGBT youth of color, and how
they affect their interactions with public, nonprofit and private
institutions.
                                 21
4. PORTRAYING GOVERNMENT
AS OVERREACHING
Depicting government efforts to promote racial equity and inclu-
sion as misguided, unnecessary and/or improper.

EFFECT ON RACIAL DISCOURSE
Undermines support for a significant government role in dis-
mantling systemic racism. Suggests that if government would
just “get out of the way” (i.e., stop infringing on the individual
freedom of Whites), we could have a “colorblind” country once
and for all.

EXAMPLE
A low-income family of color recounts the story of how they “got
in over their heads” in the housing market through the rapid
refinancing of their home.  Media coverage blames a govern-
ment program for first-time homebuyers that helped the family
make their initial purchase, for disrupting “market forces” which
should be “free” from government “social engineering.”




5. PRIORITIZING INTENT OVER IMPACT
Focusing more on the intention of a policy or practice and far
less, if at all, on its daily impact on people and communities of
color.

EFFECT ON RACIAL DISCOURSE
Devalues the humanity of the people and communities of color
that bear the brunt of a policy’s implementation. Obscures the
role of implicit bias in that policy’s operation, and reinforces the
power of White fear in policy and decision-making.

EXAMPLE
As part of a public health campaign to treat and contain the
outbreak of an infectious disease, a city mayor strongly connects
the disease with a low-income East Asian immigrant community,
thereby stigmatizing the group. Public statements from the city

                                 22
administration and reports on the outbreak in the media
disregard the vantage point of those most affected and under-
resourced in the health and education systems, particularly chil-
dren who are likely to face harassment, bullying, and worse.
Policy and public perspectives fail to take into account this
group’s point of view on how best to approach the issue.




6. CODED LANGUAGE
Substituting terms describing racial identity with seemingly
race-neutral terms that disguise explicit and/or implicit racial
animus.

EFFECT ON RACIAL DISCOURSE
Injects language that triggers racial stereotypes and other neg-
ative associations without the stigma of explicit racism. Fosters
anxiety among audiences for the coverage and dehumanizes
people and communities of color.

EXAMPLE
Two or three shoplifting incidents in a downtown area, allegedly
perpetrated by 8-10 African American junior high students, draw
the attention of local news media. Quotes or descriptions from
witnesses characterize the 11- to 12-year olds using “pack animal”
imagery and terms such as “hyenas,” “menacing” and “vicious,”
that play to White stereotypes and fears of youth of color.




                                 23
7. SILENCING HISTORY
Omitting, dismissing, or deliberately re-writing history.

EFFECT ON RACIAL DISCOURSE
Isolates racial disparities and attitudes from a historical con-
text and instead presents them as a unique, individual instance.
Results in incomplete or inaccurate understandings of the root
causes of these disparities and attitudes. Obscures the pathway to
illuminate which solutions are most viable or warranted.
Miseducates the public.

EXAMPLE
Tribal leaders have floated a proposal to expand an American
Indian gaming facility in a suburb of a major city where state
lotteries and scratch cards abound. Media coverage of the
American Indian proposals primarily reflects the perspective of
and the potential effects upon the non-Indian population and do
not mention principles of tribal sovereignty and self-determi-
nation; how tribal lands were reserved through treaties with the
United States; or the importance of economic development for
Native tribes.




                                24
                            KEY TERMS & CONCEPTS




Key Terms &
Concepts
Essential to good reporting on race is understanding the context
and historical background that many terms convey. This section
of Race Forward’s Race Reporting Guide aims to inform reporting
and support appropriate language and story framing. While not
intended to be a traditional dictionary, the information provided
here is intended to enhance understanding of some terminology
and encourage usage that reflects cultural and racial awareness.


Affirmative action
This term describes policies adopted since the 1960s that require
“affirmative” (or positive) actions be to taken to ensure people of
color and women have opportunities equal to those of White men
in the areas of promotions, salary increases, school admissions,
financial aid, scholarships, and representation among vendors
in government contracts. Although they have been effective in
redressing injustice and discrimination that persisted in spite of
civil rights laws and constitutional guarantees, the policies have
been attacked because of perceived “reverse discrimination.” The
Supreme Court has not ruled all affirmative action unconstitu-
tional but has limited the use and ways which policies can be
written and applied. See “Reverse discrimination.”


Anti-racism
The work of actively opposing racism by advocating for changes
in political, economic, and social life. Anti-racism tends to be an
individualized approach, and set up in opposition to individual
racist behaviors and impacts.


Civil rights
A group of laws designed to protect various groups against dis-
crimination based on race, sex, religion, age, national origin, and

                                 25
other characteristics. Often used in connection to the Civil Rights
Movement, widely recognized as taking place from 1954 to 1968,
which included  issues and practices such as school desegrega-
tion, sit-ins, “Freedom rides,” voter registration campaigns, and
other acts of civil disobedience to protest racial discrimination.


Class
Classism is the systematic oppression of subordinated class
groups, held in place by attitudes that rank people according to
economic status, family lineage, job status, level of education, and
other divisions. One’s race can be a major determinant of one’s
social or economic class. The variables of race and class, though
closely connected, each need distinct attention.


“Colorblind”
A term used to describe a disregard of racial characteristics or
lack of influence by racial prejudice. The concept of colorblind-
ness is often promoted by those who dismiss the importance of
race in order to proclaim the end of racism. It presents challenges
when discussing diversity, which requires being racially aware,
and equity that is focused on fairness for people of all races.


Colorism
Discrimination based on skin color, which often privileges
lighter-skinned people within a racial group, positioning people
with darker complexions at the bottom of the racial hierarchy.  It
is an example of how White supremacy can operate amongst the
members of a single racial or ethnic group. This form of prejudice
often results in reduced opportunities for those who are discrimi-
nated against, and numerous studies have revealed differences in
life outcomes by complexion.




                                 26
Cultural appropriation or “misappropriation”
Adoption of elements of a culture that has been subordinated in
social, political, economic, status by a different cultural group. It
may rely on offensive stereotypes, and is insensitive to how the
culture of a group has been exploited by the culture in power,
often for profit.


Discrimination
Treatment of an individual or group based on their actual or per-
ceived membership in a social category, usually used to describe
unjust or prejudicial treatment on the grounds of race, age, sex,
gender, ability, socioeconomic class, immigration status, national
origin, or religion.


Diversity
There are many kinds of diversity, based on race, gender, sexu-
al orientation, class, age, country of origin, education, religion,
geography, physical, or cognitive abilities. Valuing diversity
means recognizing differences between people, acknowledging
that these differences are a valued asset, and striving for diverse
representation as a critical step towards equity. See “Equity.”


Equity
Equity means fairness and justice and focuses on outcomes that
are most appropriate for a given group, recognizing different
challenges, needs, and histories. It is distinct from diversity,
which can simply mean variety (the presence of individuals with
various identities). It is also not equality, or “same treatment,”
which doesn’t take differing needs or disparate outcomes into
account. Systemic equity involves a robust system and dynam-
ic process consciously designed to create, support and sustain
social justice. See “Racial Justice.”




                                  27
Ethnicity
A socially constructed grouping of people based on culture, tribe,
language, national heritage, and/or religion. It is often used
interchangeably with race and/or national origin, but should be
instead considered as an overlapping, rather than identical, cate-
gory.  See the section “Covering Key Issues with a Racial Lens” and the
term “Racial & Ethnic Categories.”


Hate crime
Criminal acts, motivated by bias, that target victims based on
their perceived membership in a certain social group. Incidents
may involve physical assault, damage to property, bullying, ha-
rassment, verbal abuse, offensive graffiti, letters or email.  Hate
crime laws enhance the penalties associated with conduct that is
already criminal under other laws.


Implicit bias/unconscious bias
Attitudes that unconsciously affect our decisions and actions.
People often think of bias as intentional, i.e. someone wanted
to say something racist. However, brain science has shown that
people are often unaware of their bias, and the concept of im-
plicit bias helps describe a lot of contemporary racist acts that
may not be overt or intentional. Implicit bias is just as harmful,
so it is important to talk about race explicitly and to take steps to
address it. Institutions are composed of individuals whose biases
are replicated, and then produce systemic inequities. It is possi-
ble to interrupt implicit bias by adding steps to decision-making
processes that thoughtfully consider and address racial impacts.  


Inclusion
Being included within a group or structure.  More than simply
diversity and quantitative representation, inclusion involves
authentic and empowered participation, with a true sense of
belonging and full access to opportunities.




                                  28
Intersectionality
The acknowledgement that multiple power dynamics/”isms” are
operating simultaneously—often in complex and compounding
ways—and must be considered together in order to have a more
complete understanding of oppression and ways to transform
it. There are multiple forms of privilege and oppression based
on race, gender, class, sexuality, age, ability, religion, citizenship
or immigration status, and so on. These social hierarchies are
products of our social, cultural, political, economic, and legal
environment. They drive disparities and divisions that help those
in power maintain and expand their power. There’s a danger in
falsely equating different dynamics (e.g. racism and sexism) or
comparing different systems to each other (sometimes referred
to as the “oppression Olympics”). It is important to give each
dynamic distinct, specific and sufficient attention. Every person
is privileged in some areas and disadvantaged in other areas.


Minority/minorities
A term that has historically referred to non-White racial groups,
indicating that they were numerically smaller than the dominant
White majority. Defining people of color as “minorities” is not
recommended because of changing demographics and the ways
in which it reinforces ideas of inferiority and marginalization of
a group of people. Defining people by how they self-identify is
often preferable and more respectful. The term “minority” may
be needed in specific cases (such as “minority contracting” and
“minority-owned businesses”) to reflect data that is collected
using those categories. See the term “People of color,” and the
section Covering Key Issues with a Racial Lens.


Mixed race, biracial, multiracial
Generally accepted terms to describe a person who has mixed
ancestry of two or more races. Many terms for people of various
multiracial backgrounds exist, some of which are pejorative or
are no longer used. The U.S. Census first gave the option for a
person to identify as belonging to more than one race in 2000, at
which time approximately 9 million individuals, or 2.9% of the
population, self-identified as multiracial.

                                  29
Multicultural
Involving various cultures in a society, usually with intent to
promote tolerance, inclusion, and equal respect for cultural di-
versity. Does not include an explicit racial lens. Multiculturalism
often focuses on interpersonal interaction and communication
between people of different cultures rather than a systemic ap-
proach to advance equity.


People of color
Often the preferred collective term for referring to non-White
racial groups, rather than “minorities.” Racial justice advocates
have been using the term “people of color” (not to be confused
with the pejorative “colored people”) since the late 1970s as an
inclusive and unifying frame across different racial groups that
are not White, to address racial inequities. While “people of color”
can be a politically useful term, and describes people with their
own attributes (as opposed to what they are not, eg: “non-White”),
it is also important whenever possible to identify people through
their own racial/ethnic group, as each has its own distinct experi-
ence and meaning and may be more appropriate.


“Post-racial”
A term used to describe a time in which racial prejudice and dis-
crimination no longer exist. There are deep racial disparities and
divisions across our society, and some are even widening. Much
like the notion of “colorblindness,” the idea of a “post-racial”
society does not acknowledge that racism and inequity sit at the
core of many of our nation’s deepest challenges.
See “Colorblind.”


Privilege
A set of advantages systemically conferred on a particular person
or group of people. White people are racially privileged, even if
they are economically underprivileged. Privilege and oppression
go hand-in-hand: they are two sides of the same power relation-
ship, and both sides of the equation must be understood and


                                 30
addressed. People can be disadvantaged by one identity and
privileged by another. See “Intersectionality,” “White
supremacy.”


Race
While often assumed to be a biological classification, based on
physical and genetic variation, racial categories do not have a
scientific basis. However, the consequences of racial categoriza-
tion are real, as the ideology of race has become embedded in our
identities, institutions, and culture, and is used as a basis for dis-
crimination and racial profiling. How one is racialized is a major
determinant of one’s socioeconomic status and life opportunities.
See “Racial & ethnic categories.”


Racial & ethnic categories
System of organizing people into groups based on their identified
race and ethnicity, with categories that may change over time.
Data is derived from self-identification questions; however, peo-
ple often do not get to select the categories from which they must
choose, making most methods of categorizing and counting
highly political and often problematic. See the section Covering
Key Issues “Reporting on Racial And Ethnic Groups.”


Racial hierarchy
Ranking of different races/ethnic groups, based on physical
and perceived characteristics. Racial hierarchy is not a binary
of White vs. non-White, rather a complex system where groups
occupy different rungs of political, economic and cultural power.
Racist ideology relies on maintaining hierarchies, even among
racial groups.


Racial justice
The systematic fair treatment of people of all races, resulting in
equitable opportunities and outcomes for all. Racial justice—or
racial equity—goes beyond “anti-racism.” It is not just the absence


                                  31
of discrimination and inequities, but also the presence of delib-
erate systems and supports to achieve and sustain racial equity
through proactive and preventative measures.


Racial profiling
The discriminatory practice by law enforcement officials of
targeting people of color for suspicion of crime without evidence
of criminal activity, based on their perceived race, ethnicity,
national origin or religion (e.g., “stop and frisk”). Racial profiling
is ineffective, damages community-police relationships, and is
being litigated around the country as a violation of constitution-
al rights. However, racial profiling continues to be used by law
enforcement authorities at the federal, state, and local levels.


Racial slur
Derogatory, pejorative, or insulting terms for members of a racial
or ethnic group. While some slurs, like the “n-word” are under-
stood as such and are avoided, some slurs are still used in every-
day speech, with little understanding of their harm. Two such
examples that are inaccurate, racially charged, and should not be
used:

•   “Illegals”
    Many outlets have changed their style guides to stop using
    “illegal” as it applies to immigrants as a result of Race For-
    ward’s Drop the I-Word campaign. For more information visit
    droptheiword.com.

•   “Redskin”
    Despite being a dictionary-defined slur, it remains in use as
    the team name for the Washington NFL franchise. There has
    been widespread campaign for the renaming of the team,
    as well as other sports teams that continue to use offensive
    names.




                                  32
Racism
Historically rooted system of power hierarchies based on race—
infused in our institutions, policies and culture—that benefit
White people and hurt people of color. Racism isn’t limited to in-
dividual acts of prejudice, either deliberate or accidental. Rather,
the most damaging racism is built into systems and institutions
that shape our lives. Most coverage of race and racism is not
“systemically aware,” meaning that it either focuses on racism at
the level of individuals’ speech or actions, individual-level racism,
dismisses systemic racism, or refers to racism in the past tense.
See more on the Four Dimensions of Racism in the Appendix,
p.36.


Racist
Describes a person, behavior, or incident that perpetuates racism.
Stories of race and racism that focus on personal prejudice
(“who’s a racist”) get a disproportionate share of attention in the
media. This reinforces the message that racism is primarily a
phenomenon of overt, intentional acts carried out by prejudiced
individuals who need correcting and/or shaming, and tends to
spark debates of limited value about that individual’s character.
It is important for media to use a systemic lens on race-related
stories to examine systems, institutional practices, policies, and
outcomes.


“Reverse racism”
A concept based on a misunderstanding of what racism is, often
used to accuse and attack efforts made to rectify systemic injus-
tices. Every individual can be prejudiced and biased at one time
or another about various people and behaviors, but racism is
based on power and systematic oppression. Individual prejudice
and systemic racism cannot be equated. Even though some peo-
ple of color hold powerful positions, White people overwhelm-
ingly hold the most systemic power. The concept of “reverse rac-
ism” ignores structural racism, which permeates all dimensions
of our society, routinely advantaging White people and disadvan-
taging people of color. It is deeply entrenched and in no danger of
being dismantled or “reversed” any time soon.

                                 33
Stereotype
Characteristics ascribed to a person or groups of people based on
generalization and oversimplification that may result in stigma-
tization and discrimination. Even so-called positive stereotypes
(e.g., Asians as “model minorities”) can be harmful due to their
limiting nature.


Systemic analysis
A systemic analysis means we are examining the root causes and
the mechanisms at play that result in patterns. It involves looking
beyond individual speech, acts, and practices to the larger struc-
tures — organizations, institutions, traditions, and systems of
knowledge.


White supremacy
 A form of racism centered upon the belief that White people are
superior to people of other racial backgrounds and that Whites
should politically, economically, and socially dominate non-
Whites. While often associated with violence perpetrated by the
KKK and other White supremacist groups, it also describes a
political ideology and systemic oppression that perpetuates and
maintains the social, political, historical and/or industrial White
domination.




                                 34
                                               RESOURCES




Race Forward Resources:
Moving the Race Conversation Forward
http://raceforward.org/moving-race-conversation-forward

Drop the I-Word
http://droptheiword.com

Racial Equity Impact Assessment Toolkit
http://raceforward.org/racial-equity-impact-assessment-toolkit

Colorlines
http://colorlines.com/

What is Systemic Racism?
https://www.raceforward.org/videos/systemic-racism




Additional Resources:
W.K. Kellogg Foundation’s Racial Equity Resource Guide
www.racialequityresourceguide.org

Kirwan Institute for the Study of Race and Ethnicity’s
State of the Science: Implicit Bias Review 2015
http://kirwaninstitute.osu.edu/implicit-bias-review/

For more resources, visit Race Forward’s Race Reporting
Guide online
http://raceforward.org/reporting-guide




                                   35
                                                    APPENDIX




APPENDIX


Four Dimensions of
Racism, from Race
Forward Trainings:
  INDIVIDUAL-LEVEL RACISM

  INTERNALIZED RACISM                    INTERPERSONAL RACISM
  The private racial beliefs held        How we act upon our racial
  by individuals.                        beliefs when we interact with
                                         others.

  EXAMPLE                                EXAMPLE
  Prejudice, internalized oppres-        Bias, bigotry, hate speech and
  sion and internalized privilege        violence


  SYSTEMIC-LEVEL RACISM

  INSTITUTIONAL RACISM                   STRUCTURAL RACISM
  Racial inequities within insti-        Racial bias across institutions
  tutions and systems                    and society.
  of power.


  EXAMPLE                                EXAMPLE
  School systems that provide            The racial wealth gap reflects
  unequal opportunities for              the cumulative effects of of
  people of different races              racial inequities.



ONLINE RESOURCES
See Race Forward’s Racial Equity Impact Assessment Toolkit
http://raceforward.org/racial-equity-impact-assessment-toolkit




                                    36
     NOTES




37
38
39
40
41
Race Forward advances racial justice through
research, media, and practice. Founded in 1981,
Race Forward brings systemic analysis and an
innovative approach to complex race issues to
help people take effective action toward racial
equity. Race Forward publishes the daily news
site Colorlines and presents Facing Race, the
country’s largest multiracial conference on
racial justice.
