                                                                                                                                 OREGON
Access to Linguistic Inclusion (HB 2056)                                                                          JiR           suiex%
                                                                                                                                DEPARTMENT OF

                                                                                                                     Oregon achieves...   together!
             Guidance and Explanation for Schools and Districts
The following document explains Access to Linguistic Inclusion (also known as HB 2056), which was
passed in the 2021 legislative session. It provides a short overview of the law, explains its impact on
specific academic content areas, and concludes with relevant questions and answers.



What is Access to Linguistic Inclusion?
Access to Linguistic Inclusion equips Oregon schools and districts with new tools to honor and recognize
the achievements of Oregon’s multilingual and multicultural students. At least 160 different languages
are spoken by students in Oregon. This law honors the linguistic heritage of Oregon’s students and
communities and paves the way for a multilingual educational environment in Oregon’s schools. It also
removes structural barriers to high school graduation for students in the process of learning English, and
recognizes that content learning can and should occur in multiple languages.
Access to Linguistic Inclusion:
     e    Repeals the statute that mandated nearly all instruction in Oregon be conducted in English. This
          means that districts may offer courses (in any content area) in languages other than English.
     e    Expands two definitions.
              Oo Changes the name “English language arts” to “language arts” and revises the definition
                  to: “includes reading, writing and other communications in any language, including
                  English.”
              O   Changes the definition of World Language: “World languages” includes sign language,
                    heritage languages, and languages other than a student’s primary language.
     e    Expands the opportunities that schools and districts may offer to students, such as course credit
          options for multilingual students. It does not, however, impose new requirements as to which
          courses schools must teach or offer.


 Bill History
 In 2021, the Oregon Legislature passed Access to Linguistic Inclusion, introduced as HB 2056. This
 law—one of multiple equity bills brought forward during the 2020-21 legislative session—increases
 the opportunity for, and recognition of, multilingual education in Oregon. Access to Linguistic Inclusion
 enjoyed a broad base of support from K-12 educators, postsecondary educators (including
 representatives from Oregon’s Public Universities), and community partners.

 The legislative history and enrolled text of Access to Linguistic Inclusion can be found on the Oregon
 State Legislature HB 2056 overview page.



Language Arts
Access to Linguistic Inclusion revises the definition of “Language Arts” to include reading, writing and
other communications in any language, including English.




' In addition to the cha nges below, Access to Linguistic Inclusion adds a definition for “holocaust and genocide studies.”
* The previous definition reads: “English” includes, but is not limited to, reading and writing.
                                                                                                                                OREGON
Access to Linguistic Inclusion (HB 2056)                                                                        JiR            suiex%
                                                                                                                               DEPARTMENT OF

                                                                                                                    Oregon achieves...   together!
             Guidance and Explanation for Schools and Districts
Oregon’s English Language Arts and Literacy standards were adopted prior to the passage of Access to
Linguistic Inclusion; therefore, when evaluating whether Language Arts courses meet Oregon’s adopted
English Language Arts and Literacy standards, use the following interpretations:
     e    Read references to “English” (such as “English grammar” or “standard English usage”) as
         referring to the language of study in the course.
     e   Translate geographically or culturally specific markers in the standards to markers appropriate
          for the language and culture of study in the course.

As a reminder, a district can only award high school Language Arts credit in Oregon if the course covers
applicable grade-level content described in Oregon’s adopted English Language Arts and Literacy
standards.



World Language
Access to Linguistic Inclusion revises the definition of “World Languages” to include sign language,
heritage languages’, and languages other than a student’s primary language.’ Under this definition,
English may be a World Language for a student if it is not a student’s primary language.
As areminder, districts in Oregon can only award high school World Language credit for a course if it
covers content described in Oregon’s adopted World Languages standards that is appropriate to the
targeted proficiency level of the course.
A student is eligible to receive high school World Language credit from courses identified according to
the criteria above if the language and content of the course constitute a “world language” for that
student, according to the definition above.

Both the awarding and receiving criteria above must apply for the district to award World Language
credit to a student in a given course.
Course work completed in a student’s heritage language may count for World Language credit; it is not
necessary to demonstrate that a student has greater or less proficiency in English than their heritage
language. Students for whom English is a World Language (per the definition above), and who complete
qualifying coursework in English, may meet eligibility criteria to receive World Language credit.




3 For the purposes of Access to Linguistic Inclusion, “heritage language” means a language that has cultural or familial
significance to a student, going beyond personal preference. A student’s primary language cannot be a heritage language if it is
also the language of the dominant culture in the student’s educational environment (definition adapted from Fishman 1999, as
cited by King and Ennser-Kananen).
      e    Example: A student from Bolivia learned Spanish first and English after immigrating to the United States. Spanish is a
          heritage language for this student.
     e    Example: A student has a cultural or familial connection to the Siuslaw people. Siuslaw is a heritage language for this
          student, even if the student is a monolingual English speaker.
     e    Example: A student comes from a household that primarily speaks English but studies other languages as a culturally
          enriching experience. The student’s primary language is English. Since English is also the primary language of the
          dominant culture in Oregon schools, English is not a heritage language for this student.
4 The previous definition reads: “World languages” means American Sign Language, and languages other than English.
                                                                                                              OREGON
Access to Linguistic Inclusion (HB 2056)                                                       JiR           suiex%
                                                                                                             DEPARTMENT OF

                                                                                                  Oregon achieves...   together!
            Guidance and Explanation for Schools and Districts

Applying Access to Linguistic Inclusion
As part of Oregon’s graduation requirements, which predate Access to Linguistic Inclusion, each student
shall develop an Education Plan and Profile, which includes planning course taking and planning for post-
secondary transitions. Schools must consider this Education Plan and Profile when making decisions
regarding whether and how Access to Linguistic Inclusion might be applied to help individual students
meet graduation requirements and attain their post-secondary goals. While the intent of Access to
Linguistic Inclusion is to remove structural barriers to high school graduation, it is also important that
schools support students and families in understanding that the course requirements that post-
secondary institutions apply during the admissions process may continue to emphasize course
completion in the English language.

For example, some university admissions require four years of “English.” Additionally, students who are
found to be insufficiently prepared for university-level English (in terms of language or in terms of
academic composition) may be required to take remedial English courses. If the student is considering
college-level athletics, they will also want to consider National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA)
rules to ensure the transcript aligns with the course requirements of NCAA. Therefore, in considering
when and where to apply flexibilities available under Access to Linguistic Inclusion, districts should take
care not to close off opportunities while opening others.


Common Applications
The following list is not exhaustive.
 Course                   Credit option      Requirements and Notes

 Advanced English         Language Arts      e   Course covers English Language Arts and Literacy standards
 Language                                    e   Student demonstrates proficiency
 Development                                 e   Course planning/delivery involves appropriately endorsed
                                                 teacher(s)
                                             e   Language Arts credit is awarded instead of elective credit

 English Language         World Language | @     Course covers World Languages standards
 Development                                 e   Student demonstrates proficiency
                                             e   Course planning/delivery involves appropriately endorsed
                                                 teacher(s)
                                             e   World Language credit is awarded instead of elective credit

 Spanish Literature       Language Arts      e   Course covers English Language Arts and Literacy standards
 and Language                                e   Student demonstrates proficiency
                                             e   Course planning/delivery involves appropriately endorsed
                                                 teacher(s)

 Literature Course        Language Arts      e   Course is an international equivalent to Oregon Language
 on an International                             Arts courses
 Transcript
                                                                                                             OREGON
Access to Linguistic Inclusion (HB 2056)                                                      JiR            suiex%
                                                                                                             DEPARTMENT OF

                                                                                                 Oregon achieves...   together!
           Guidance and Explanation for Schools and Districts
Remember that the student’s education plan and profile should always be considered when awarding
credit through Access to Linguistic Inclusion.


Multiple Credit Applications
Interactions between the new definition of Language Arts and the new definition of World Language
make it possible for some students to earn two credits for a single course: one in Language Arts, and one
in World Language. This is only possible if all awarding and receiving criteria are met for a particular
student in a particular course. The grade level for the two credits may not match (e.g. a 12th grade
course may be found to cover English Language Arts standards at the 9th grade level), or a course may
only offer partial credit for one of its content areas.
As a reminder, the awarding criterion means the course covers applicable, grade-level content as
described in Oregon’s adopted academic standards for the content area in question. The receiving
criterion means the language and the content of the course count as a World Language for the student
who will be receiving that credit (and only that student; other students receive only the course’s “base”
credit).

The table below lists all allowable interactions that would result in earning both a Language Arts anda
World Language credit for a single course. All of the situations described below are rare and require
careful district review to establish both awarding and receiving criteria. Any situation not listed in the
table below does not qualify to award multiple credits under the new definitions in Access to Linguistic
Inclusion.

 Courses eligible for        Notes and reminders
 multiple credit

 English Language Arts       e    Only students for whom English is a World Language would receive World
                                  Language credit in an English Language Arts course.

 Language Arts ina           e    Examples: Spanish Language Arts, Russian Language Arts.
 language other than         e    This category includes Heritage Language courses of sufficient rigor to
 English                          award Language Arts credit.

 Advanced English            e    Because these courses are offered exclusively to students with English
 Language Development             Learner status, English is a World Language for these students.
                             e    See Question 8 in the Questions and Answers below.

 Advanced World              e    A traditional fourth year language course does not cover standards
 Language courses                 sufficiently to award Language Arts credit. This may be possible in very
                                  advanced courses, such as 7+ year programs which begin in middle or
                                  elementary school.



International Transcripts
The following factors are recommended for handling international transcripts:
                                                                                                              OREGON
Access to Linguistic Inclusion (HB 2056)                                                       JiR           suiex%
                                                                                                             DEPARTMENT OF

                                                                                                  Oregon achieves...   together!
         Guidance and Explanation for Schools and Districts
  e    Every effort should be made to obtain missing transcripts, working in close collaboration with
       families.
  e    Staff who are responsible for transcript evaluation should have appropriate training and
       professional development.
  e    Ideally, the same group of trained staff will handle all transcript evaluation, to ensure
       consistency across schools and years.
  e    Courses taken outside the United States should be judged solely on their academic merits:
            Oo   Course credit equivalencies and credit transfer should be in the same content
                 area/subject, regardless of the language of instruction.
            Oo   Courses should transfer in, whenever possible, with an equivalent letter grade.
            Oo   Students’ levels of English proficiency should have no bearing on how their transcripts
                 are evaluated.
  e    Districts should have a clear policy and process in place for international transcript evaluation.
  e    District policy should be reviewed regularly to meet the needs of newly-arrived students.
  e    Language Arts and World Language courses may appear on transcripts from any country. ELD
       courses or their equivalents are most likely to appear on transcripts from English speaking
       countries.



Questions and Answers
  1.   Willschools and districts be required to offer instruction in languages other than English?
            a.   No. Access to Linguistic Inclusion expands the opportunities that schools and districts
                 may offer to students, but it does not impose new instructional requirements.
  2.   Will districts be required to rename or restructure high school courses, course categories, or
       departments based on this law?
            a.     No. Access to Linguistic Inclusion does not require renaming of courses or course
                   categories. In fact, doing so could in some cases be detrimental to students’ post-
                   secondary planning (for example, if the student is applying to a university that requires
                   four years of “English”). See “Applying Access to Linguistic Inclusion” above.
            b.     Access to Linguistic Inclusion does not require a wholesale removal of the word
                   “English” from school or district course offerings. Because the law increases the range
                   and variety of courses a school or district can offer, however, districts may wish to
                   reexamine some course titles for accuracy and clarity (regarding the principal content of
                study and credit awarded).
  3.   Will districts need to pursue additional instructional materials adoptions as a result of Access
       to Linguistic Inclusion? For example, does the new law require districts to adopt sets of
       Spanish Language Arts materials?
           a.  Districts are not required to offer Language Arts courses in languages other than English
              as a result of Access to Linguistic Inclusion, nor does Access to Linguistic Inclusion require
              adoption of instructional materials in languages other than English.
  4.   Under Access to Linguistic Inclusion, is it possible for a student to earn a high school diploma
       without studying English composition and literature during their high school career?
           a.  Oregon’s adopted English Language Arts and Literacy standards, as well as Oregon’s
               English Language Arts summative assessment, remain in place.
  5.   Under Access to Linguistic Inclusion, can two credits be awarded for one course?
                                                                                                                 OREGON
Access to Linguistic Inclusion (HB 2056)                                                          JiR           suiex%
                                                                                                                DEPARTMENT OF

                                                                                                     Oregon achieves...   together!
          Guidance and Explanation for Schools and Districts
            a.   Due to the interaction of the new definitions for Language Arts and World Language,
                 this is possible in specific circumstances. All such interactions are listed in the “Multiple
                 Credit Applications” section above. Criteria for eligibility both to award and to receive
                 credit must be met.
   6.   Is Access to Linguistic Inclusion retroactive? For example, can credit be awarded for courses
        that were completed prior to the effective date of the law?
            a.   Access to Linguistic Inclusion is not explicitly retroactive, so it is not necessary for
                 districts to update the historic transcripts for all students who have ever attended the
                 institution. However, it is within the equity focus of the law to award credits for current
                 or recent students who may benefit from the expanded recognition afforded by the law,
                 even if awarded credits come from courses that were completed prior to the effective
                 date of Access to Linguistic Inclusion. (These courses would still need to be eligible to
                 award credit, as described earlier in this guidance.)
   7.   Who decides whether a course meets the expanded definition of Language Arts or World
        Language?
            a. These determinations are made by the district. The course must meet appropriate
                Language Arts or World Language standards, as described earlier in this communication.
   8.   Under Access to Linguistic Inclusion, can districts award English Language Arts credit for
        English Language Development courses?
            a.   This is possible. However, be aware that English Language Development (ELD) and
                 Language Arts are different disciplines, with different goals and different academic
                 standards. OAR 581-022-2025 explicitly links course credit to content standards. For a
                 course to award Language Arts credit, it must address appropriate grade-level English
                 Language Arts standards.
            b.   When considering whether to award Language Arts credit for completed ELD
                 coursework, consider existing Language Arts courses as a standard of comparison. Is a
                student who completes a given ELD course receiving the same content and academic
                preparation as students in a Grade X (9, 10, 11, or 12) Language Arts course? Do they
                learn the same knowledge and skills? After completing this course, will this student be
                ready for the reading, writing, research, and compositional demands of the next stage of
                their education?
   9.   When awarding credit under Access to Linguistic Inclusion, what requirements need to be met
        regarding teacher credentialing and licensure?
            a.   Access to Linguistic Inclusion makes no changes to existing rules about teacher licensure.
                 The following resources relate to teacher licensure and credentialing:
                      i.   ODE’s Teacher Licensure page
                    il.    OAR 584-210-0020 Scope and Responsibilities of Teachers of Record
                   iii.    OAR 584-210-0160 License for Conditional Assignment (Section 2 of this OAR
                           addresses teaching out of field)
                   iv.     OAR 584-210-0170 Atypical Assignments



Contact Information
Please contact both Tina Roberts and Ben Wolcott with questions about Access to Linguistic Inclusion.
                                                                                                OREGON
Access to Linguistic Inclusion (HB 2056)                      .   .
                                                                                   JiR         suiex%
                                                                                               DEPARTMENT OF

                                                                                    Oregon achieves... together!
       .                          .
     Guidance and Explanation for Schools and Districts

Appendix: Credit Decision Trees
                                      Language Arts



                             Does the course cover applicable
                             grade-level content described in
                            Oregon’s adopted English Language
                               Arts and Literacy standards?




                 Yes                                                  No




       District may offer                                 District may NOT offer
       Language Arts Credit                               Language Arts Credit
                                                                                                          OREGON
Access to Linguistic Inclusion (HB 2056)                           .      .
                                                                                           JiR           suiex%
                                                                                                         DEPARTMENT OF

                                                                                              Oregon achieves... together!
             .                           .
          Guidance and Explanation for Schools and Districts
                                             World Language




                                Does the course cover content described
                                 in Oregon’s adopted World Languages
                                   standards that is appropriate to the
                                targeted proficiency level of the course?




                        Yes                                                              No



                  QZ                                                              NY
                 Is the language of
                   study a World                                              NO World Language
                                                            No
                 Language” for this                                           Credit for this student
                     student?




                        Yes



                  NY
          World Language Credit
          available for this student


*Sign language, heritage languages, and languages other than a student’s primary language.
