            Wore              SMALL                     PURCHASE
                              PROCEDURES
Small purchases are the least constraining class of purchases. They are designed to offer the Public Housing
Authorities (PHAs) flexibility in procurements that support day-to-day operations.



Ef Types of Small Purchases
     e Micro-purchases: Defined by federal regulations as having a maximum threshold of $10,000. (If state or local
       standards are more restrictive, they must be followed.) Micro-purchases may be awarded without securing multiple
       quotes, but prices must be verified as reasonable. A Contracting Officer’s signature is required.
     e Small Purchases: Defined by federal regulations as having a maximum threshold of $250,000. (State or local
       standards may be more restrictive.) PHAs must solicit quotes from at least three qualified sources, and the
       selection must be reported to all vendors. The Contracting Officer's evaluation may be informed by previous
       experience, knowledge of market conditions and/or past performance, or by conducting an Independent Cost
       Estimate.
     e Petty Cash: Used for small one-time purchases. Consult with procurement and/or accounting to determine petty
       cash procedures. Track all purchases and keep receipts. Ensure that petty cash is reconciled and replenished
       when depleted.
     e Indefinite Delivery Contracts: Also known as Blanket Purchase Agreements (BPAs), they are an efficient way for
       PHAs to make small purchases to satisfy recurring needs for goods and services. Vendors are selected through an
       Invitation to Bid (Chapter 6) or Request for Proposals or Request for Qualifications (Chapter 7).

     e Bid-splitting: Is the unethical   practice of artificially subdividing   orders to stay within the cost limits of a micro-
       purchase or small purchase.

     e Purchase Orders: These are considered a contract when           purchased through a BPA. They should have the same
       clauses as any small purchase contract.


2           Points to Ponder
         For micro- purchases, document and save catalogue prices or other documentation of reasonability for 3 years from
         final payment.

     e   lf considering factors (other (than price) they should be defined and ranked in the solicitation.

     e   lf only one quote can be obtained, document the reason and& efforts to secure more.           Keep all documents for 3
         years after final payment.

     e   Becareful with petty cash. Never “borrow” from petty cash.

     e   Under a BPA, a vendor is procured to supply the PHA with goods up to a pre-procured limit in quantity or dollar
         amount.

     e   Don’t be tempted to split a bid to expedite a purchase!




Page lofi                                                                                 D3R TA- PHA Procurement FACT Sheets
