              are       NT o,.
         er             .            4%
     )              F
     &



 ”
                                | 3                        U.S. DEPARTMENT    OF HOUSING AND URBAN       DEVELOPMENT
 7 *
  y
  Z                         |             :                                  WASHINGTON, DC 20410-5000
     “ Za      |    |

          "8,46     oeve®        O


 OFFICE OF PUBLIC AND INDIAN HOUSING




Special Attention of:                                                              Notice PIH 2024-21(HA)
Directors of HUD Regional and Field
Offices of Public Housing;                                                         Issued: June 24, 2024
Public Housing Agencies that Administer the
Housing Choice Voucher Program                                                     Expires: This notice remains in effect until
                                                                                    amended, superseded, or rescinded.


                                                                                   Cross References:     PIH Notice 2024-16



SUBJECT:                                      HCV 2024 HAP Funding — Revised HAP Set-aside Shortfall Funding
                                              Requirements

1.             Purpose. This notice revises the Calendar Year (CY) 2024 Housing Assistance Payment
               (HAP) Set-aside shortfall funding requirements. It establishes additional public housing
               agency (PHA) eligibility requirements for the CY 2024 shortfall funding category,
               including more stringent restrictions on the issuance of vouchers, and provides updated
               information on the shortfall funding calculation and funding awards.

               This notice supersedes Appendix E of PIH Notice 2024-16, Implementation of the Federal
               Fiscal Year (FFY) 2024 Funding Provisions for the Housing Choice Voucher (HCV)
               Program, issued May 28, 2024.

2.             Background. The appropriations for the HCV HAP renewal funding for CY 2024 is made
               available through the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2024 (Public Law 118-42, enacted
               on March 9, 2024, and referred to in this notice as “the 2024 Act.”).                        Notice 2024-16
               describes the 2024 Act provisions that apply to the HCV program.

               The 2024 Act provides up to $200 million for the HCV HAP Set-aside, through which
               HUD may make adjustments to PHAs’ CY 2024 HAP renewal allocations for certain
               specified purposes. One of the eligible categories under the HAP set-aside is funding for
               PHAs that, despite taking reasonable cost savings measures as determined by the Secretary,
               would otherwise be required to terminate participating families form the program due to
               insufficient funding.                    As discussed in section 11.A of PIH Notice 2024-16, this shortfall
               funding category may also be funded in whole or in part through the offset described in
               section 4, step 5 of that notice.

               Due to 2024 shortfall concerns, HUD                      must take several steps to mitigate the risk that
               funding resources may not be available to prevent terminations in CY 2024. This includes
               delaying the awarding of funding under the other HAP set-aside categories until later in the



                                                               www.hud.gov         espanol.hud.gov
    year, revising the exceptions under which a shortfall PHA may continue to issue vouchers,
    and establishing other additional eligibility conditions for shortfall funding. Further
    actions may also be warranted.

.   HAP     Set-aside Shortfall Funding Impact on Other Set-aside Categories.        HUD   is
    prioritizing the need for shortfall funding to prevent terminations over the other HAP Set-
    aside funding categories. Consequently, HUD will delay making awards for the other
    funding categories. Furthermore, HUD may prorate funding awards or decline to make any
    funding awards for some or all other Set-aside categories depending on the extent of
    shortfall funding needs.

    The shortfall funding amount that a PHA will be eligible to receive from the $200 million
    HCV Program HAP Set-aside, any funds available through CY 2024 offsets against excess
    reserves, and the $10 million Mainstream Voucher HAP Set-aside, will be calculated by
    HUD. HUD will use the Two-Year Forecasting Tool (TYT) and the most recent validated
    voucher leasing and expense data available in the Voucher Management System (VMS) at
    the time the PHA’s application is reviewed, including any updated information supplied by
    the PHA.

.   PHA Requirements for Shortfall Funding.        Under the 2024 Act, the PHA must take
    reasonable cost savings measured as determined by HUD to be eligible for shortfall funding.

    Upon receiving notification that HUD’s Shortfall Prevention Team (SPT) has identified a
    projected shortfall in the PHA’s HCV program for CY 2024, the PHA must comply with all
    required actions outlined in the SPT notification and any subsequent SPT notification. The
    required actions include:

       e     Immediately suspend the issuance of vouchers in accordance with the requirements
             described below.
       e     Immediately cease to absorb vouchers under the portability provisions until otherwise
             instructed by the SPT.
       e     Implementing all other cost savings measures identified by the SPT in the PHA’s
             Action Plan within the SPT’s specified timeframes.
       e     Applying for the Shortfall funding in accordance with the timeframe specified by the
             SPT.

       The requirement to suspend general voucher issuance is subject to the following
       exclusions:

       a)    Vouchers issued to current HCV participants to allow them to move, and vouchers
             issued to project-based voucher (PBV) families to move from the PBV project in
             accordance with the PBV mobility requirements.
   b)   Instances in which the PHA is leasing under the HUD-VASH program up to the
        baseline level of units under all HUD-VASH    allocations (not just recent allocations),
        including turnover of HUD-VASH vouchers.

   c)   Vouchers issued to program applicants under Tenant Protection vouchers (TPVs) or
        special-purpose voucher (SPVs) increments awarded in CY 2023 or CY 2024. These
        SPVs include Family Unification Program (FUP), Non-Elderly Disabled (NED), and
        Foster the Youth to Independence (FYI) vouchers.

   d)   PHAs may allow applicants to move into PBV units in order for the PHA to meet its
        contractual PBV obligations. This covers both units being placed under HAP contract
        for the first time (e.g., in accordance with an Agreement to Enter into a HAP Contract
        (AHAP)) and PBV units currently under HAP contract that are vacant. This includes
        PBV projects under the Rental Assistance Demonstration (RAD), including HUD-
        approved contractual obligations associated with Faircloth to RAD projects.

   e)   Vouchers issued pursuant to the settlement of litigation (“Litigation Vouchers’’)
        against a PHA. PHAs must request approval to continue leasing Litigation Vouchers
        and submit supporting documentation. HUD will review the PHA request and decide
        on a case-by-case basis using the supporting documentation received as the basis for
        the decision.

   f)   Vouchers awarded to the PHA under the Community Choice Demonstration (CCD).

HUD reserves the right to consider and approve additional exceptions on a case-by-case
basis.

PHAs may not issue vouchers and/or execute HAP contracts for families that do not meet
any of the exceptions through the end of CY 2024 unless advised that they may resume
issuing vouchers by the SPT prior to that time. Please note that PHAs may not issue
vouchers to avoid a reduction in leasing due to program attrition, as previously provided in
the now superseded Appendix E in PIH Notice 2024-16. In addition, HUD reserves the right
to further suspend leasing if necessary.

HUD reserves the right to require a PHA to rescind recently issued vouchers in order to be
eligible for shortfall funding should HUD determine such action is necessary or warranted.
PHAs should not rescind previously issued vouchers unless required to do so by HUD.

The PHA must continue to work with the SPT throughout the year. The PHA must
implement any additional cost savings measures that may be required by the SPT or by HUD
notice.

PHAs must fully comply with the eligibility requirements of this Notice or a superseding
notice. HUD may reject a PHA shortfall funding application or may reduce or rescind a
PHA shortfall funding award if the PHA fails to comply with any of these requirements.
5.   Application Process. PHAs must continue to follow section 11.A of Notice PIH 2024-16
     with respect to the process of submitting the application for shortfall funding. However,
     Appendix E of that notice has been superseded by the requirements of this notice.

     All PHAs applying for the shortfall Set-aside must be working with the SPT at the time of
     their application and must have received SPT confirmation of the funding shortfall. The SPT
     will review the PHA’s funding available for 2024 and their leasing and expense data to date
     to determine whether the PHA has a shortfall and the amount needed to resolve the shortfall.
     If a PHA believes that they are in a shortfall or at-risk of a shortfall, the PHA should
     immediately contact their local field office to determine if a referral to the SPT is warranted.

     The application period for shortfall Set-aside funding will remain open until the SPT has
     reconciled Shortfalls for all PHAs for CY 2024, subject to funding availability. PHAs that
     receive Set-aside funds based on their current HAP costs must maintain contact with the SPT
     to ensure shortfall needs are met. Similarly, PHAs that do not initially qualify for shortfall
     funding are encouraged to maintain contact with the local Field Office and the SPT and to
     immediately seek assistance if attrition and other reasonable cost savings measures
     undertaken by the PHA are not resolving their potential shortfalls.

6.   Shortfall and Funding Shortfall Calculations.

     HUD’s TYT can be found in the HCV Program Utilization Tools section of the HCV
     Program Website (www.hud.gov/hcv). The TYT compares all resources available! to
     support the PHA’s HAP payments in CY 2024 with actual HAP expenses for 2024 projected
     through the end of the CY based upon the best information available.

     Resources are calculated using the HUD-calculated Restricted Net Position (RNP) as of
     12/31/2023, the HUD-held reserve as of 12/31/2023, the PHA’s actual Renewal Annual
     Budget Authority (ABA) for 2024, and any new voucher incremental funding applicable to
     CY 2024 or HAP Set-aside amounts awarded or expected to be awarded in 2024.

     HAP expenses are calculated based on current leasing and expense data, projected through
     the end of CY 2024; the PHA’s suspension of general voucher issuance; and projected
     attrition based on actual attrition for the 12 months prior to the PHA’s request for HAP Set-
     aside funds, adjusted for accuracy if the PHA has more recent information that will impact
     the attrition rate in future months, as reported in in IMS/PIC (or successor system), and
     considering any updated information supplied by the PHA.

     Factors considered by the SPT to determine the amount of a potential shortfall are as follows:

        a.   Cash Supported Total Reserves as of 12/31/2023: The SPT will use the Cash
             Supported Total Reserves as of 12/31/2023, which consists of the HUD-Held

1 This includes any American Rescue Plan (ARP) Act Extraordinary Circumstances renewal adjustments for CY
2021 PUC increases that the PHA has not yet expended.
  Reserves, and the lower of HUD-Estimated RNP, PHA Reported RNP as of
  12/31/2023, or the actual amount of cash on hand to support the RNP. If there is a
  discrepancy with any of these amounts the PHA will be required to provide
  documentation as requested before this adjustment is made.

. HUD-held reserve as of 12/31/2023: The SPT will use the balance reported to the
  SPT by HUD’s Office of Housing Voucher Programs’ (OHVP’s) Financial
  Management Center (FMC).

  2024 Renewal ABA: Actual renewal ABA awards for CY 2024.

. SPV and tenant protection funding and Set-asides: The FMC will provide amounts
  to be made available to the PHA in CY 2024 for SPV and TPV funding increments
  applicable to any portion of CY 2024, and for any Set-aside funding previously
  awarded in CY 2024. The SPT will make adjustments to the shortfall projection to
  account for the fact that new increment funding for Mainstream, SPVs, and/or TPVs
  must remain available to lease the newly awarded number of SPVs and/or TPVs and
  cannot be used to cover the general shortfall.

  Unit months leased: The unit months leased (UML) for CY 2024 will be projected
  by taking the number of units reported in VMS in the last month available and
  projecting that number through the end of the year. Reductions to projected leasing
  will be made to adjust for attrition, in accordance with the annual turnover rate used
  in the two-year tool. This rate is derived from the PHA’s PIC data on families end of
  participation (EOP). Increases to projected leasing will be made for vouchers issued
  prior to the date of the notification by the SPT of a potential shortfall and for
  additional leasing resulting from the admission of families described in each
  exception category above except that no adjustments will be made for mover families
  who receive vouchers in accordance with category 1.

  Total HAP expense: Total HAP expense for CY 2024 will be based on a projection
  of the unit months leased for CY 2024 (described in e above) at the per-unit cost
  taken from the PHA’s most recent VMS report, and considering any updated
  information supplied by the PHA. If the PHA’s PUC increases in future months, and
  the PHA again determines that it is in danger of a shortfall, the amount of PHA’s
  shortfall award eligibility may be adjusted without the need to reapply.

. Vouchers issued or projected to be issued: The number of vouchers issued as of the
  date of notification by the SPT of a potential shortfall, as shown in the PHA’s VMS
  report, will be used to determine future leasing, if any, from vouchers issued prior to
  the date of notification by the SPT of a potential shortfall. Planned issuances for
  vouchers exempt from the suspension will be shown in the months they will be
  issued. The projected HAP costs for these units will be affected by the voucher
             success rate provided by the PHA and average time from issuance of the voucher to
             the HAP effective date. HUD has the right to further suspend leasing if necessary.

        h.   Other Planned Additions or Reductions to Leased Units: This field incorporates
             into the leasing schedule other planned additions to leasing with fixed start dates,
             such as the dates that PBV units currently under AHAP are scheduled to come under
             HAP. The calculated HAP cost for these units is not subject to the success rate
             calculation.

        i.   2024 Year-End Total HAP Reserve Balance: Any PHA with a negative projected
             2024 year-end balance will be considered a shortfall PHA. PHAs with year-end
             balances of $0 or above will not be considered shortfall PHAs or eligible to receive
             shortfall Set-aside funds.

        j.   Available Unrestricted Net Position (UNP) and Other Eligible Resources,
             including eligible Federal or Non-Federal Cash: HUD may consider the
             availability of UNP or other PHA resources that are eligible to be used by the PHA to
             cover HAP when determining the amount of a PHA’s shortfall award amount
             eligibility and/or prioritizing PHA shortfall funding need. For example, HUD may
             have to implement this step if the overall shortfall need for all PHAs is projected to
             exceed the shortfall funds available. These other resources include but are not limited
             to Unrestricted Net Position (UNP).   If HUD takes these other resources into account
             and the impacted PHA uses UNP and/or other eligible funds to ensure all landlords
             are paid on time, HUD may subsequently provide an additional shortfall award
             (should funding be available) to the PHA to make the HCV or Mainstream program
             whole. This would allow the PHA to repay the UNP and/or the other eligible funding
             sources for the amount borrowed pay landlords the HAP on time to avoid
             terminations.

7.   Paperwork Reduction Act. The information collection requirements contained in this
     Notice have been approved by the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) in accordance
     with the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995 (44 U.S.C. §§ 3501-3520) and have been
     assigned the following OMB control numbers - Voucher Management System: 2577-0169;
     Financial Assessment Subsystem: 2535- 0107. An agency may not conduct or sponsor, and
     a person is not required to respond to, a collection of information unless the collection
     displays a valid control number.
8.   Further Information. Questions concerning this notice should be submitted by email to the
     SPT at Shortfallinquiries @hud.gov.




                                                    sf ret
                                                    Richard J. Monocchio
                                                    Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary
                                                    Public and Indian Housing
