Introduction

This document provides an overview of the discretionary (or competitive) grants application
process at the U.S. Department of Education (the Department).

Who should use this document?

Prospective applicants, including new potential grantees, for the Department’s discretionary
grant programs that have never received a grant from the Department and those that are
interested in learning more about the process.

Department’s Mission: To promote student achievement and preparation for global
competitiveness by fostering educational excellence and ensuring equal access.

Background: In accordance with Federal statutes, the Department provides funding for
educational and other activities and projects that support the Department’s mission through grant
programs, under which some funds are distributed through periodic competitions (i.e.,
“competitive” or “discretionary grants”). General information on these types of grant programs
can be found at: https://www2.ed.gov/fund/grant/find/edlite-forecast.html?src=ft.

Congress authorizes funding for grant programs government-wide in a cycle geared to the
Federal fiscal year (but there can be variations). The Administration proposes a budget for each
Federal agency including the Department and, through the appropriations process, Congress
deliberates over the budget. When an appropriation bill for an agency is passed by Congress and
signed into law by the President, funds for grants become available in accordance with the
enacted law.

The Department awards discretionary grants through roughly 80 grant programs, yet not all of
these programs are competed each year.

   1. Department of Education Competitive Grants and How they Work

       •   Federal Fiscal Year (FY) Primer

           o Each Federal Fiscal Year (FY) starts on October 1 and ends on September 30 of
             the following year (e.g. October 1, 2019 – September 30, 2020). The Department
             generally runs grant competitions in the latter half of the fiscal year.

           o ED does not always get an appropriation at the start of a new fiscal year (the last
             time this occurred was Fiscal Year 2019).

           o The timeline of the appropriation impacts when competitions for funds are
             announced, competed and then awarded.

       •   Secretary of Education’s Final Supplemental Priorities for Discretionary Grant
           Programsi


                                                1
           o Periodically, the Secretary of Education (the Secretary) publishes supplemental
             priorities that may be used in particular funding opportunities, and that provide
             the Secretary’s vision for education. They emphasize specific initiatives for the
             Department’s competitive grant programs.

           o The Department recently published final priorities in support of Opportunity
             Zonesii and other Administrative initiatives, such as supporting new potential
             granteesiii.

       •   Grantmaking offices at the Department

           The Office of Elementary and Secondary Educationiv; Office of Postsecondary
           Educationv; Office of Special Education and Rehabilitative Servicesvi; the Office of
           Career, Technical, and Adult Educationvii; and the Office of English Language
           Acquisitionviii.

       •   Eligible Entities Resourcesix

           o Each individual grant program has its own statutory authority of who is eligible to
             apply (e.g. state educational agencies; institutions of higher education; etc.).

           o Grants.gov also has “Find” capabilities to search on applicant eligibilityx.

       •   USASpending.govxi

           USA Spending tracks federal spending to ensure taxpayers can see how their money
           is being used in communities across America. It provides citizens with easy access to
           government contracts, grant, and other award data.

2: Where are Funding Opportunities Found

   •   FederalRegister.govxii

       o This daily journal of the Federal Government is published each weekday, and
         publishes among other things, government agency rules, proposed rules, public
         notices (including Department grant funding opportunities)

       o All Notices Inviting Applications (NIAs) issued by the Department are published in
         the Federal Register, which is the formal way for notifying the public of grant
         funding opportunities (more information about NIAs are on a subsequent page).

       o Sign-ups for daily emails on notices and other happenings also available.

   •   Grants.govxiii

       o This government website allows for funding opportunity searches using the Catalog
         for Federal Domestic Assistance (CFDA) number or CFDA program title.

                                                2
       o This website also offers applicant resources, including FAQsxiv.

   •   Department’s Grant Webpagexv

       o The Department’s website provides a listing and links to open Department grant
         competitions.

       o The website provides information on student loans, and other related education
         information.

   •   Forecast of Discretionary Funding Opportunities for FY20xvi

       This provides a preview of future planned grant competitions and their schedule.

3: Required Steps to be Taken Prior to Applying for Funding

   •   Data Universal Numbering System (DUNS) Numberxv

       o Before applying for a grant from any Federal agency, you must have a (DUNS)
         number. There is no charge for registering, but it may take one to two business days
         to create.

       o On December 31, 2020, the Unique Entity Identifier (UEI or SAMMI) will replace
         the DUNS number for registration in GSA’s System for Award Management (SAM).
         More to come from the Department on this transition.

   •   Taxpayer Identification Number (TIN)

       o If you are a corporate entity, agency, institution, or organization, you can obtain a
         TIN from the Internal Revenue Service (IRS). If you are an individual, you can obtain
         a TIN from the IRS or the Social Security Administration.

       o If you need a new TIN, please allow two to five weeks for your TIN to become
         active.

   •   Register in the System for Award Management (SAM)xviii

          o Before applying for a grant from any Federal agency, including the Department, a
            prospective applicant must register and set up an account in the System for Award
            Management (or “SAM”) website.

          o There is no charge for registering. New potential grantees are encouraged to
            register early and in advance of a particular grant competition to avoid delays.

          o The SAM registration process may take upwards of several weeks, so register
            well in advance of a competition submission deadline.

                                               3
   •   The Federal Awardee Performance and Integrity Information System (FAPIIS)xix

       FAPIIS is the Federal government’s designated integrity and performance system
       established to aid Federal agencies in determining whether an applicant or grantee is
       qualified for an award. This contains information of prior performance of federal
       grantees, and cooperative agreement holders, and it is reviewed by agencies to inform
       funding decisions. New potential grantees are encouraged to check their status within the
       system.

4: How the Department Announces Funding Opportunities

   •   Notice Inviting Applications (NIA)

       o The Department generally publishes NIAs in the Federal Register to announce its
         grant competitions. Some agencies call their funding opportunity announcements
         “Requests for Proposals (RFPs), Notices of Funding Opportunities (NOFOs), or
         Funding Opportunity Announcements (FOAs)”.

       o Each NIA for a program is unique and includes, but is not limited to, the following:
         (1) Eligible entities (e.g. institutions of higher education (IHEs), nonprofits, local
         educational agencies (LEAs)) who can compete for funds; (2) Priorities (e.g.
         Absolute, Competitive Preference, or Invitational); (3) Required entrance Evidence;
         (4) Project period length; and (5) important dates (e.g. date for intent to apply and
         application deadline).

       o The Department tries to maximize the number of days applicants have to submit
         applications, but usually applicants have a minimum of 30 to 45 days for existing
         programs.

       o Submit your application early; do not wait until the last minute.

       o Grantees are selected based on peer reviewer scores and Secretary approval.

   •   Common Instructions for Applicants to Discretionary Grant Programsxx

       This document provides applicants with a centralized set of instructions for applying to
       the Department's discretionary grant programs. NIAs reference this document.

   •   Technical Assistance to applicants

       o General technical assistance to applicants is commonly offered; sometimes this
         includes pre-application webinars and program application FAQ documents.

       o These resources are generally available on the grant program’s specific website.




                                                4
       o However, program offices do not provide substantive guidance on an individual
         application before submission that would give that application an unfair advantage
         over others in the competition.

       o Grant Webinars

          Are offered by some programs to provide and clarify information about the
          application process

       o Current grantee abstracts

             Many current grantee abstracts (and project narratives in some cases) are on the
              Department’s ED.gov website or the individual program page.

             A few examples of winning proposal abstracts may be viewed here, here, and
              here.

5: How the Department Notifies Successful and Unsuccessful Applicants

   •   Successful Applicants – The Department’s Office of Legislation and Congressional
       Affairs (OLCA) notifies the applicant’s U.S. Representative and U.S. Senators. After
       this notification to Congress has occurred, the Department emails the applicant’s
       certifying representative and grant project director a link to their Grant Award
       Notification (GAN). The GAN serves as the Department’s official notification to grant
       applicants informing them that their applications have been selected for funding.
       Successful applications will receive a GAN or a link to access. A hard copy GAN may
       instead be issued in some cases.

   •   Unsuccessful Applicants – The Department formally notifies unsuccessful applicants that
       their applications were not selected for funding.

6. Contacting the Department and Grants.gov

   •   For questions about the grant competition and application submission, contact the
       Department’s person listed in the FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT section
       in the grant competition’s NIA.

   •   For questions about submitting an application using Grants.gov, go to Grants.gov - How
       to Apply for Grants.




                                               5
