                                 HUD GRANTS MANAGEMENT               HANDBOOK       2210.17 REV 3.2



Chapter 2: PRE-AWARD
2-1: Program             Purpose        and Instrument             Selection

As outlined in 2 CFR 200.201, HUD uses three types of instruments: contracts, grants, and
cooperative agreements for procurement and assistance relationships to achieve its mission. The
Federal Grant and Cooperative Agreement Act (FGCA) (31 U.S.C. 6301-08) distinguishes
procurement relationships from assistance relationships with non-Federal entities.

       A.   OVERVIEW
            I. Grant agreements and cooperative agreements are the legal instruments used for
               HUD’s financial assistance relationships. The main difference between a grant
               and a cooperative agreement is the degree of Federal participation or involvement
               during the performance of work activities. A grant agreement is the appropriate
               instrument when HUD anticipates no substantial involvement. When HUD
               expects substantial involvement with the recipient, a cooperative agreement is
               appropriate.

                 When selecting the award instrument to be used, the Program Office must first
                 look to the specific authorizing statute or appropriation Act to determine if there
                 is specific guidance on the funding instrument. (Note the authorizing statute may
                 use different terminology, e.g., Annual Contributions Contract, but the instrument
                 must be either a grant or a cooperative agreement.) Program Offices are advised
                 to discuss this with their program counsel to ensure the proper funding instrument
                 is selected. In making the selection of the funding instrument, Program Offices
                 should consider:
                         The program purpose;
                    b.   The purpose of the individual transaction; and
                    c.   The purpose of the relationship between the award recipient and HUD.
                         Does HUD intend to have substantial involvement or is substantial
                         involvement not anticipated?
            3.   For more information on Grants and Cooperative Agreements, see Section 1 — 4
                 of this Handbook, Federal Financial Assistance.

       B.   BASIS FOR AWARD
            I.   HUD Authorizing Officials must make awards based on one of the following:
                    a.   Plans submitted in response to a notice as is the case with non-
                         discretionary awards and Congressionally directed awards;

                    b.   Applications received resulting from a NOFO for discretionary funding or
                         notice; or




                                                                                                   21
                            HUD GRANTS MANAGEMENT              HANDBOOK      2210.17 REV 3.2


                c.   An unsolicited proposal, if permitted under program requirements. For
                     more information, see Section 2 — 11 of this Handbook, Unsolicited
                     Proposals.

      2.   Unless otherwise stated in appropriation Acts, HUD Authorizing Officials must
           always attempt to solicit applications for discretionary funds on a competitive
           basis, in accordance with the HUD Reform Act, and in concert with program
           requirements.



2-2: Paperwork          Reduction         Act and Assistance             Listings

    A. PAPERWORK REDUCTION ACT (PRA) of 1995 REQUIREMENTS
           I.   The PRA requires HUD to obtain OMB approval before requesting most types
                of information from the public. These “information collections” include
                forms, surveys, interviews and recordkeeping requirements.
                Program Offices must adhere to HUD PRA policy requirements and use the
                PRA approval process to obtain OMB approval for Federally sponsored data,
                or information collection requests (ICR). (2. CFR 200.207) HUD’s Office of
                the Chief Information Officer (OCIO) oversees the PRA process for HUD.
    B. PRA PROCESS FOR INFORMATION                  COLLECTIONS        INCLUDED IN
       NOFOs AND AWARD RENEWALS
           1.   NOFOs submitted for Departmental Clearance must include OMB-approved
                forms, sample formats, or other information collection requests to be
                submitted by the applicant. *Note: It is required that all submitted NOFOs
                meet the accessibility standards set forth by Section 508 of the
                Rehabilitation Act of 1973.

                Only NOFOs with a current OMB approval number for information collection
                requests can be published on Grants.gov. In addition, to publish on HUD’s
                website, the Program Office cannot issue a notice for award renewals, unless
                the information collection request has a current OMB approval number.

                Program Offices should submit their PRA requests to OMB at least 60
                calendar days prior to the proposed publication date of the NOFO to ensure
                adequate time for OMB clearance. Program Offices are also reminded to
                include time for Departmental clearance, the 60-day public comment period,
                comment review and package revisions, and the final 30-day notice period.




                                                                                             22
                           HUD GRANTS MANAGEMENT             HANDBOOK          2210.17 REV 3.2



                                                                                     Submit
             At least 60                   60-Day                  Final 30-        to OMB
              days prior       HUD        Federal      Hep            Day           for final
              to NOFO,       Develops     Register    oe            Federal              ;
                begin          ICR       Comment      Comments     Register         Review
              process                     Period                    Notice            and
                                                                                   Approval



          The process for obtaining an OMB approval number includes publishing the
          requested information collection instrument or form and the estimated burden
          hours in the Federal Register for a 60-day public review and comment period
          after Departmental clearance. At the end of the comment period, comments
          must be addressed prior to publication of a 30-day Notice, OMB review and
          final approval.

          OCIO (PRA Office) will advise and provide guidance to Program Offices on
          how to complete the required OMB form 83-I, the Supporting Statement. The
          Supporting Statement explains the request and the required Federal Register
          Notice. OCIO (PRA Office) will also help coordinate the placement of
          approved program forms for NOFOs on the HUD Client and Information
          Policy System (HUDCLIPS) web page.

     6.   Program offices may use the following PRA resource tools:
            a. http://hudatwork.hud.gov/HUD/gc/doc/praogcquickguidetopracompliance
                33623.pdf- PRA Compliance Guide
            b.https://www.reginfo.gov - Track the status of pending and current PRAs.

C. ASSISTANCE LISTINGS (FORMERLY CATALOG OF FEDERAL
   DOMESTIC ASSISTANCE, CFDA) (2 CFR 200.203)
     I.   The Assistance Listings is a government-wide compilation of Federal
          programs, projects, services and activities assisting or benefiting the public.
          The Assistance Listings aids the public with obtaining general information on
          Federal assistance programs.
          OMB provides oversight of the collection of Federal domestic assistance
          program data. GSA operates and maintains the listings on the SAM.gov
          website under the sub-heading Federal Assistance.
          To comply with HUD requirements, Program Offices must update program
          information on the Assistance Listings Workspace at least annually. Program
          Offices must:
                a. Designate an Assistance Listings Liaison to work with the Assistance
                    Listings Coordinator who is assigned by the OCFO Budget Office;
                 b.     Obtain a unique Assistance Listing number for new programs via the
                        Assistance Listings Coordinator, provide a completed Assistance




                                                                                                23
                           HUD GRANTS MANAGEMENT              HANDBOOK       2210.17 REV 3.2


                          Listing template, and submit to the OCFO Budget Office for HUD
                          internal review and approval;
                     c.   Provide the updated program information to the Assistance Listings
                          Coordinator who submits it to the Assistance Listings portal for
                          clearance by GSA and OMB;
                     d.   Update program information annually in the Assistance Listings
                          Workspace on SAM. gov; and

                     e.   Discontinue or archive programs not funded for more than two fiscal
                          years unless a continuing resolution delayed or was otherwise
                          prohibitive in funding the program.
           4.   Program Offices must include the Assistance Listing Number and Title in the
                Grants.gov synopsis, NOFO and the grant or cooperative agreement. (2 CFR
                200.211(b)(13)).

2-3:   Annual    Milestone        Plan

       A. ANNUAL MILESTONE PLAN FROM PROGRAM                     OFFICES

           I.   Program Offices must conduct an annual planning process for financial
                assistance programs and transactions to ensure decisions and time frames for
                awarding financial assistance. The annual planning process should address
                activities for which the Program Office has discretion regarding the timing of
                the announcement, receipt of applications, and/or whether to award. This
                includes activities relating to competing and non-competing continuation of
                on-going awards. This information must be recorded in the Annual Milestone
                Plan template and submitted to GMO.
                Program Offices must submit the Annual Milestone Plan for discretionary
                programs for the next fiscal year. The Milestone Plan should detail clearance
                timelines, publication, application deadline, award, and obligation dates for
                discretionary programs. The Milestone Plan must also indicate the estimated
                funding for the next fiscal year as well as any estimated carryover funding
                from previous fiscal years. It should also include only estimated award dates
                for mandatory programs.
                Proposed funding amounts in the plan should be based upon actual
                appropriations, or if the program does not yet have an enacted full-year
                appropriation for the fiscal year (because HUD is operating under a
                Continuing Resolution), the best information available for proposed funding
                amounts plus any estimated carryover of funds from prior years available for
                obligation. Final dollar amount adjustments to the plan must be provided to
                GMO, as they are known.
                Program Offices are expected to work closely with their program counsel and
                Budget Officers when developing their Milestone Plan. Attention should be




                                                                                               24
                          HUD GRANTS MANAGEMENT               HANDBOOK        2210.17 REV 3.2


               paid to the identification of any new programs or program components during
               a fiscal year and the proposed NOFO publishing date.
          . Program Offices must ensure programs for Federal financial assistance have a
            valid Assistance Listings Number and OMB Approval Number.
B. ANNUAL AWARD               CALENDAR AND NOFO DASHBOARD
     I.        GMO will host an annual meeting with Program Offices to review milestone
               plans, annual award calendar and NOFO Dashboard, note any changes from
               the previous fiscal year, and adjust for the next fiscal year.
               Based on plan information submitted, GMO will develop the Department’s
               annual Award Calendar. The Award Calendar will be housed on GMO’s
               SharePoint site, GMOHOME.

               The NOFO Dashboard provides a visual assessment of whether the
               Department is achieving its NOFO publishing goals in a timely manner.
               Progress on the Award Calendar will be tracked by GMO and reported to
               Program Offices and Departmental leadership on a regular basis through the
               NOFO Dashboard and HUD’s Consolidated Management Calendar.
C. GMO PORTFOLIO MANAGER                     ROLE
          I.    GMO Portfolio Managers support Program Offices throughout the grant
                lifecycle. Portfolio Managers are trained grants management staff in GMO
                assigned to support Program Offices on the development and publication of
                NOFOs.
                Throughout the grant lifecycle, GMO Portfolio Managers consult with
                Program Offices on grants management issues; help strengthen internal
                controls; and propose enterprise-level solutions to streamline and/or
                simplify HUD’s grants management processes.
                GMO Portfolio Managers host a monthly meeting for HUD’s grants
                management professionals, produce a quarterly newsletter update and
                maintain a SharePoint site, GMOHOME, with updated grants information,
                including training, resources and access to other Federal grants-related
                websites.
D. HUD FORECAST
          I.     The Program Office must designate a staff member to develop/draft a
                 Forecast for planned grant opportunities. NOFO Drafters complete the
                 forecast information to include estimated dates, funding,   a NOFO
                 description, and statutory authority.
                The Forecast should contain actual or estimated funding levels for awards
                the Program Office intends to make during the fiscal year, subject to
                Congressional appropriations.
          3.    A Forecast is subject to change and may be modified by the Program Office.




                                                                                            25
                                    HUD GRANTS MANAGEMENT               HANDBOOK        2210.17 REV 3.2


                    4.     If using the GrantSolutions online grants management system, the forecast
                           is the mandatory first stage of the NOFO publication workflow in the
                           Announcement Module (AM).
    E. NOFO TIMELINESS POLICIES


           I.            Milestone Plan - Program offices must create a NOFO Awarding Schedule
                         that aligns with the following action steps:
                                a. Forecast - Program Offices must submit a forecast date to
                                    Grants.gov, identifying when the grant will be published;
                               b. Draft - Program Offices must identify a draft timeline and when the
                                    NOFO will be submitted to Departmental Clearance;
                                c. Departmental Clearance - Program Offices must identify date
                                    NOFO will be submitted for Departmental Clearance. This includes
                                    OMB review and approval.
                                d. Publishing - Program Offices must submit the anticipated date for
                                    publishing the NOFO to Grants.gov.
                               e. Awarding/Obligating Funds - Program Offices must identify an
                                    anticipated date of the award and date award funds will be obligated
                                  to grantees.


2-4: Development                  of a Notice of Funding Opportunity (NOFO)

    A.   CONTENT              (2_CFR 200.204)

           I.            NOFOs are HUD’s equivalent to Funding Opportunity Announcements
                         (FOAs) used throughout the Federal government to make awards.
                         NOFOs must be made available to potential applicants through Grants.gov. In
                         addition, Program Offices may use supplementary means of sharing NOFOs,
                         1.e., distribution through a constituency organization, transmittal through a
                         targeted mailing, or electronic notification directed to the known universe of
                         eligible applicants. Any supplementary notice cannot pre-date the publication
                         of the NOFO at Grants.gov.
                         NOFOs follow a standardized format and order of content. However, each
                         Program NOFO will have a unique title, Funding Opportunity Number (FON),
                         text and instructions specific to the program.
                         NOFOs must include applicable terms and conditions for awards, including
                         any exceptions to the terms.
                .        HUD?’s standard format for the NOFO     Table of Contents is below (Appendix I
                         to 2 CFR Part 200):




                                                                                                       26
HUD GRANTS MANAGEMENT             HANDBOOK       2210.17 REV 3.2


      [Funding Opportunity Title]
    [Funding Opportunity Number]
       TABLE OF CONTENTS

Executive Summary
I. Funding Opportunity Description
        A. Program Description
        B. Authority
        C. Program Goal and Objectives
        D. Relevant Assistance Listings
II. Federal Award Information
        A. Available Funds
        B. Number of Awards
        C. Minimum/Maximum Award Information
        D. Period of Performance
        E. Type of Funding Instrument
        F. Supplementation
HI. Eligibility Information
            Eligible Applicants
      mMOOW pS




            Ineligible Applicants
            Cost Sharing or Matching
            Eligible Activities
            Threshold Eligibility Requirements
            Statutory and Regulatory Requirements Affecting
            Eligibility
            Program Specific Requirements Affecting Eligibility
      mo




            Criteria for Beneficiaries

IV. Application Preparation and Submission Information
        A. Obtaining an Application Package
        B. Content and Form of Application Submission
        C. Unique Entity Identifier and SAM Registration
        D. Application Submission Dates and Times
        E. Intergovernmental Review
        F. Funding Restrictions
        G. Other Submission Requirements
V. Application Review Information
        A. Review Criteria
        B. Reviews and Selection Process
        C. Anticipated Announcement and Award Dates
VI. Federal Award Administration Information
        A. Award Notices
        B. Administrative, National and Departmental Policy
    Requirements
        C. Reporting
VII. Federal Awarding Agency Contact(s)




                                                                  27
                       HUD GRANTS MANAGEMENT               HANDBOOK       2210.17 REV 3.2


                       VIII. Other Information

  6.   NOFOs must contain detailed instructions explaining requirements, the funding
       opportunity and application submission procedures. See 2 CFR 200.204 and
       Appendix I to 2 CFR part 200 for additional details about the contents of a
       NOFO.
  7.   The NOFO must also comply with the Plain Writing Act of 2010 (Public Law
       111-274). To help Program Offices develop clearly written NOFOs, GMO has
       created the Writing Effective NOFOs and Developing Sound Rating Criteria
       course. It is available to all HUD staff on HUD Virtual University (HVU) via
       InCompass. The course includes 3 modules: Plain Writing, NOFO Development
       and Rating Factors and Evaluator Instructions. Staff completing the course will
       earn 2.15 hours of training credit.
  8.   A Program Office may not give potential applicants advance notification of
       planned or pending funding opportunities nor may Program Offices tailor NOFOs
       for selected projects informally discussed with a potential applicant in another
       forum. (Section 103 of the HUD Reform Act, in HUD regulations in 24 CFR part
       4, subpart B.)
B. NOFO SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS AND EXCEPTIONS (2 CFR 200.204)
       1.   NOFOs must include submission requirements and an application deadline. A
            Program Office must post all funding opportunities for at least 60 calendar
            days.
       2.   The Program Office may determine a NOFO to have a less than 60 calendar
            day availability period, but no NOFO should be available for less than 30
            calendar days, unless exigent circumstances require as determined by the
            Federal awarding agency head or delegate.
       3.   There are three reasons for which an exception may be granted to the required
            60 calendar day posting policy. They are:
               a.   Delayed appropriations beyond the first quarter of the fiscal year,
                    where publishing for less than 60 days is necessary to avoid hardship
                    on the applicants (such an exception request will only be approved if
                    the Program Office was ready to publish before the Appropriations Act
                    was passed);
               b.   The competition was published in two phases, the NOFO for first
                    phase was published for 60 days and the applicants invited to apply in
                    phase two are only updating or expanding upon the application
                    information provided in phase 1; and
               c.   Programmatic delay that results in a potential negative impact on the
                    program or its intended recipients.


            Note: Requests to have NOFOs available for application less than 60 calendar
            days must include specific details regarding the exigent circumstances that



                                                                                            28
                          HUD GRANTS MANAGEMENT              HANDBOOK        2210.17 REV 3.2


               require a shorter availability period. The Deputy Secretary may grant
               exceptions for a shortened application period based on review of the timelines
               outlined by the Program Office submitted in its Milestone Plan.


          4.    HUD further requires that grant funds are awarded in a timely and consistent
               manner.


C. NOFO DEADLINES AND APPLICATION SUBMISSION

     I.   HUD may extend a published application deadline when justified by
          circumstances such as a Presidentially declared disaster (e.g., floods or
          hurricanes); widespread disruptions of mail service or other services; or technical
          issues at Grants.gov. If circumstances affect a defined geographical area, the
          Program Office may extend the deadline to applicants in the affected area.
          Application deadline extensions must be announced on Grants.gov.
          Applications not meeting the deadline specified in a NOFO are late and shall not
          be accepted for competition under the NOFO. To be timely, an application must
          be received by Grants.gov by the deadline date and time specified in the NOFO.
          Under 24 CFR 5.1005, applicants may request a waiver of the requirement for
          electronic submission and HUD will waive the electronic submission requirement
          on the basis of good cause. Lack of SAM registration or valid Assistance Listings
          number is not good cause. Applicants seeking a waiver of the electronic grant
          submission requirements must submit a written request, following the instructions
          provided in the NOFO. Waivers will not be granted if the request is not received
          at least 15 days before the application deadline and if the applicant does not
          demonstrate good cause.
          A Program Office may not require an applicant to submit more than an original
          and two copies of a paper application unless OMB has approved a different
          number of copies as part of PRA clearance of an application form or format.
          If a Program Office permits submission of a paper application, the applicant must
          send the application in enough time to be received before the deadline date (with
          documented proof of mailing). A Program Office may not accept hand-delivered
          applications.
D.   CERTIFICATIONS AND ASSURANCES                   (2_CFR 200.209)
     I.   NOFOs must include the required certifications and assurances for the program.
          The certifications and assurances are material representations of the facts HUD
          relies upon when making an award. This includes but is not limited to the SF-424
          Family of forms.

          If a later determination shows the applicant has knowingly made a false
          certification or assurance, or the signatory did not have the authority to make a
          legally binding commitment for the applicant, the applicant may be subject to the



                                                                                             29
                                 HUD GRANTS MANAGEMENT              HANDBOOK        2210.17 REV 3.2


                False Claims Act.    HUD may then terminate the award or pursue other available
                remedies.

           3.   Each applicant is responsible for including the correct certifications and
                assurances with its application submission. Applicants must submit all required
                forms in the SF-424 Family of forms, including SF-424B (Assurances of Non-
                construction Programs) or SF-424D (Assurances for Construction Programs).
                Applications receiving funds for both non-construction and construction programs
                must submit both the SF-424B and SF-424D.


2-5   Additional             NOFO       Requirements

      A.   OVERVIEW

                1.   Unless otherwise specified, the following requirements apply to recipients of
                     HUD funding under a NOFO. HUD has implemented these requirements in
                     24 CFR part 5. Many of the national public policy requirements (see Section
                     1—7 of this Handbook) have been incorporated into the NOFO template.
                2.   Program NOFOs must clearly refer to these requirements and where
                     applicable, indicate any variation or additions. There may be slight variations
                     in requirements among HUD programs.
                3.   These requirements are also applicable for recipients of award renewals.
                     Renewal notices must clearly refer to these requirements and where
                     applicable, indicate any variation or additions. More information about
                     renewals may be found in Section 2 — 10 of this Handbook.
                4.   HUD 1s not required to make an award to a recipient, even if it has submitted
                     a meritorious application, as determined by the merit review. HUD reserves
                     the right to:
                            a.   Deny funding, or with a renewal or continuing award, consider
                                 suspension or termination of an award immediately for cause,
                            b.   Require removal of any key individual from association with
                                 management or implementation of the award, and
                            c.   Make provisions or revisions regarding method of payment or
                                 financial reporting requirements.
      B.   FISCAL AND ORGANIZATIONAL                  REQUIREMENTS
                1.   Uniform Administrative Requirements, Cost Principles and Audit
                     Requirements. Unless excepted under HUD program regulations (24 CFR,
                     Subtitle B, chapters I through IX), the Uniform Administrative Requirements,
                     Cost Principles, and Audit Requirements for Federal Awards in 2 CFR part
                     200 apply to Federal awards made by HUD. For older HUD grants and for




                                                                                                     30
                 HUD GRANTS MANAGEMENT                HANDBOOK        2210.17 REV 3.2


     PHAs where the basis for an exception or waiver is 24 CFR parts 84 and 85
     (2013 edition), the non-Federal entity may apply 24 CFR 84.1(b) and 85.1(b).
2.   Compliance with the Federal Funding Accountability and Transparency Act
     of 2006 (Pub. L.109-282), as amended. Recipients of HUD’s financial
     assistance must report certain sub-awards in the Federal Sub-Award Reporting
     System (FSRS) or its successor system for prime awards.
3.   Codes of Conduct. 2 CFR 200.112 requires HUD to have a conflict-of-interest
     policy for Federal awards. Before executing a grant or cooperative agreement
     with HUD, recipients must ensure an up-to-date copy of the organization’s
     code of conduct, dated and signed by the Executive Director, Chair, or
     equivalent official, of the governing body of the organization has been
     submitted to HUD, or if required by program regulations, be maintained and
     available to HUD.
            a.   Non-Federal entities must comply with program specific conflict
                 of interest requirements.
            b.   For procurement transactions only: Non-Federal entities subject to
                 2 CFR 200.318 must have documented procurement procedures
                 that include standards of conduct consistent with 2 CFR 200.318(c)
                 and prohibit real and apparent conflicts of interest arising among
                 officers, employees, or agents in the selection, award, and
                 administration of procurement contracts. The standards must
                 prohibit the solicitation and acceptance of gifts or gratuities over
                 minimal value by officers, employees, or agents for their personal
                 benefit; and outline administrative and disciplinary actions
                 available to remedy violations of such standards
            c.   In accordance with 2 CFR 200.318(c), if the recipient has a parent,
                 affiliate, or subsidiary organization, that is not a state, local
                 government, or Indian Tribe, the recipient must also maintain
                 written standards of conduct covering organizational conflicts of
                 interest in procurements. “Organizational conflicts of interest”
                 means due to relationships with a parent, affiliate, or subsidiary
                 organization, the recipient is unable, or appears to be unable, to be
                 impartial in conducting a procurement action involving the related
                 organization.
4.   Participation ina HUD-Sponsored Program Evaluation. As a condition of
     receiving funding under a NOFO, recipients must agree to cooperate with
     HUD staff, contractors, or designated recipients performing research or
     evaluation studies.
5.   Ensuring the Participation of Small and Minority Businesses, and Women-
     Owned Businesses, and Labor Surplus Area Firms. Under 2 CFR 200.321,
     recipients, their sub-recipients and contractors must take all necessary
     affirmative steps to assure small and minority businesses, women's business
     enterprises, and labor surplus area firms are used when possible.




                                                                                     31
                       HUD GRANTS MANAGEMENT                  HANDBOOK        2210.17 REV 3.2


       6.   Prohibition Against Lobbying Activities. Applicants are subject to Section
            319 of Public Law 101-121, 31 U.S.C. 1352, (the Byrd Amendment) and 24
            CFR part 87, prohibiting recipients of Federal contracts, grants, cooperative
            agreements, or loans from using appropriated funds for lobbying the executive
            or legislative branches of the Federal government for a specific contract,
            grant, loan, or cooperative agreement.
            All applicants must submit a Certification of Lobbying form signed by the
            authorized representative using language in Appendix A of 24 CFR Part 87.
       7.   Applicants must also disclose, using Standard Form LLL (SF-LLL),
            “Disclosure of Lobbying Activities,” any funds, other than Federally
            appropriated funds, used to influence Federal employees, members of
            Congress, or congressional staff regarding specific grants, cooperative
            agreements, or contracts. Federally recognized Indian tribes and tribally
            designated housing entities (TDHEs) established by Federally recognized
            Indian tribes are excluded, but State-recognized Indian tribes and TDHEs
            must comply.
C. REPORTING REQUIREMENTS
       1.   Reporting Requirements and Frequency of Reporting. The NOFO and grant or
            cooperative agreement must specify the reporting requirements, including
            content, method of data collection, and reporting frequency. If the total
            Federal share of a recipient’s Federal award is more than $500,000 over the
            period of performance, the recipient may be subject to post-award reporting
            requirements reflected in Appendix XII to 2 CFR Part 200--Award Term and
            Condition for Recipient Integrity and Performance Matters.
       2.   Race, Ethnicity and Other Data Reporting. Unless there is an explicit
            exemption, HUD requires recipients providing HUD-funded program benefits
            to individuals or families to report data on the race, color, religion, sex,
            national origin, age, handicap (disability), and family characteristics of
            persons and households who are applicants for, participants in, or
            beneficiaries or potential beneficiaries of HUD programs in order to meet the
            Department’s responsibilities under the Fair Housing Act, Executive Order
            11063, Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, and Section 562 of the
            Housing and Community Development Act of 1987. NOFOs may specify the
            data collection and reporting requirements. Many programs use the Race and
            Ethnic Data Reporting Form HUD-27061 (U.S. Department of Housing;
            OMB Approval No. 2535-0113).
       3.   Performance Reporting. HUD-funded programs require recipients to submit,
            not less than annually, a report on achievement of outcomes under the
            program in the grant or cooperative agreement.
D.   OTHER REQUIREMENTS              (This list is non-exhaustive)
       1.   Environmental Requirements. The HUD regulations governing the
            environmental review process can be found at 24 CFR Parts 50 and 58. This




                                                                                           32
                HUD GRANTS MANAGEMENT                HANDBOOK       2210.17 REV 3.2


     covers both the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) and related laws
     and authorities and incorporates NEPA and Council on Environmental Quality
     (CEQ) regulations in 40 CFR Parts 1500 through 1508.
                a.   The environmental review process must be completed prior to
                     approval of an application or issuance of an award unless the
                     NOFO, grant agreement, or cooperative agreement includes a
                     special condition providing for environmental review after
                     approval of the application or issuance of the award.
                b.   The NOFO must include applicable environmental
                     requirements in the NOFO or state if the funded activities are
                     excluded from environmental review. Unless a categorical
                     exclusion applies, each NOFO must also reference a Finding of
                     No Significant Impact (FONSI) establishing that the issuance
                     of the NOFO itself will not have a significant environmental
                     impact or indicate that an environmental impact statement has
                     been prepared if the NOFO does have a significant
                     environmental impact. FONSI documents are available for
                     public inspection on HUD’s website for applicable NOFOs.
                c.   The Program Environmental Clearance Officer for the
                     appropriate office should be consulted for specific information
                     on what the applicant must address.

2.   Eminent Domain. Annual HUD appropriation Acts have prohibited the use of
     funds to support any Federal, state, or local project seeking to use the power
     of eminent domain, unless eminent domain is employed only for a public use.
     Public use shall not be construed to include economic development that
     primarily benefits private entities. This requirement must be included in the
     NOFO if the fiscal year appropriation Act contains this provision.
3.   Consistency with the Consolidated Plan. Certain competitive programs require
     applications to contain a certification of consistency with a HUD-approved
     Consolidated Plan. This certification means the jurisdiction’s consolidated
     plan shows need, the proposed activities are consistent with the strategic plan
     and the location of the proposed activities is consistent with the geographic
     areas in the jurisdiction’s Consolidated Plan. HUD will not select and award
     funding for applications which do not contain certifications of consistency
     with the Consolidated Plan when certification is required under the NOFO.
4.   Economic Opportunities for Low- and Very Low-income Persons. Certain
     programs require recipients to comply with Section 3 of the Housing and
     Urban Development Act of 1968 (Section 3), 12 U.S.C. 1701u, and the HUD
     regulations at 24 CFR part 75. For NOFOs where Section 3 and 24 CFR part
     75 apply, applicants must include information regarding how Section 3
     activities will be considered in rating the application, the evaluation criteria
     utilized, and the rating points assigned.




                                                                                    33
                   HUD GRANTS MANAGEMENT              HANDBOOK        2210.17 REV 3.2


5.   Real Property Acquisition and Relocation. Except as otherwise provided by
     Federal statute, programs or projects assisted with HUD grant funds are
     subject to the Uniform Relocation Assistance and Real Property Acquisition
     Policies Act of 1970, as amended (URA)(42 U.S.C. 4601-4655), and the
     government-wide implementing regulations issued by the Federal Highway
     Administration at 49 CFR part 24.
              a.    Real property acquisition satisfying the requirements of 49 CFR
                    24.101(b)(1) through (5) is not subject to the requirements of 49
                    CFR 24, subpart B. These acquisitions, commonly referred to as
                    “voluntary acquisitions,” include those conducted without the
                    threat or use of eminent domain. Records demonstrating
                    compliance with these requirements must be maintained by the
                    recipient. The URA's assistance provisions remain applicable to
                    any tenants that must move as a result of an acquisition described
                    in 49 CFR 24.101(b) (1) through (5).
              b.    The relocation requirements of the URA, and its implementing
                    regulations at 49 CFR part 24, cover any person who moves from
                    real property or moves personal property from real property
                    because of acquisition, rehabilitation, or demolition for a
                    program or project receiving Federal financial assistance. While
                    there are no URA statutory provisions for “temporary
                    relocation,” the URA regulations recognize sometimes, a person
                    will not be permanently displaced but may need to relocate for a
                    short period. Under the URA regulations any tenant temporarily
                    relocated for a period beyond one year must be contacted by the
                    displacing agency and offered URA permanent relocation
                    assistance (See Appendix A to 49 CFR 24.2(a)(9)(i1)(D)). The
                    URA does not apply to displacements resulting from the
                    demolition or disposition of public housing covered by Section
                    18 of the United States Housing Act of 1937.
              c.    However, if subsequent acquisition, rehabilitation, or demolition
                    carried out with HUD funds or carried out with other HUD-
                    funded activities causes residents to relocate, the URA may
                    apply to those relocations. Additionally, if CDBG or HOME
                    funds are used in the demolition or with conversion of lower-
                    income dwelling units to a use other than lower-income dwelling
                    units, the project may be subject to section 104(d) of the Housing
                    and Community Development Act of 1974, including relocation
                    assistance and one-for-one replacement provisions under 24 CFR
                    part 42 subpart C.( PIH Notice 2021-07)
6.   Accessible Electronic and Information Technology. Section 508 of the
     Rehabilitation Act (Section 508) requires HUD to ensure access to electronic
     information and data to persons with disabilities comparably to those without
     disabilities unless an undue burden would result to the Federal agency. HUD




                                                                                    34
                          HUD GRANTS MANAGEMENT               HANDBOOK        2210.17 REV 3.2


               encourages its recipients to adopt the goals and objectives of Section 508 by
               ensuring comparable access whenever electronic and information technology
               is used.
          7.   Prohibition of the purchase of certain telecommunications equipment. Under
               Section 889 of the National Defense Authorization Act of 2019 (Pub. L. No.
               115-232) and 2 CFR 200.216, HUD loan and grant funds cannot be used to
               procure or obtain or extend or renew a contract to procure or obtain; or to
               enter a contract to procure covered telecommunications equipment as
               described in subsection (a) of Section 889. 2 CFR 200.216(b) also provides
               that heads of executive agencies administering loan, grant, or subsidy
               programs shall prioritize available funding and technical support to assist
               affected businesses, institutions and organizations as is reasonably necessary
               for those affected entities to transition from covered communications
               equipment and services, to procure replacement equipment and services, and
               to ensure that communications service to users and customers is sustained.
          8.   Executive Order on Ensuring the Future Is Made in All of America by All of
               America’s Workers (E.O. 14005). In alignment with E.O. 14005, HUD
               should, consistent with applicable law, use terms and conditions of Federal
               financial assistance awards and Federal procurements to maximize the use of
               goods, products, and materials produced in, and services offered in, the United
               States. HUD should, whenever possible, procure goods, products, materials,
               and services from sources that will help American businesses compete in
               strategic industries and help America’s workers thrive. Additionally, to
               promote an accountable and transparent procurement policy, HUD should vest
               waiver issuance authority in senior agency leadership, where appropriate and
               consistent with applicable law.

2-6:   NOFO    Clearance

        A. INTERNAL CLEARANCE
          1.   This section outlines the specific process for NOFO clearance and procedures.
          2.   Originating Program Offices must prepare an original and redlined version of
               their prior year’s NOFO to start the clearance process. Assigned counsel for
               each Program Office must review the proposed NOFO for legal sufficiency.
               Note: All documents must be in an accessible format in accordance with
               Section 508 compliance requirements.
          3.   Review by program counsel includes coordination with OGC’s Office of
               Legislation and Regulations. If the program counsel was not included in the
               pre-clearance process and the NOFO is new or contains significant changes
               from the prior year’s NOFO, then program counsel will have 28 days to
               review and comment. Once the NOFOA is approved by the Program Office,
               the Certifying Official can submit it into Departmental Clearance.




                                                                                                35
                  HUD GRANTS MANAGEMENT              HANDBOOK       2210.17 REV 3.2


B. DEPARTMENTAL          CLEARANCE
  I.   The NOFO Departmental Clearance process allows 10 Business Days for
       Program Offices and Support Offices (e.g., OGC, OCFO) to review and
       comment on a NOFO from the originating Program Office. The options for
       commenting on the NOFO: No Position (1.e., no need to review the NOFO);
       Concur without   Comment, Concur with     Comment; or Non-Concur with
       Comment. For definitions of these terms, see the HUD Directives Handbook.

       Default Concurrence of NOFOs - Default Concurrence means concurrence 1s
       automatically assumed when Program Offices do not send their NOFO review
       and concurrence status by the deadline.
       NOFOs will be in Departmental Clearance for 10 business days. After 10
       business days, all non-respondent offices, except OGC, will be considered to
       have Default Concurrence.
       To expedite OGC’s concurrence, GMO will schedule a meeting with the
       NOFO Drafter and OGC at the beginning of the clearance period.
       Non-concurring comments must include proposed language clearing the non-
       concurrence or explain why the commenter is unable to propose language.
       Additionally, non-concurring comments from OGC must have a basis in
       statute or regulation. Comments from reviewing Program Offices must have a
       basis in statute, regulations, or HUD policy. Originating offices should make
       good faith efforts to consider and incorporate clearance comments, including
       concurring comments.
       Once Departmental Clearance is complete, the following steps take place:
           a.   The NOFO is submitted to OMB. OMB has an initial 10 business
                days to review, approve, and return the NOFO to HUD with any
                comments or concerns.
           b.   The Department then works to resolve those comments or concerns
                and sends the NOFO back to OMB. OMB is then allowed an
                additional 10 business days for a final review.
           c.   Once approved by OMB and returned to HUD, OGC has 5 business
                days to complete a final review. When OGC concurs on the NOFO
                for publication and concurs with the NOFO’s FONSI, if applicable, it
                is sent to GMO for publishing. This task is a part of the AM
                workflow in the GrantSolutions system.
           d.   After final approval by OGC, GMO Portfolio Managers will submit
                an email notification to the Office of the Secretary (OSEC). The
                notification will contain a brief synopsis of the NOFO, and a .pdf
                version of the final approved NOFO to review.




                                                                                      36
                       HUD GRANTS MANAGEMENT              HANDBOOK         2210.17 REV 3.2


                    OSEC will have 7 business days to submit their respective reviews.
                    After 7 business days, these offices will be considered in Default
                    Concurrence.


               e.   Upon final approval or concurrence from OSEC, GMO will publish
                    the NOFO within 2-3 business days unless the Program Office
                    requests the NOFO be published on a specific date or other
                    circumstances require a delay in publication.
     6.   GMO will work with Program Offices to ensure no more than four (4) NOFOs
          are in Departmental Clearance in any given week.


     NOFO    Clearance Steps                         General Timeframes

     NOFO Drafted                                    Milestone Plan Timeline

     Cleared internally by originating office        5-10 business days
     (including pre-review by program attorney
     in OGC)

     Departmental Review and clearance by            10 business days
     other HUD offices

     Originating office revises NOFO based on        10 business days
     comments and resolves non-concurrences

     OMB reviews and approves NOFO.                  Up to 20 business days
     Originating office revises NOFO based on
     OMB comments.

     OGC completes final review and                  5 business days
     concurrence on publication




     Publication to Grants.gov by GMO                2 - 3 business days



C. EXECUTING THE HUD-22, DEPARTMENTAL                     CLEARANCE           APPROVAL
   PROCEDURES
     1.   When an electronic grants management system is used to draft, clear, and
          publish NOFOs, a HUD-22 from the originating Program Office is not needed
          to put the NOFO into Departmental Clearance. The digital signature by the
          Certifying Official indicates approval to put the NOFO into Departmental
          Clearance.




                                                                                         37
                        HUD GRANTS MANAGEMENT              HANDBOOK       2210.17 REV 3.2


       2.   Program Offices reviewing a NOFO have 10 business days from the date the
            NOFO entered Departmental Clearance to submit a signed HUD-22 with or
            without comments.
            Except for the offices listed in #4 below, Program Offices failing to submit a
            signed HUD-22 within 10 business days will be deemed to have “No
            Position” by the originating Program Office when the clearance period has
            expired.
            GMO, OGC, and OCFO must upload a concurring HUD-22 before            a NOFO
            can go to OMB.
            Portfolio Managers must give the GMO Director a HUD-22 to sign — either
            paper copy or electronic copy (via email formatted for digital signature).
D.   ORIGINATING PROGRAM             OFFICE RESPONSIBILITIES
       I.   Originating Program Offices must address all non-concurring comments and
            should consider concurring comments received on a NOFO during the
            Departmental Clearance process.
            When necessary, the originating Program Office can extend the review period
            beyond the 10 business days standard when requested by a reviewing office.
            Extensions granted should not be so long as to significantly delay the
            Departmental Clearance process.
            Originating Program Offices should complete NOFO revisions based on
            comments received during Departmental Clearance within 14 days.
E. NOFO PUBLICATION ON GRANTS.GOV
       I.   Once OGC has given final concurrence, GMO staff will publish the NOFO to
            Grants. gov.
       2.   NOFOs posted on Grants.gov are the official documents to solicit
            applications. If there is a discrepancy between a NOFO posted on Grants.gov
            and other information provided in any other copy, version, or supporting
            documentation, the Program NOFO published on Grants.gov will prevail.
F.   NOFO AMENDMENTS           AND TECHNICAL          CORRECTIONS
       I.   If, after NOFO publication, a Program Office determines a correction or
            change is needed, HUD can publish a revised version to Grants.gov. The two
            types of corrections or changes allowed are technical corrections and
            amendments.
            A technical correction is a minor change not altering the program intent,
            purpose, rating factors, or policy intent of the NOFO (e.g., funding amount
            change, deadline date, or minor typographical error).
                   a.   To initiate a technical correction, a Program Office must seek
                        approval from the Authorizing Official and work with GMO to
                        update the NOFO publication on Grants.gov.




                                                                                             38
                             HUD GRANTS MANAGEMENT               HANDBOOK        2210.17 REV 3.2


                        b.   The minor nature of technical corrections does not change the
                             application deadline date.
           3.   A significant change altering the program intent, purpose, rating factors, or
                policy (e.g., Program Office discovers an error in a rating factor or eligibility
                criteria changes) is an amendment.
                        a.   To initiate an amendment, a Program Office must seek approval
                             from the Authorizing Official and consult with GMO on the
                             correction and its implications.
                        b.   Amendments require review and concurrence of the revised NOFO
                             by OGC before GMO can publish the updated version to
                             Grants.gov. If the need for an amendment is identified less than 30
                             days before the published application deadline, the application
                             deadline must be moved to ensure potential applicants have at least
                             30 days to apply.

2-7: Application Receipt and Review                         Procedures          for
     Competitive Awards

    A. APPLICATION RECEIPT
           1.   After submission, applications undergo initial screening by the Program
                Office, often referred to as threshold or intake, to ensure they meet minimum
                eligibility requirements in the NOFO requirements. Applications failing to
                meet initial screening requirements will not be evaluated further.
           2.   Applications passing the initial screening process will be evaluated based on
                the rating criteria outlined in the NOFO.
           3.   Eligibility requirements must be identified in the NOFO.
           4.   Unless there is an exception in Appropriations language or the Program Office
                grants a waiver, HUD does not accept faxed or hand-delivered applications or
                supporting documents.
    B.   CORRECTIONS         TO DEFICIENT APPLICATIONS
           1.   HUD will not consider information applicants want to provide after the
                application deadline. HUD will not seek or consider clarification of
                application items or responses improving the substantive quality of an
                application or correct deficiencies in whole or part of a rating factor, including
                items impacting preference points.
           2.   HUD may contact the applicant to clarify other items in its application,
                consistent with 24 CFR 4.26(b). To not unreasonably exclude applications
                from being rated and ranked where there are curable deficiencies, HUD will
                uniformly notify applicants of technical deficiencies.




                                                                                                    39
                         HUD GRANTS MANAGEMENT                 HANDBOOK        2210.17 REV 3.2


                 a.   A technical deficiency is an error or oversight that, if corrected, would
                      not alter, in a positive or negative fashion, the review and rating of the
                      application. Examples of curable (correctable) technical deficiencies
                      include inconsistencies in the funding request, failure to submit the
                      proper certifications, failure to submit an otherwise sufficient
                      application under the correct Assistance Listings number or Funding
                      Opportunity Number in Grants.gov, and/or failure to submit an
                      application containing a signature by an official able to make a legally
                      binding commitment on behalf of the applicant. These examples are
                      non-exhaustive.
                      When HUD identifies a curable technical deficiency, HUD will notify
                      the applicant’s authorized representative. Official email notification
                      must be sent from HUD with confirmation of delivery receipt
                      requested. Applicants must provide an accurate email address for
                      receipt of the notification.
                      Applicants must email corrections of technical deficiencies to
                      applicationsupport@hud.gov within the time limits specified in the
                      notification. The time allowed to correct deficiencies will not exceed
                      14 calendar days or be less than 48 hours from the email notification.
                      The start of the cure period will be the date stamp on the email HUD
                      sends to the applicant. If the deficiency cure deadline date falls on a
                      Saturday, Sunday, Federal holiday, or other day when HUD’s
                      Headquarters offices in Washington, DC, are closed, then the
                      applicant’s correction must be received on the next business day HUD
                      Headquarters offices in Washington, DC are open.
         3.   Corrections to a paper application should be sent to the address stated in the
              Notice of Deficiency. Paper applications with incorrect Assistance Listings
              Numbers submitted under a waiver may correct the Assistance Listings
              Number as a technical deficiency. Applicants failing to correct the deficiency
              and submit an Assistance Listings number association with an active SAM
              registration on the submission deadline date will be ineligible for funding.
              The applicant must cure technical deficiencies before HUD can announce and
              award funding to the applicant.

2-8: Application       Merit Review

    A. REVIEW DESIGN AND CRITERIA (2 CFR 200.205)

         I.   For discretionary Federal awards HUD Program Offices must design and
              execute a merit review process for applications, with the objective of selecting
              recipients most likely to be successful in delivering results based on the
              program objectives outlined in section 2 CFR 200.202. A merit review is an
              objective process of evaluating Federal award applications in accordance with




                                                                                               40
                        HUD GRANTS MANAGEMENT               HANDBOOK       2210.17 REV 3.2


            written standards set forth by HUD. The process and criteria must be
            described in the NOFO. Merit review processes typically include intake or
            threshold screening reviews, reviewing and rating applications using HUD’s
            standard rating factors and program-specific rating factors, and ranking
            applications by final scores. Alternative methods, such as funding by lottery,
            may be used if approved during the NOFO clearance process. HUD must also
            periodically review its merit review process.
            Under Section 103 of the HUD Reform Act, in HUD regulations in 24 CFR
            part 4, subpart B, HUD’s employees reviewing applications and making
            funding decisions are prohibited from providing advance information to any
            person (other than an authorized HUD employee) concerning funding
            decisions or from otherwise giving any applicant an unfair competitive
            advantage. Applicants for assistance must confine their inquiries to the areas
            HUD’s employees may answer under 24 CFR part 4. This prohibition is lifted
            after award announcements are made.

          . For discretionary award renewals and non-discretionary award programs,
            applications may be subject to a review by at least one reviewer who is
            professionally and technically qualified to conduct the review. This review is
            limited to technical and/or cost matters.
            Scientific or technical aspects of the grant application are evaluated through
            the merit review process. Competing grant applications must undergo
            objective review. The evaluation during objective review is based on merits of
            the application in response to the published criteria.
            Criteria used to evaluate applications during the merit review must be
            included within a NOFO.
B. APPLICATION EVALUATION
     I.     HUD has established five (5) standard award funding factors in the NOFO
            template Program Offices may use. HUD may modify the factors for a
            specific funding opportunity to reflect statutory and regulatory limitations or
            program needs. The factors are:
                a.   Capacity of the Applicant and Relevant Organizational Staff
                b.   Need/Extent of the Problem
                c.   Soundness of Approach
                d.   Leveraging Resources
                e.   Achieving Results and Program Evaluation

     2.     NOFOs may award up to 100 points for the standard rating factors.
            Additional preference points may be given for Secretarial initiatives such as
            Opportunity Zones, Promise Zones, and Historically Black Colleges and
            Universities (HBCUs). GMO working with other offices will provide annual
            guidance on NOFO preference points, including any appropriations Act




                                                                                              4]
                 HUD GRANTS MANAGEMENT                 HANDBOOK         2210.17 REV 3.2


provision regarding Promise Zones. Applicants must submit HUD Form
50153, signed by the Promise Zone authorized official to receive the points.


In evaluating applications for funding, HUD will consider an applicant’s past
performance in managing previous grants under the program or from HUD.
Items HUD may consider include, but are not limited to:
        Accounting for funds appropriately;
  monogeUsing funds received from HUD in a timely manner;
        Producing timely and high-quality reports submitted to HUD;
        Meeting program requirements;
        The use of quantitative data to establish performance targets;
        Meeting performance targets as established in the grant agreement,
        with a focus on outcomes rather than output measures; a timeline
        outlining data collection strategies and annual reporting mechanisms;
        The applicant’s organizational capacity, including staffing structures
        and capabilities;
    h. Timelines for completion of activities and receipt of promised
        matching or leveraged funds; and
    1. The number of persons to be served or targeted for assistance.

Outstanding civil rights matters must be resolved before the application
deadline. Applicants who, after review, are confirmed to have civil rights
matters unresolved at the application deadline will be deemed ineligible.
Their applications will receive no further review, will not be rated and ranked,
and they will not receive funding.

   a. Applicants having any of the charges, cause determinations, lawsuits, or
   letters of findings referenced in subparagraphs (1) — (5) that have not been
   resolved to HUD’s satisfaction before or on the application deadline date
   are ineligible for funding. Such matters include:
           i.    Charges from HUD concerning a systemic violation of the Fair
                 Housing Act or receipt of a cause determination from a
                 substantially equivalent state or local fair housing agency
                 concerning a systemic violation of a substantially equivalent state
                 or local fair housing law proscribing discrimination because of
                 race, color, religion, sex, national origin, disability or familial
                 status;
           ii.  Status as a defendant in a Fair Housing Act lawsuit filed by the
                Department of Justice alleging a pattern or practice of
                discrimination or denial of rights to a group of persons raising an
                issue of general public importance under 42 U.S.C. 3614(a);
           ili. Status as a defendant in any other lawsuit filed or joined by the
                Department of Justice, or in which the Department of Justice has
                intervened, or filed an amicus brief or statement of interest,




                                                                                       42
                 HUD GRANTS MANAGEMENT               HANDBOOK        2210.17 REV 3.2


                 alleging a pattern or practice or systemic violation of Title VI of
                 the Civil Rights Act of 1964, Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act
                 of 1973, Section 109 of the Housing and Community Development
                 Act of 1974, the Americans with Disabilities Act or a claim under
                the False Claims Act related to fair housing, non-discrimination, or
                civil rights generally including an alleged failure to affirmatively
                further fair housing;
            iv. Receipt of a letter of findings identifying systemic non-compliance
                with Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, Section 504 of the
                Rehabilitation Act of 1973, Section 109 of the Housing and
                Community Development Act of 1974, or the Americans with
                 Disabilities Act;
            v.   Receipt of a cause determination from a substantially equivalent
                 state or local fair housing agency concerning a systemic violation
                 of provisions of a state or local law prohibiting discrimination in
                 housing based on sexual orientation, gender identity, or lawful
                 source of income.
        b. HUD will determine if actions to resolve the charge, cause
        determination, lawsuit, or letter of findings taken before the application
        deadline date will resolve the matter. Examples of actions that may be
        sufficient to resolve the matter include, but are not limited to:
            i.   Current compliance with a voluntary compliance agreement signed
                 by all the parties;
            ii. Current compliance with a HUD-approved conciliation agreement
                 signed by all the parties;
            iii. Current compliance with a conciliation agreement signed by all the
                 parties and approved by the state governmental or local
                 administrative agency with jurisdiction over the matter;
            iv. Current compliance with a consent order or consent decree;
            v. Current compliance with a final judicial ruling or administrative
                 ruling or decision; or
            vi. Dismissal of charges.
5.   HUD may deduct points from the rating score or establish threshold levels as
     specified under the Factors for Award in the program NOFOs. Program
     NOFOs will specify how past performance will be rated or otherwise used in
     determining award amounts.

6.   HUD may give funding priority to applicants who demonstrate effective use
     of evidence in identifying needs to be addressed and selecting the practices,
     strategies or remedies proposed in the application, where practicable.

7.   Environmental Justice. HUD may consider environmental justice in
     evaluating applications. Under E.O. 12898, each Federal agency is directed to




                                                                                       43
                     HUD GRANTS MANAGEMENT               HANDBOOK        2210.17 REV 3.2


          identify and address disproportionately high and adverse human health or
          environmental effects of its programs, policies, and activities on minority
          populations and low-income populations. If your NOFO will consider
          environmental justice, you must specify how it will be evaluated.

          Intergovernmental Reviews. Executive Order (EO) 12372,
          Intergovernmental Review of Federal Programs, as implemented by 24 CFR
          part 52, is intended to foster an intergovernmental partnership and a
          strengthened Federalism by relying on state, areawide, regional, and local
          coordination and review of proposed Federal financial assistance and direct
          Federal development. NOFOs must indicate if the program is subject to EO
          12372. If subject to EO 12372, a Program Office must review comments
          received from the State Single Point of Contact (SSPOC) and make efforts to
          accommodate intergovernmental concerns as per the procedures outlined in 24
          CFR part 52.

C. INDEPENDENCE        OF APPLICATION REVIEWERS
     I.   The Program Office must use objective reviewers knowledgeable in the field
          of endeavor or subject under review, be sufficiently independent of the entity
          applying for assistance, and able to render an objective and unbiased
          evaluation. This includes Federal employees, including HUD staff. Any
          circumstance introducing a conflict of interest, or appearance thereof,
          prejudices, biases, or predispositions into the process must be avoided.
          Federal employees, including consultants and technical experts, who assist
          HUD in rating and ranking applications for funding under NOFOs are subject
          to 18 U.S.C. 208, the Federal criminal conflict-of-interest statute, and the
          Standards of Ethical Conduct for Employees of the Executive Branch
          regulation published at 5 CFR part 2635. Consultants and technical experts
          who assist applicants with preparing applications for Program NOFOs may
          not serve on a selection panel and may not serve as a technical advisor to
          HUD.
          Employment of outside experts and peer reviewers under the consultant
          appointment authority subjects them to the restrictions under Section 103 of
          the HUD Reform Act when consultants/experts review competitive
          applications. Program Offices must ensure inherently governmental
          functions, such as award selections and recommendations, are not performed
          by experts or consultants.

          Anyone involved in rating and ranking Program NOFO applications,
          including departmental staff, experts, and consultants, must avoid conflicts of
          interest or the appearance of such conflicts. These individuals must also
          disclose to HUD’s OGC Ethics Law Division the following information, if
          applicable:




                                                                                         44
                         HUD GRANTS MANAGEMENT                HANDBOOK       2210.17 REV 3.2


                a.    How the selection or non-selection of any applicant under a Program
                      NOFO will affect the individual's financial interests, as provided in 18
                      U.S.C. 208, and;

               b.     How the application process involves a party with whom the
                      individual has a covered relationship under 5 CFR 2635.502 (b)(1).
       5.   The consultant or technical expert assisting HUD must disclose the
            information in 4.a. or 4.b. above before participating in any matter regarding a
            NOFO.
D.   CONDUCT         OF MERIT REVIEW
       I.   The merit review must be performed:
                a.    After the application submission deadline; or
               b.     After the Program Office accepts an unsolicited request for funding for
                      review.
       2.   Applications must be evaluated against the Eligibility, Threshold
            Requirements and Rating Factors in the NOFO. At a minimum, evaluations
            of applications from eligible applicants must include a full reading of the
            application, scoring of the application on the evaluation criterion, and indicate
            the strengths and weaknesses of the overall response.
            If stated in the NOFO, HUD may consider geographic distribution, diverse
            types and sizes of applicant entities, diversity of methods or approaches or a
            limitation on the number of awards a single applicant may receive when
            selecting applicants for funding.
E. RANKING AND SELECTION OF APPLICANTS
       I.   After applications are scored, the Program Office must rank the applications
            unless only one application is received.
            The results of the application review process and selection recommendations
            are then provided to the Allotment Holder. Selections are made based on the
            evaluation, published factors for award and other factors as indicated under
            D.3. above, and comments if any, under EO 12372.

            Approval of the ranking and selections by the Allotment Holder or his/her
            designee indicates all requirements in the NOFO have been met for successful
            applicants.
            Applicants disapproved (including those not meeting eligibility threshold
            requirements), must be notified in writing after the Allotment Holder approves
            the selected applicants list. (See Section 2 —5 A.4, above, for applications not
            accepted for review.)




                                                                                             45
                             HUD GRANTS MANAGEMENT                 HANDBOOK         2210.17 REV 3.2


    F.   DOCUMENTATION             OF THE MERIT REVIEW PROCESS
            1.   Documentation of the decision to approve, disapprove, or otherwise not fund
                 an application, as required by this Section, must be maintained by the Program
                 Office in its files or in the official electronic award file.
            2.   Documentation must be handled in a manner that protects the confidentiality
                 of the reviewers’ identities and their comments and does not reveal their
                 assessments or scores to the public. This information must be documented for
                 approved applications:
                     a.   The numerical position of the application in the ranking list;
                     b.   When applications are not approved in rank order, adequate
                          justification and description of the items or reasons influencing the
                          selection of applicants for funding;
                     c.   The amount recommended for funding and, if different from the
                          amount requested in the application, an explanation or rationale for the
                          difference between the requested amount and the award amount;
                     d.   Information on strengths and weaknesses of the application; and
                     e.   Any conditions imposed on the approved application, whether
                          resulting from the objective review or pre-award risk assessment.
            3.   HUD must ensure documentation states the rationale for approval or denial.
                 The application, including any letters of support, may be subject to public
                 disclosure as provided under the Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) (5
                 U.S.C. 552) and HUD’s implementing regulations at 24 CFR Part 15.
            4.   Pursuant to FOIA, HUD may proactively disclose awarded applications accessible on the
                 Department's Web site at http://www.hud.gov/FOIA.

            5.   Applicant/Recipient Disclosure/Update Reports (currently Form HUD-2880)
                 submitted must be available to the public for five (5) years. Updated reports
                 must be available with the initial applicant disclosure reports for at least three
                 (3) years.

2-9: Non-Discretionary                 Awards
    An award made by HUD to specific recipients in accordance with statutory, eligibility and
    compliance requirements, such that in keeping with specific statutory authority the agency has
    no ability to exercise judgement (“discretion”). A non-discretionary award amount could be
    determined specifically or by formula.


    A.      OVERVIEW
            1.   This section describes procedures applicable to programs that provide non-
                 discretionary awards.




                                                                                                     46
                              HUD GRANTS MANAGEMENT                 HANDBOOK       2210.17 REV 3.2


              2.   Itis HUD policy to recognize the unique statutory and regulatory
                   requirements applicable to non-discretionary awards while maintaining a
                   systematic approach to their award and administration.
                   Program Offices may monitor non-discretionary awards either on-site or
                   remotely. The review must include requirements related to eligible activities,
                   allowable costs, any limits on types of costs (such as administrative costs),
                   beneficiary eligibility determinations, matching funds, collection and
                   reporting of program data, and collection and use of program income.
        B.    SUBMISSION PROCESS FOR NON-DISCRETIONARY AWARDS
              I.   In most cases, HUD will notify recipients of their non-discretionary award
                   allocation within 60 days of funding appropriation as required by many
                   funding provisions in the annual appropriations Acct.
                   Recipients must submit a plan (e.g., Consolidated Plan, Five-Year Public
                   Housing Agency Plan or Annual [Public Housing] Plan) reviewed and
                   approved by HUD in accordance with 24 CFR parts 91 and 903.
                   HUD review of plan submissions are set forth in the relevant program
                   regulations.

2-10:        Award       Renewals

        A. TYPES OF AWARD          RENEWALS

              I.   Another important kind of discretionary grant-making at HUD is renewal
                   awards. There are three types of renewal awards: continuation, competitive,
                   and non-competitive. Whether a grant can be continued or renewed and
                   whether they may be awarded non-competitively depends on authorizing acts,
                   appropriations acts and program regulations.
                   A grant continuation is an extension or renewal of an existing expiring
                   program funding for one or more additional budget period(s). Continuation
                   grants are typically available to existing recipients of discretionary, multi-year
                   grants.
              3.   A competitive award renewal is an extension of program funding for one or
                   more additional budget period (s) based on a competition with other eligible
                   renewal recipients. Funding is announced via a NOFO on Grants.gov and
                   selection is based on criteria detailed in the NOFO.
              4.   A non-competitive award renewal is an extension of program funding for one
                   or more additional budget period(s) based on availability of funds, project
                   performance and/or compliance with progress and financial reporting
                   requirements. Recipients may have originally competed for selection or were
                   selected based on Congressional direction or an appropriations act.




                                                                                                   47
                                   HUD GRANTS MANAGEMENT               HANDBOOK      2210.17 REV 3.2


     B.   RENEWAL APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS

              1.   Program Offices must provide recipients and/or applicants with specific
                   instructions for completing and submitting applications for renewal awards.

              2.   At minimum, the renewal award instructions must specify:
                                   Required means of submission;
                           b.      Required forms and documentation to be submitted, including
                                   instructions;
                           c.      Due date for submission and consequences of a late submission;
                           d.      Approved funding level for the upcoming budget period;
                           e.      Requirements to request any budget or project revisions; and
                           f.      The recipient must provide its estimated unobligated balance
                                   at end of performance period and explain why an unobligated
                                   balance exists.
              3.    Ifapplicable, selection and award of competitive renewals must comply with
                   requirements for discretionary grant competitions, including NOFO
                   development and merit review.
C.        RENEWAL APPLICATION REVIEW
              1.   The Program Office must review the renewal application/submission and
                   provide a recommendation for continuing or discontinuing the award. The
                   review must be documented and included in the official grant file.
              2.   Subject to the requirements of the authorizing acts, appropriations acts and
                   program regulations, grant continuations and non-competitive renewals need
                   not undergo a merit review process. However, HUD must determine that the
                   grant being renewed complies with program requirements.
              3.   As aprerequisite to continued funding, the appropriate grants official, must:
                      a.        Determine whether the recipient has submitted applicable
                                certifications and assurances (2 CFR 200.209);
                      b.        Review the required OMB-designated repositories of government-
                                wide data such as the SAM and the FAPIIS and make award decisions
                                accordingly (Appendix I to 2 CFR part 200); and
                      c.        Review the application budget and the most recent Federal Financial
                                Report (FFR) and other available information.
              4.   For multi-year project periods, the Program Office may opt to provide future
                   funding in the approved amount(s) unless:
                      a.        The recipient is not making adequate progress;




                                                                                                      48
                                HUD GRANTS MANAGEMENT                HANDBOOK       2210.17 REV 3.2


                        b.   The recipient has not complied with the terms and conditions of
                             previous budget; or
                        c.   The amount available for funding has been reduced or eliminated.
               5.   The Program Office may reject an application for a renewal award if any of
                    these situations occur, subject to any appeal rights available to the recipient in
                    statute or regulation.

2-11:         Unsolicited         Proposals

A.   OVERVIEW

               1.   Unsolicited proposals are those received without benefit of full and open
                    competition. The determination to fund a grant or cooperative agreement
                    without competition must be authorized by law (including the competition
                    provision in the annual appropriations Act) and supported by a written
                    justification approved by the responsible Authorizing Official.

               2.   Program Offices may only fund an unsolicited proposal where it has been
                    determined the applicant has offered a unique idea or concept and it is not
                    feasible to pursue the project competitively without disclosing the applicant’s
                    proprietary ideas.

B. UNSOLICITED PROPOSALS INVOLVING RESEARCH
         I.    If a proposed unsolicited project, not exempt under 24 CFR Part 60.101, involves
               research using human subjects, then a certification must be included indicating an
               Institutional Review Board (IRB) has approved the research design. The
               certification must be accompanied by a description of the procedures and
               membership of the IRB and shows it has been registered under the Department of
               Health and Human Services’ (HHS) Policy for Protection of Human Research
               Subjects, 45 CFR Part 46, Subpart E. Unsolicited proposals involving research
               should be forwarded to the HUD Office of the Assistant Secretary for Policy
               Development and Research (PDR).
               Unsolicited proposals sent to HUD should be treated uniformly from receipt
               through evaluation in accordance with 48 CFR Part 15, Subpart 15.6. Title V of
               the Housing and Community Development Act of 1970, as amended, authorizes
               the Secretary to undertake programs of research, studies, testing and
               demonstrations, relating to the mission and programs of the Department.

               To assure effective results of these activities, the Secretary is also authorized to
               disseminate significant reports, data and information to Departments and agencies
               of Federal, state, and local governments, private organizations, and the public.
               Research conducted by HUD must undergo peer review procedures in HUD’s
               Guidelines for Information Quality and Integrity prior to issuance to the public.




                                                                                                    49
                               HUD GRANTS MANAGEMENT               HANDBOOK        2210.17 REV 3.2




2-12:        Research        Involving        Human         Subjects

        A.   OVERSIGHT AND APPLICABILITY

               I.   The Office of Policy Development and Research (PDR) is the HUD office
                    with Department-wide responsibility for research involving human subjects.

                    The regulations for protecting human subjects in 45 CFR part 46, Federal
                    Policy for the Protection of Human Subjects, apply to HUD grants for
                    research involving human subjects. Subpart A of Part 46 was adopted by
                    HUD in 24 CFR 60.101 and by other Federal agencies, as a uniform
                    “Common Rule.”

                    HUD amended its human subject protection regulations on January 19, 2017
                    (82 Federal Register 7149 — 7274). The effective date for the amended
                    regulations is January 19, 2018, except the effective date is January 20, 2020
                    for research conducted at more than one institution, called “cooperative
                    research.”

        B. NOFO REQUIREMENTS

               I.   Program Offices must ensure NOFOs for research clearly state the
                    requirements associated with protection of human subjects and specify the
                    information and assurances required from the applicant prior to the issuance
                    of award.
                    Recipients and sub-recipients must safeguard the rights and welfare of human
                    subjects in HUD-supported research activities in compliance with the
                    Common Rule (45 CFR part 46, subpart A). This includes obtaining IRB
                    approval and obtaining informed consent. As a matter of grants policy,
                    recipients must ensure sub-recipients comply with these requirements.

2-13:        Pre-Award          Risk Assessment              (2 CFR 200.206)

        A. ENTERPRISE RISK MANAGEMENT                   RELATIONSHIP
               I.   Prior to making a Federal award, HUD is required by the Payment Integrity
                    Information Act of 2019, 31 U.S.C. § 3354, and 41 U.S.C. 2313 to review
                    information available through any OMB-designated repositories of
                    governmentwide eligibility qualification or financial integrity information as
                    appropriate. See also suspension and debarment requirements at 2 CFR part
                    180 as well as individual Federal agency suspension and debarment
                    regulations in title 2 of the Code of Federal Regulations.




                                                                                                     50
                       HUD GRANTS MANAGEMENT                HANDBOOK        2210.17 REV 3.2


       2.   An objective of HUD’s Risk Management Program is to facilitate the
            completion of risk assessments at the program level which inform, and are
            informed by, the enterprise risks. These pre-award risk assessments of
            recipients provide input into the development of the Department’s view of
            risk. They also promote an understanding of HUD’s enterprise risks. HUD
            must have a framework in place for evaluating the risks posed by applicants
            before they receive Federal awards.
            The Risk Management Program’s standard set of methodologies, tools,
            templates and processes for managing risk activities can be used by the
            Program Offices to develop or enhance pre-award risk assessment procedures.
            As enterprise-level risk management processes over grants are reviewed and
            matured by the Department, GMO will work with the Risk Management
            Program to provide updated information and tools to Program Offices.
B. PROGRAM        OFFICE RISK FRAMEWORK
       I.   Program Offices must establish a process to identify and mitigate potential
            risks posed by potential recipients before selection. (2 CFR 200.206) Before
            selecting applicants for award, Program Offices must conduct a pre-award
            evaluation of each applicant; determine if the applicant poses risk; and decide
            whether to impose award conditions and additional performance requirements
            to mitigate and monitor risk or not select the applicant for funding based on
            the risk evaluation.
            Regulations on reviewing and evaluating risk are in 2 CFR 200.206. Prior to
            making a Federal award, HUD must consider all of the information available
            through FAPIIS with regard to the applicant and any immediate highest level
            owner, predecessor (1.e.; a non-Federal entity that is replaced by a successor),
            or subsidiary, identified for that applicant in FAPIIS, if applicable.
            At a minimum, the information in the system for a prior Federal award
            recipient must demonstrate a satisfactory record of executing programs or
            activities under Federal grants, cooperative agreements, or procurement
            awards; and integrity and business ethics.
            Each Program Office’s financial management staff is charged with helping the
            Program Office determine whether an applicant is sufficiently responsible to
            receive Federal financial assistance under requirements established in 2 CFR
            part 200. If the review of the application shows risk using the indicators in
            sub-section C below, the Program Office must determine whether the risks
            can be handled with special terms and conditions (2 CFR 200.208).
C. RISK INDICATORS (2 CFR 200.206) — In evaluating risks posed by applicants,
   HUD may use a risk-based approach and may consider items such as the following:
       I.   Financial Instability. Indicators of financial instability include lack of timely
            payment to sub-recipients, contractors, and staff; tax liens/failure to pay
            Federal taxes; or a filing of bankruptcy or insolvency. Please note a decision
            not to make an award based on bankruptcy or insolvency alone may violate 11




                                                                                           51
                      HUD GRANTS MANAGEMENT              HANDBOOK       2210.17 REV 3.2


          USC 525(a) prohibiting discrimination against organizations filing such
          actions.
          Quality of Management Systems and Ability to Meet Management Standards.
          HUD will not award or disburse funds to applicants not having a financial
          management system meeting Federal standards as described at 2 CFR
          200.302. HUD may arrange for a financial capability system review for
          recipients who have not previously received Federal financial assistance. This
          may occur when HUD has reason to question whether a financial management
          system meets Federal standards, or for applicants considered high-risk based
          on past performance or financial management findings.
          History of Performance. Unsatisfactory performance on another Federal
          award, may include, but is not limited to, material violations of award terms
          and conditions, present debarment, suspension or voluntary exclusion from
          Federal programs on the Limited Denials of Participation list, termination of a
          previous award for cause or unsatisfactory or incomplete reporting or
          performance under a prior or current award.
          Debarments and/or Suspensions. Under 2 CFR part 180, no award of Federal
          funds may be made to debarred or suspended applicants, or those proposed to
          be debarred or suspended from doing business with the Federal government.
          Reports and Findings from Audits performed under Subpart F.

          The Applicant’s Ability to Effectively Implement Statutory, Regulatory, or
          Other Requirements Imposed on Non-Federal Entities.

          Exceptions. Federal awarding agencies may request exceptions in support of
          innovative program designs that apply a risk-based, data-driven framework to
          alleviate select compliance requirements and hold recipients accountable for
          good performance. 2 CFR Part 200.102(d)
D. RISK EVALUATION (2 CFR 200.206)
     I.   Pre-award risk evaluation must include a review of the applicant’s history in
          available systems, including OMB-designated repositories of government-
          wide eligibility and financial integrity and other sources of historical
          information. These systems include, but are not limited to:
                 a.   FAPHS (www.fapiis.gov), including past performance on Federal
                      contracts as per Duncan Hunter National Defense Authorization
                      Act of 2009. HUD must consider all of the information available
                      through FAPIIS;
                 b.   Dun and Bradstreet;

                 c.   Do Not Pay list; and
                 d.   System for Award Management (SAM).




                                                                                          52
                               HUD GRANTS MANAGEMENT             HANDBOOK       2210.17 REV 3.2


        3.    Before making an award expected to exceed the simplified acquisition threshold
              ($250,000), HUD must determine whether a non-Federal entity is qualified to
              receive an award by considering any information about the entity in FAPIIS.
        4.    HUD 1s not required to make an award to a recipient, even if it has submitted a
              meritorious application, as determined by the merit review. HUD reserves the
              right to:
                          a.   Deny funding, or with a renewal or continuing award, consider
                               suspension or termination of an award immediately for cause,
                          b.   Require removal of any key individual from association with
                               management or implementation of the award, and
                          c.   Make provisions or revisions regarding method of payment or
                               financial reporting requirements.
        5.    A financial capability review may be required for newly established
              organizations, organizations not receiving an award from a Federal agency within
              the preceding 36 months, and organizations experiencing financial difficulty as
              evidenced by financial reports. In these instances, the Program Office shall
              evaluate the organization’s financial statements and verify that the organization’s
              financial stability can support its operations without using Federal funds for non-
              authorized purposes.
        6.    The Program Office makes the final decision to fund an application based on the
              reviews. This could include special restrictive conditions as provided in 2 CFR
              200.208 upon written notification of the conditions; the reason(s) for imposing
              them; and the corrective action necessary to remove them.

2-14:        Funds     Commitment             and    Obligation        Prior to Award

              1.   Program Offices must have an OCFO-approved Funds Control Matrix for
                   their programs. The Matrix covers key information with respect to the
                   assignment, commitment, obligation, and disbursement of funds for each
                   program activity, including the verification of the availability of funds.
                   OCFO’s Funds Control Handbook has chapters on each of these areas. This
                   process significantly reduces HUD’s risk of an Anti-Deficiency Act violation.
                   For additional information, see Chapter 3 -1 of this handbook.
              2.   Allotment Holders are the HUD primary organization heads, such as Assistant
                   Secretaries or equivalent positions. No official or employee of HUD shall be
                   designated as an Allotment Holder unless OCFO has determined he/she has
                   implemented an adequate funds control system and has received training in
                   funds control procedures. For additional information, see Chapter | — 5 A.2.
                   of this handbook.
              3.   Before Congressional notification and public announcement, Program Offices
                   prepare funding commitments for selected recipients and submit to the




                                                                                                53
                                HUD GRANTS MANAGEMENT              HANDBOOK       2210.17 REV 3.2


                     Allotment Holder for approval. Once approved, the Congressional
                     Notification can be generated for Congressional and Intergovernmental
                     Relations (CIR) and the OCFO. Whenever possible, an electronic file is
                     prepared for upload into HUD’s accounting system to record the commitment
                     by the Program Office or OCFO systems staff. CIR provides the date awards
                     can be announced only when the notification has been submitted to Congress
                     and the required embargo period has been satisfied.
                4.   After selection, some Program Offices may negotiate specific terms of the
                     funding agreement and budget with selected applicants, if permitted by the
                     NOFO. If HUD and a selected applicant do not successfully conclude
                     negotiations in a timely manner, or a selected applicant fails to provide
                     requested information, the applicant will not be awarded. HUD may select
                     another eligible applicant in accord with the NOFO selection requirements.
                5.   To ensure the fair distribution of funds and enable the purposes or
                     requirements of a specific program to be met in the NOFO, HUD reserves the
                     right to fund less than the amount requested in an application. Program
                     Offices that choose to award more than amount requested must use their
                     respective statutory or regulatory authority to justify an increased award.
                6.   If an applicant turns down an award offer, or if HUD and an applicant do not
                     successfully complete grant negotiations, HUD may fund another eligible
                     application in accordance with the NOFO.
                7.   If, after announcing awards, additional funds become available either through
                     the fiscal year appropriations bill, a supplemental appropriation, other
                     appropriations or recapture of funds, HUD may use the additional funds to
                     provide additional funding to an applicant awarded less than the requested
                     funds to make the full award, and/or to fund additional applicants (in accord
                     with the NOFO selection requirements) eligible to receive an award where no
                     funds were available.

2-15:          Award      Notification

        A. PREPARE AWARD            ANNOUNCEMENT          AND POST IN THE FEDERAL
           REGISTER

          1.    HUD publishes a quarterly Federal Register Notice listing awards including (1)
                assistance subject to Section 102(a) of the HUD Reform Act and (2) assistance
                provided through grants or cooperative agreements on a discretionary, non-
                competitive basis (see 24 CFR part 4).
                To implement this requirement, Program Offices must prepare and submit the
                Award Federal Register Notice Information Sheet to GMO within 30 days of
                awards being publicly announced. GMO will prepare the Award Federal Register
                Notice for HUD and facilitate its posting. OGC reviews the Federal Register
                Notice before it is published.




                                                                                                    54
                              HUD GRANTS MANAGEMENT               HANDBOOK       2210.17 REV 3.2




B.   CONGRESSIONAL NOTIFICATION REQUIREMENT
     1.   To ensure members of Congress receive prompt advance notification of grant
          awards not less than three (3) full business days before any award is announced,
          Program Offices must notify CIR of:
                    a.   New or renewal awards for discretionary funds, whether awarded on a
                         competitive or non-competitive basis;
                    b.   Supplemental awards under discretionary grant programs, based on
                         dollar amount or a change in scope, that have undergone objective
                         review; and,

                    c.   Allocations under non-discretionary award programs.
     2.   The CIR notification requirement does not apply to the de-obligation of HUD
          funds.
C. NOTIFICATION PROCESS
          I.     The notification must be provided by the responsible Program Office to CIR
                 in an Excel file five business days before the Office would like to announce
                 awards. The notification format may be subject to change. If changed,
                 Program Offices will be provided with an update from GMO and CIR.
                 The current notification format must include:

                              Name of the recipient;
                              Congressional district(s) of the recipient and place of performance
                              (if different);
                              Award type (e.g., new, renewal, supplemental);
                         d.   Award amount; and
                         e.   Contact Name and phone number.
                 CIR must provide the notice to OCFO for review.
                 After review, CIR provides the notice to Congressional members. OCFO
                 provides the notice to House and Senate Appropriations Committees.
               . Program Offices must email the Congressional Notification report to
                 AskGMO@bhud.gov after it is submitted to CIR. They should also email the
                 URL link to the press release issued by the Office of Public Affairs, if
                 applicable, to AskGMO@hud.gov as soon as possible after publication.
                 GMO will update HUD’s Funds Available web page to reflect awards made
                 during a fiscal year.




                                                                                                55
                                     HUD GRANTS MANAGEMENT              HANDBOOK         2210.17 REV 3.2


2-16:        Program             Office Responsibilities After Award
             Notification

        A. PREPARE AWARD                 ANNOUNCEMENT          AND POST IN THE FEDERAL
           REGISTER

               I.     On a regular basis, HUD publishes a Federal Register Notice listing awards
                      including
                           i.   Assistance subject to Section 102(a) of the HUD Reform Act and;
                          li.   Assistance provided through grants or cooperative agreements on a
                                discretionary, non-competitive basis (see 24 CFR part 4).
                      To implement this requirement, Program Offices must prepare and submit the
                      draft Federal Register Notice to the OGC Regulations Division. OGC reviews
                      the Federal Register Notice before it is published.
                      GMO will periodically check to ensure award lists are published in the
                      Federal Register.
        B.   CODES OF CONDUCT                (2_CFR 200.318)
               I.     To ensure compliance with 2 CFR 200.318(c)’s conflict of interest
                      requirements for procurements, Program Offices must ensure proposed award
                      recipients have a Code of Conduct in the HUD Code of Conduct e-library.
                      The Code of Conduct must include compliant conflict of interest language that
                      is consistent with the prohibited conflicts listed in 2 CFR 200.318(c). Please
                      note no funds can be awarded to an applicant without a Code of Conduct
                      statement, including compliant conflict of interest language, on file. The
                      Program Office must review the language to determine it meets requirements.
                      If the Code of Conduct is on file, including compliant conflict of interest
                      language, no further action is required.
                    . Ifnot on file, but the Program Office has a copy of the Code of Conduct, it
                      shall use the Code of Conduct Checklist to review each Code of Conduct for
                      compliance with 2 CFR 200.318(c). Items on the checklist must be answered
                      in the affirmative for compliance.
                      The Program Office should email the Code of Conduct and the signed,
                      completed checklist and the following information to AskkGMO@hud.gov.
                                     Assistance Listings Number
                                of




                                     Organization name
                                     Mailing address
                                ao




                                     Name, title, phone number and email address of Authorized
                                     Representative or person with executive authority

                      If not on file, and the applicant does not submit a Code of Conduct statement
                      with the application, the Program Office shall request a copy as a curable



                                                                                                      56
                     HUD GRANTS MANAGEMENT               HANDBOOK       2210.17 REV 3.2


          deficiency. The applicant must meet threshold requirements and be selected
          for an award. As stated above, the selection of the application cannot be
          announced and funded if deficiencies have not been cured.

C. DEBRIEFING
     I.   Most of HUD’s discretionary funding competitions do not have appeal
          processes. However, application debriefing is available. For a period of at
          least 90 days, following the public announcement of awards under a NOFO,
          HUD will provide an application debriefing to requesting applicants.
     2.   A debriefing request must be made in writing or by email by the applicant’s
          authorized official whose signature appears on the SF-424 or by his or her
          successor in office and be submitted to the Agency Contact(s) in the NOFO.
          Information provided during a debriefing may include the final score the
          applicant received for rating factors, final evaluator comments for rating
          factors, and the final assessment indicating the basis assistance was provided
          or denied.




                                                                                           57
