       +            _
   +       7   eedre”   ~   A




               M, be            =                      y ei
       A guide for Oregon Judg
- mys




                                    e   Know and enforce nondiscrimination policies— state civil rights laws;
                                        court rules; representation standards; school, placement, and agency
                                        policies; and canons of ethics.

                                    e   Do not make assumptions about a person’s sexual orientation or gen-
                                        der identity based on that person’s appearance or name.

                                    e   Ifuncertain about someone’s sexual orientation or gender identity,
                                        and knowing is necessary to the Court’s ability to conduct court pro-
                                        ceedings or for adjudication, ask respectfully and with consideration
                                        for privacy, if possible.

                                    e   Use gender-neutral language whenever possible (1.e., use name or role
                                        in proceedings rather than a pronoun).

                                    e   Ifthe person has indicated a preferred name or gender pronoun, use
                                        the person’s name and pronoun     of choice, and ensure Court records
                                        include the person’s preferred name as well as the legal name, if re-
                                        quested.

                                    e   Never discuss a person’s sexual orientation or gender identity unless
                                        doing so is necessary to the court’s adjudication, and, if so, do so with
                                        respect.

                                    e   Ifa person is under the authority of the Court and asks to dress in a
                                        manner different than that typically associated with the person’s as-
                                        signed sex, allow the person to dress as requested.

                                    e   Avoid defining LGBTQ people by their sexual orientation and gender
                                        identity. Realize all persons’ sexual orientation and gender identity
                                        are just aspects of their lives.

                                    e   Ensure that all court staff and court partners are respectful to all indi-
                                        viduals, regardless of sexual orientation and gender identity. Speak
                                        out when you hear anyone make anti-LGBTQ comments.
Everything on the other side, plus:

e   Insist the agency care for the youth in an affirming way. If they
    do not, consider making a “no reasonable efforts” finding
    against the agency.

e   Have resources available to share with LGBTQ youth, their
    families, and lawyers.

e   Ifnegative responses by the family to the child’s sexual orienta-
    tion and/or gender identity led to or were related to placement:
        e   Require the child welfare agency provide services to the
            family to work towards a safe and emotionally healthy
            reunification;
        e   Require parents and family members participate in
            counseling and parent support groups to help them ac-
            cept and support the youth.
        e   Require that discharge plans identify local programs and
            services available for LGBTQ youth and their families.

e   Identify appropriate school placements to maintain LGBTQ
    youth in the community or successfully transition back to the
    community at the end of placement.

e   Require the child welfare agency to find social support
    opportunities for LGBTQ youth and identify other trans-
    affirming services.

e   Eliminate segregation, isolation, or juvenile sex offender treat-
    ment of LGBTQ youth as a punishment for having same-sex
    relationships.

e   Do not make housing decisions solely on assigned sex or
    genitalia.

e   Ensure transgender youth receive medical services from quali-
    fied health care practitioners specifically knowledgeable about
    healthcare for transgender youth.

e   Require the child welfare agency to locate LGBTQ-friendly
    foster and adoptive placements.
