Home - Restorative Justice Skip to main content Why The Issue Impact Stories What Three Core Elements of Restorative Justice Theory of Change Resources Restorative Justice Handbook RJE Archive Blog Who Our Network Prison Fellowship International Contact Us Where In the Field Donate Strengthening restorative practices in programs for prisoners, victims and families of prisoners. Learn More Encounter Repair Transform Looking for resources and materials from the Centre for Justice and Reconciliation? See Archives . Resources See All Resources A Case Study in Peacemaking Peacemaking can be described as a set of principles, strategies, and actions aimed at settling conflicts between individuals or groups at odds with each other. Peacemaking can be... RJE Theory of Change by Jonathan Derby, Special Advisor to Prison Fellowship International Building Peace, Building Right Relationships Steps to Reconciliation Restorative Justice Handbook by Jonathan Derby, Special Advisor to Prison Fellowship International What Is Restorative Justice? Where Love and Justice Meet Understanding Prisons by Andrew Coyle UN Handbook on Restorative Justice Programmes by United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime What is restorative justice? Where in the world is it being used? Does it really make a difference in people’s lives? Our handbook on Restorative Justice Principles and Practice will answer these questions and more. This guide was developed to help our indigenous, autonomous partners in more than 100 countries around the world strengthen restorative practices in programs for prisoners, victims and families of prisoners. We openly share these best practices so that any organization can apply them in varied contexts. Download Impact Stories See All Stories Listening to These People Has Made Me Stop and Think I would like to thank all the members of The Sycamore Tree program, for the opportunity you have given me to better myself, and for the time you have all invested in me. You came to visit week after week to give us the opportunity to hear a... Read More Support the cause We've Been Restoring Justice for More Than 40 Years Your donation helps Prison Fellowship International repair the harm caused by crime by emphasizing accountability, forgiveness, and making amends for prisoners and those affected by their actions. When victims, offenders, and community members meet to decide how to do that, the results are transformational. Donate Now Subscribe to our RJE newsletter Contact Us Donate Now © 2025 Restorative Justice Exchange. All rights reserved. An initiative of