Just Narratives for Multiracial Solidarity | Race Forward Skip to main content Main navigation Learn About Us Our Story Our Mission, Vision, and Values Our Strategic Plan Annual Reports 2024 2022-23 Projects, Programs, & Initiatives Butterfly Lab Colorlines Government Alliance on Race and Equity H.E.A.L. (Honest Education Action and Leadership) Together Housing and Land Justice Narrative Place-Based Strategies (Co-governance) Policy Innovation Lab Services for Organizations Our Board Our Team Get Tools and Resources Understanding Racial Equity Events Cultural Week of Action Facing Race Conference Just Narratives Training Racial Equity Series H.E.A.L. Together Training Government Webinars (#RaceAnd) Podcasts Toolkits Reports Ways to Give Open Search Donate Now Submit Close Search Breadcrumb Training and Events Just Narratives For Multiracial Solidarity Just Narratives for Multiracial Solidarity Just Narratives for Multiracial Solidarity Just Narratives for Multiracial Solidarity Just Narratives Partners A Race Forward Convening November 13th-15th, 2025 | St. Louis, MO Race Forward, producer of Facing Race, the largest multiracial racial justice conference in the country, is thrilled to announce the Just Narratives for Multiracial Solidarity 2025. Just Narratives is a multi-day convening of narrative strategists, communicators, creatives, storytellers, racial justice advocates, and movement builders. As the anchor event of the 2025 Cultural Week of Action , Just Narratives represents Race Forward’s commitment to building both the narrative and cultural power needed to advance a just, multiracial democracy. Register Now Why is This Convening Needed in This Moment? As the prolific poet and lyricist Kendrick Lamar once said, “Sometimes you have to pop out and show ‘em.” For generations, people of color have understood and wielded the power of narratives – interconnected stories, messages and imageries – and storytelling to shift people’s hearts and minds and (re)shape public institutions and policies in service of ending systemic racism, even when it felt like our nation did not want to be shifted or shaped. We have used this power to make our vision of a liberated future deeply felt, where everyone, regardless of how deep their melanin may be, can thrive and have a democratic say in the governance of our communities. But, narrative works both ways. In response to the Movement for Black Lives and other burgeoning racial justice movements, we have witnessed the mass deployment of narratives doubling down on racist, transphobic, and sexist beliefs meant to fracture our efforts towards a multiracial democracy. These harmful narratives have helped usher fascism into state legislatures and Congress as well as dismantle key policies and practices, such as Roe v. Wade, affirmative action, and the Chevron doctrine. Not only must we fight back, we must produce and amplify narratives rooted in racial justice and collective liberation that unites us and drowns out the hateful noise of our naysayers and opposition. By expressing our racially just narratives through art, culture, and media, we can bring into focus the liberated future we all deserve so that our peoples and communities remain resolute that a better world is possible in our lifetimes. At Race Forward, narrative strategy is the praxis of using stories, messages, imagery and the arts in a purposeful way to move people toward the values and worldviews we want to achieve. Through storytelling of all types, we can affirm that every human being is valuable and worthy, make real co-governance and multiracial democracy, and claim the pillars of universal and equitable public goods for us all. Yet, dedicated spaces for people, who are committed to realizing a racially just world, to forge meaningful relationships, learn new skills and tactics to shift mindsets, and align on narrative strategies together, are few and far between. Just Narratives will serve as a lab where together we can co-construct and mobilize racially just narratives that will transform mindsets, policies, practices, and institutions in favor of racial justice and solidarity. What are The Goals of the Convening? The goal of Just Narratives is to congregate narrative strategists, communicators, creatives, storytellers, cultural workers, organizers, and advocates, who see themselves as part of the racial justice movement, to align our theories and practice for popularizing effective narratives for racial justice, multiracial solidarity, and collaborative governance. For us to succeed in this moment, we need to grow and strengthen our narrative ecosystem, a network of connected individuals and organizations that can share knowledge, expertise, skills, ideas, capacities, and work to advance a narrative system across a diversity of fronts along different timelines. By bringing people from across expertise, roles, issue areas, institutions, communities, and regions of the country we hope to expand the narrative ecosystem. By embedding solidarity into all of our work, we hope to strengthen this narrative infrastructure. Together, we will: foster solidarity for racial justice across our identities, geographies, and issue areas; share our lessons and best practices from the field; offer and coalesce around new narrative and cultural strategies and tactics that make our vision of solidarity and a racially just world real and inevitable; learn new skillsets for narrative change by doing; and identify opportunities for collaborations on impact storytelling for racial justice through various mediums and platforms. By harmonizing the various stakeholders of the racial justice movement around shared narrative strategies, skillsets, and tactics, Just Narratives will disrupt and neutralize racist dominant narratives and ignite our path towards a future where communities of color thrive and where we all enjoy the bounties of shared governance and democracy. Register Now Who is This Convening For? Just Narratives is an interactive, participant-driven meeting for people and organizations across racial justice movements, who are or want to be committed to building our collective narrative power for racial justice and co-governance, including: Racial justice movement leaders and grassroots organizers, who work closely with people and communities most impacted by systemic racism and, therefore, have the trust, relationships, and lived experience needed to sharpen our narrative strategies for racial justice. Storytellers, communicators, journalists, messaging experts, and digital strategists, who are shaping how we talk about our shared vision of racial justice with the public across any and all issue areas. Movement artists, creatives, media makers and cultural workers, who help us to make meaning of our society and, through the arts, shift mindsets, allowing us to imagine and experience the racially just future world we are fighting for. Racial justice advocates, researchers and practitioners working within grasstop nonprofits, arts and cultural institutions, academia, and government agencies who are looking for narrative guidance and support as part of their institutional and sectoral change work. We especially want to invite the voices, insights, and practices of people, who identify as women and femmes; transgender, intersex and gender nonconforming; queer and same gender loving; poor and on welfare; documented and undocumented immigrant; neurodivergent and disabled; formerly detained and incarcerated; and other people who are marginalized and minoritized in our society. What Content Will Be Offered in the Convening? Attendees will have opportunities to deepen their understanding and praxis of narrative strategies for racial justice, sparking new ideas and collaborations for storytelling and civic media, movement-building and mass mobilization locally and nationally. Content will include: People’s movement assembly and interactive discussions Breakout sessions Skills-building workshops Interactive art exhibits and musical performances Social networking activities Tickets are limited by design. We encourage organizations to be intentional and strategic about who they send to this convening. Please review our FAQs for the answers to the frequently asked questions. For questions or concerns, please email us at [email protected] . Register Now Join the Just Narratives Mailing List Join the Just Narrative mailing list to get updates on admission discounts, content, the agenda, speakers, performers, and more! First Name Last Name Email Subscribe to: Just Narratives By providing your contact information, you agree to receive updates from Race Forward. For information about how Race Forward handles your data, read our privacy policy. Leave this field blank Sponsors Presenting Sponsor RWJF Ally Sponsor Transgender Law Center Movement Sponsor Missouri Foundation for Health Ready to support Just Narratives? View Our Partnership Deck (PDF) COVID-19 Policy At Race Forward, we are committed to creating an accessible and inclusive space that prioritizes the well-being of our entire community, especially those most vulnerable. Our COVID-19 policy is designed with disability justice principles in mind and will be updated as needed based on CDC guidelines and local health recommendations. Masks Masking is strongly encouraged throughout the conference, regardless of vaccination status. A limited amount of KN-95 masks will be available at registration free of charge. Some sessions may be designated Mask Required at the request of facilitators. Vaccination Proof of vaccination is not required, but we strongly encourage attendees to be fully vaccinated and up to date on boosters. Visit the CDC website for the latest vaccination guidelines. Testing & Check-In To ensure a safe and smooth experience for all attendees, the following COVID-19 testing protocols will be in place: All attendees and guests must provide proof of a negative at-home antigen test taken within 48 hours before check-in . Acceptable proof includes: A time-stamped photo of the test result A digital confirmation from a testing service Do not bring physical test kits to the conference. A limited number of complimentary test kits will be available at the registration area. We encourage daily testing before entering shared spaces. Please allow extra time for check-in and COVID screening. Testing protocols may be adjusted based on national, state, and local health guidelines. If You Have Symptoms If you experience any COVID-19 symptoms (fever, cough, shortness of breath, fatigue, etc.), please do not attend the conference. If you test positive for COVID-19 during the event, we ask that you follow CDC isolation guidelines and notify event staff. We understand that unforeseen circumstances, including COVID-19, may impact your ability to attend. As such, we offer the following options: Partial Refund: If you are unable to attend, you may request a 25% refund up to September 12, 2025. Refunds will not be issued after this date. Ticket Transfer: You may transfer your ticket to another individual within your organization or network at no additional cost. Please notify us at [email protected] with the new attendee’s name and contact details. Scholarship Donation: If you do not wish to receive a partial refund or transfer your ticket, you may choose to donate your ticket to someone who would otherwise be unable to afford attendance. Your generosity will help further our mission. General Health & Safety Practices Follow CDC recommendations for COVID-19 prevention, including: Practicing good hand hygiene (hand sanitizing stations will be available). Maintaining physical distance when possible. Staying informed about the latest health updates. By working together, we can create a safe and welcoming space for all. Thank you for your support! For any questions, contact [email protected] . Narrative change is a team sport – no one individual or organization can do it on their own. To realize a liberated future, it will take all of us – organizing around shared narratives and leveraging our skills – to help our neighbors and coworkers to embrace the world we want to live in together. So, whether you’re a movement journalist, a community theater performer, an activist, or public information officer, Just Narratives is a space for you to tap into and harmonize with the broader movement for racial justice. Footer Careers Contact Us Press Privacy Policy ©1999–2025 Race Forward. All rights reserved. Donate Now Sign Up For Our Newsletter Charity Navigator Candid Youtube Instagram LinkedIn Bluesky Facebook Threads