Targeted Universalism 2: Stages of TU, part one Home Courses About How to Use OBI University What is OBI Contact Us OBI Home SIGN UP SIGN IN Stages of Targeted Universalism part 1 Level All Levels Video time 68 minutes Writing exercises 4 Certificate awarded No (see TU 3) Preview illustration by Zofia Chamienia for The Greats Explore the formative stages of targeted universalism. In this course, you will dive into the first three stages: learn how to develop universal goals and to assess how groups and whole populations are situated to that goal. Through case studies, we will also examine how T.U. can be implemented in a number of fields — in education, philanthropy, and cross-sector consultancy. Explore all courses on T.U. Course Guide Ashlin Malouf-Gashaw In this course, you will learn about: 1 Universalism What is a universal goal?How can we ensure everyone benefits? 2 Situatedness How do we measure one's distance from the universal goal? What impacts this distance? 3 Embodiment How can T.U. practitioners best prepare themselves holistically for this work? The Othering & Belonging Institute at UC Berkeley brings together researchers, organizers, stakeholders, communicators, and policymakers to identify and eliminate the barriers to an inclusive, just, and sustainable society in order to create transformative change. Copyright © 2023, Othering & Belonging Institute at UC Berkeley Sign up for OBI’s newsletter Sign up now! I would like to receive news, tips and tricks, and other promotional material Thank you! Privacy Policy Cookie Policy Terms & Conditions Accessibility Statement Contact Us Othering & Belonging Institute Ashlin Malouf-Gashaw is the Deputy Director of Strategy and Program at the Othering and Belonging Institute. She is driven by the growth and development of people, teams, and systems. Whether in the role of mediator, community organizer, coach, executive director, or chief of staff, she has led by inviting people into liberatory practices of dialogue, bridging, authenticity, and power building. From her experience, when courageous conversation, storytelling, vulnerability, and self-reflection are paired with concrete and coordinated strategies, progress is made. Since 2006, Ashlin has worked in a variety of capacities with the Faith in Action Network (previously the PICO National Network), equipping those closest to the pain with the tools and strategies to make structural change. She began as a Community Organizer in Colorado, then returned to her hometown of Sacramento where she served as the Executive Director of Sacramento ACT. Most recently, Ashlin was the Chief Formation Officer and then Chief of Staff with PICO California. During her tenure in organizing, she worked on countless campaigns including healthcare access, community benefits agreements, reinvestment of public funds, moving from punitive to restorative practices, immigration reform, and affordable housing, to name a few. Ashlin received her BA in Political Science and Social Change and Development, and her MA in International Conflict Resolution. She lives in Sacramento with her husband Theodros and her 2 children Kayden and Davin. Read more about her work here . Ashlin Malouf-Gashaw Ashlin is our guide to courses on Targeted Universalism. She also appears in Bridging 2: A Conversation with Ashlin Malouf-Gashaw Bridging 3: Two Studies of Bridging Across Power john a. powell (who spells his name in lowercase in the belief that we should be "part of the universe, not over it, as capitals signify") is an internationally recognized expert in the areas of civil rights, civil liberties, structural racism, housing, poverty, and democracy. He is the Director of the Othering & Belonging Institute at the University of California, Berkeley, a research institute that brings together scholars, community advocates, communicators, and policymakers to identify and eliminate the barriers to an inclusive, just, and sustainable society and to create transformative change toward a more equitable world. john holds the Robert D. Haas Chancellor’s Chair in Equity and Inclusion and is a Professor of Law , African American Studies, and Ethnic Studies at UC Berkeley . Previously, he was the Executive Director of the Kirwan Institute for the Study of Race and Ethnicity at The Ohio State University where he also held the Gregory H. Williams Chair in Civil Rights & Civil Liberties at the Moritz College of Law. He has won several awards including the 2021 Housing Hero Award, 2021 John W. Gardner Leadership Award, and the Convergence Bridge-Building Leadership Award for 2022. He regularly appears in major media offering expert insights on a host of issues. Recent appearances include NPR and WYNC's On The Media in an episode about free speech and the constitution, Last Week Tonight with John Oliver in an episode about housing segregation, and CBS Evening News where john discussed the Institute's frameworks like Targeted Universalism. john gives frequent keynotes talks at a range of institutions such as the Chan Zuckerberg Initiative, Washington State University, the Office of the Minnesota Attorney General, Nonprofit Quarterly, Project Democracy, the Gates Foundation, Habitat for Humanity, the InterFaith Leadership Council, the Permanente Medical Group, and many more. john has written extensively on a number of issues including structural racism, racial justice, concentrated poverty, opportunity-based housing, voting rights, affirmative action in the United States, South Africa and Brazil, racial and ethnic identity, spirituality and social justice, and the needs of citizens in a democratic society. He is the author of several books, including his most recent work, Racing to Justice: Transforming our Concepts of Self and Other to Build an Inclusive Societ y . The founder and director of the Institute on Race and Povert y at the University of Minnesota, john has also served as Director of Legal Services in Miami, Florida and was the National Legal Director of the American Civil Liberties Union , where he was instrumental in developing educational adequacy theory. john led the development of an “opportunity-based” model that connects affordable housing to education, health, health care, and employment and is well-known for his work developing the frameworks of “targeted universalism ” and “othering and belonging ” to effect equity-based interventions. john has lived and worked in Africa, where he was a consultant to the governments of Mozambique and South Africa, and has also worked in India and Brazil. He is one of the co-founders of the Poverty & Race Research Action Council and serves on the board of several national and international organizations. He is also a member of the New Pluralists . john has taught at numerous law schools including Harvard and Columbia University. Follow john on Twitter @profjohnapowel l and read his blogs on HuffPo . john a. powell john guides our Introduction to Othering & Belonging's Key Frameworks course. Additionally, he appears in the courses named below. Bridging 1: The Risk & Possibility of Bridging, john a. powell and Judith Butler in conversation Bridging 2: john a. powell on power and john a. powell on levels of bridging Structural Racism: White Space, Black Hood Mónica Guzmán is Senior Fellow for Public Practice at Braver Angels, a nonprofit working to depolarize America, founder and CEO of Reclaim Curiosity, an organization working to build a more curious world; and author of I Never Thought Of It That Way: How to Have Fearlessly Curious Conversations in Dangerously Divided Times. ​ Moni is the inaugural McGurn Fellow at the University of Florida, working with researchers at the UF College of Journalism and Communications and beyond to better understand ways to employ techniques described in her book to boost understanding. She was a 2019 fellow at the Henry M. Jackson Foundation, where she studied social and political division, and a 2016 fellow at the Nieman Foundation for Journalism at Harvard University, where she studied how journalists can better meet the needs of a participatory public. Her work has been featured in The New York Times, the Glenn Beck Podcast, Reader's Digest, BookTV, and EconTalk, and she is an advisor for Starts With Us and the Generations Over Dinner project. ​ Before committing to the project of helping people understand each other across the political divide, Mónica cofounded the award-winning Seattle newsletter The Evergrey and led a national network of groundbreaking local newsletters as VP of Local for WhereBy.Us. ​ She was named one of the 50 most influential women in Seattle, served twice as a juror for the Pulitzer Prizes, and plays a barbarian named Shadrack in her besties' Dungeons & Dragons campaign. Visit her website to learn more about her work. Mónica Guzmán Mónica appears in Bridging 1: Bridging with Curiosity Bridging 3: Bridging with Curiosity and Humanity Bridging 4: Preparing to Bridge with Curiosity Sarah Crowell is a dancer and choreographer who has taught dance, theater, mindfulness and violence prevention for over 35 years. She recently left her position as the Artistic Director at Destiny Arts Center in Oakland where she served in different capacities including Executive Director for 30 years. She founded and co-directed the Destiny Arts Youth Performance Company, which was the subject of two documentary films, and won the National Arts & Humanities Youth Program Award. Sarah has facilitated arts integration, violence prevention, cultural humility and team building professional development sessions with artists and educators since 2000, both locally and nationally. She is the recipient of many awards including the KPFA Peace award, the KQED Women’s History Local Hero award, and the National Guild for Community Arts Education Milestone award. She is a four-time finalist for a Tony Award for Excellence in Theater Education. Sarah Crowell Sarah is our graceful guide and facilitator. As such, she appears in most lessons across OBI University. Ashley Gallegos works as the Belonging Coordinator at the Othering and Belonging Institute at UC Berkeley. Her work is at the intersection of belonging research, application, and societal change. Ashley’s work centers the application of OBI’s unique conception of belonging which is rooted in both the feeling or sense of belonging and the necessary structural design for belonging. Ashley works closely with the director of the Institute to advance initiatives of belonging, currently focusing on Places of Belonging. This initiative works with high impact collaborators nationally and internationally to align and advance belonging in varying contexts. Ashley creates and circulates belonging educational materials, amplifies belonging practices in motion, and uses her understanding of the Institutes frames of Belonging, Bridging and Targeted Universalism to support initiatives. Ashley engages in complex considerations of how belonging moves with and positively contributes to our world's biggest necessary shifts like that of global human rights, climate justice, cross-movement alignment and much more. Ashley is one of three co-facilitators at Belonging a Weekly Practice, a free, low barrier virtual belonging space open to all. Registration information for the sessions is available here Before working with OBI, Ashley worked within public health and healthcare to advance health equity and racial equity in application. She directed state wide equity coalitions and believes in the power of network models to co-create momentum beyond any one entity's capacity. While born in Southern California, Ashley was raised in Belen, NM, grew as an adult in Denver, CO, and found her way to the place where her spirit feels aligned in Oakland, CA. In her free time, Ashley enjoys spending time with loved ones, building community, experiencing and contributing to the arts, reading, being near water and maintaining a spiritual groundedness. Ashley Gallegos Ashley facilitates our course on Belonging. Maurice Swinney serves as the Chief Innovation Officer at Chicago Beyond . He moved from New Orleans to Chicago in 2012 to become a high school principal on the South Side of Chicago. He believes that actions reflect who we care for and what we care about. Maurice has spent 21 years in public education and works to create systems and supportive structures for youth. He is a former teacher and high school principal. Maurice later became Chicago Public Schools’ first-ever Chief Equity Officer, and interim Chief Education Officer, before joining Chicago Beyond. Bringing system-leadership experience to philanthropy, Maurice’s goal is to work with youth, community, and philanthropy to advance racial equity and social justice by co-designing new things to improve quality of life. Now, as the Chief Innovation Officer at Chicago Beyond, Maurice will leverage his passion for equity and skills in innovative design to create more equitable systems for young people and communities. Maurice holds a Bachelor’s degree in English Education and a Master’s degree in Educational Leadership and School Principalship from Xavier University of Louisiana. He earned his Ed.D. in Public School Administration with a concentration in Superintendency from Oral Roberts University. Dr. Maurice Swinney Maurice appears in all courses on Targeted Universalism. Zoë Stemm-Calderon is the senior director of the Raikes Foundation ’s youth serving systems strategy, where she supports the teams to co-develop strategy and do strong grantmaking in support of the field. Previously, she led the Foundation’s education strategy where she oversaw the development and implementation of our grantmaking in that portfolio. Zoë is passionate about working with young people, communities, policy makers and practitioners to build a world where all young people thrive. Prior to joining the Foundation in 2015, Zoë served as a resident at the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation while completing her doctorate in education leadership from the Harvard Graduate School of Education. Previously, Zoë was assistant superintendent of professional support and development at Houston Independent School District (ISD). Prior to her work in Houston ISD, Zoë was a senior leader at Teach for America, where she spent her 10-year tenure focused on advancing the organization's approach to teacher, coach, and manager development. Zoë began her career as an elementary school teacher in Houston. She earned her doctorate in education leadership at Harvard Graduate School of Education and completed her bachelor’s degree in international studies at the University of Washington. Zoë lives in Seattle, loves camping with her husband Andre and two teenage daughters, and puttering in her garden. Zoë Stemm-Calderon Zoë appears in all courses on Targeted Universalism. Evan Holland is a Co-Founder and Senior Consultant with Seed Collaborative , where she leads the consulting firm’s equity, inclusion and belonging practice. Over her 20-year career, Evan has worked with municipalities, nonprofit organizations, philanthropies, and government agencies to strengthen social safety nets for children and families through the consultative intersections of equity, belonging and organizational development. Evan is an expert adviser on strategies that yield just and fair outcomes while advancing organizational cultures of belonging. Evan specializes in the design and facilitation of co-creative and collaborative group processes that, when informed by data including the lived experience of those most impacted, support consensus building for strategies and actions towards greater diversity, equity, inclusion, and belonging. Evan holds a Bachelor of Arts in Rhetoric, Public Discourses with a minor in African American Studies from the University of California, Berkeley. She also holds a Master of Arts in Nonprofit Leadership and Management from the University of San Diego. Her international academic experience includes taking classes, performing research, and assisting organizations and communities in Cuba, Spain, and Botswana. Over the last 14 years, Evan has developed and contributed to dozens of publications and reports including the City of Santa Rosa Equity Plan, 2023 ; First 5 Los Angeles’ Journey Towards Deepening a Commitment to Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion, 2022 ; Workforce Equity Strategies: Recommendations to Strengthen and Improve Efforts in Multnomah County, 2018 ; Young Adults with Mental Illness: Research Based Program Design, 2011 ; and The Importance of Children's Health Coverage: Research and Stories from Working Californians, 2007 . Evan’s service to her community extends through her civic and volunteer work. She serves on the advisory board of the Arts for Healing and Justice Network and executive board member of Jack and Jill of America, Los Angeles Chapter, and is a graduate of the Los Angeles African American Women’s Public Policy Institute. She is a member of the University of San Diego Alumni Association and was a founding member of the University of San Diego Black Graduate Student Association in 2010. Evan is a native of Los Angeles, California where she currently lives and raises her teenage son. Evan Holland Evan appears in all courses on Targeted Universalism. Click here to follow her work on LinkedIn . Dr. Nina Moreno , Ph.D. brings three decades of experience collecting, analyzing, and utilizing research, assessment, and evaluation data in urban, rural, and tribal settings to support the development of strategies that promote fair outcomes and structural, institutional/systemic, and cultural transformation in California, New York, and beyond. Nina is a Senior Consultant at Seed Collaborative . Nina’s consulting experience includes inclusive representation, fairness, access, and belonging assessment, planning, and implementation as well as Targeted Universalism application; strategic planning; program/project design, implementation, monitoring, and evaluation; and policy research, strategy, advocacy, and coalition building. She spent 12 years of her career designing and leading community based participatory research (CBPR) processes that advanced a whole-person approach, with a special focus on advancing the long-term economic sustainability and health of systems involved/at risk communities, across California and nationally. Nina has developed and contributed to several publications both in peer reviewed journals and grey literature, including but not limited to: Differential Effects of Alcohol Policies Across Race/Ethnicity and Socioeconomic Status , First 5 Los Angeles’ Journey Towards Deepening a Commitment to Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion ; San Mateo County Child Care Workforce Study Report ; Chrysalis’ 2024-2028 Strategic Plan ; First 5 Santa Clara County’s Strategic Plan, 2024-2027 ; First 5 Sacramento County FY 2024-2027 Strategic Plan ; and The Importance of Children’s Health Coverage: Research and Stories from Working Californians . Nina currently serves on the California Children and Youth Behavioral Health Initiative’s Evaluation Advisory Group. She is fluent in Spanish and Portuguese. Nina holds a Ph. D. in Social Welfare from The Graduate School and University Center of the City University of New York; a Master of Science in Social Welfare from the School of Social Work at Columbia University; and a Bachelor of Science in Human Service Studies from Cornell University, College of Human Ecology. Dr. Nina Moreno Nina appears in all courses on Targeted Universalism. Click here to follow her work on LinkedIn . Targeted Universalism Course hub Check out all of our courses on targeted universalism! Start with an introduction to the framework before walking through its five stages — and when you are ready for more, dig through our resource library on targeted universalism. T.U. ONE : What is Targeted Universalism? Sign up Are you curious about targeted universalism (T.U.)? This is a great place to start. T.U. is a framework developed by OBI that goes beyond a call for inclusion in existing structures that serve only some of us. Instead, it invites members of any community to roll up their sleeves and co-create new structures designed to serve all of us. In this course, you’ll hear from practitioners sharing how T.U. can be applied across a wide range of contexts—whether in classrooms, small nonprofits, large philanthropic organizations, businesses, or even entire governments. Click here to access this course now. T.U. TWO : Stages of Targeted Universalism, part 1 Sign up Explore the formative stages of targeted universalism. In this course, you will get to dive into the first three stages: learn how to develop universal goals and assess how people are situated to that goal. Through case studies, we will also examine how T.U. can be implemented in a number of fields — in education, philanthropy, and cross-sector consultancy. Click here to access this course now. T.U. THREE : Stages of Targeted Universalism, part 2 Sign up Dig deeper into the stages of targeted universalism as you explore how structures and barriers determine group progress, and learn to develop and implement targeted strategies to transform those structures. We'll close out with some advice and reflections for the journey ahead. Once you've finished these three courses, you will receive a certificate! Click here to access this course now. T.U. FOUR : Targeted Universalism Resource Hub Explore Ready for more on targeted universalism? Check out resources like our rich primer text, explainer videos, panel discussions, podcasts, and more. Different than our first three installments of the T.U. series, this is a collection of resources that you can dig through unguided. Click here to access this resource now. Bridging Course hub Check out all of our courses on bridging! Start by laying the fundamentals and work your way up through the levels of bridging. Hear how communities across the world build bridges and then learn how to bridge yourself. Bridging One : Fundamentals of Bridging Sign up This lesson begins with a discussion of the risks and opportunities of bridging with renowned feminist philosopher Judith Butler and OBI director john a. powell. You’ll then go deeper into concepts like breaking, an essential feature of the process of othering; the role of curiosity with expert bridger Monica Guzman; and the essential role bridging plays in building cultures of belonging with philosopher bell hooks. Click here to access this course now. Bridging Two : Levels of Bridging Sign up This lesson walks you through the scales and the stakes of bridging. OBI Director john a. powell opens by outlining the three levels of bridging: individual, group, and collective. A panel conversation follows featuring brilliant thinkers Joy Harjo, Bayo Akomolafe, ALOK, and Akaya Windwood who all share their real-life experiences with bridging. Lastly, OBI Deputy Director and longtime organizer Ashlin Malouf-Gashaw describes why she bridges and why this practice is crucial for our survival. Click here to access this course now. Bridging Three : Community Stories of Bridging Sign up In this lesson, we’ll hear stories of bridging directly from the communities who are engaged in the practice. Organizers and activists share their struggles with bridging across power, tensions over identity and place, and the significance of solidarity in successful bridging. The stories shared in this lesson range from Palestinian-Israeli bridging, organizing for climate justice, Indigenous and immigrant collaboration, and more. Click here to access this course now. Bridging Four : How to Bridge Explore In this lesson you’ll learn the brass tacks of bridging from different practitioners. We’ll hear from Indigenous scholar Yuria Celidwen, canvassing expert Ella Barrett, and the always-curious Monica Guzman. As a special bonus we've included embodiment practice you can bookmark and use every time you go into a tough situation. Click here to access this resource now. Dr. Charles Chip Mc Neal is an award-winning, international educator, researcher, civic leader & activist – engaging in transdisciplinary practice across art-forms and genres, with a focus on arts, educational equity, social justice, community engagement, and cultural competency. He guides government agencies, non-profits, and schools on change-management, creative collaboration, program creation, equitable arts policies, diversity, and organizational cultural competency. Mc Neal has over 30 years of senior leadership experience and flexibly negotiates the intersection between creativity, new technologies, and professional learning. He has trained in multiple culturally responsive practices including; restorative justice techniques, social-emotional learning, and Teaching Tolerance curriculum (from the Southern Poverty Law Center). He is an accredited Integrated Learning Specialist and a certified Oral Historian. A frequent and sought-after conference presenter, Mc Neal has lectured on arts, education, social justice, multiculturalism, and equity for The Edinburgh International Festival, UC Berkeley, Stanford University, and Harvard Graduate School of Education. Mr. McNeal is the first-ever Director of Diversity, Equity and Community for the San Francisco Opera. A pioneering leader in the field of arts, McNeal is ostensibly the first director of diversity for an opera company in the United States. Mr. McNeal has operationalized a new department in a major arts organization for the second time. In his role, he leads internal and external initiatives aimed at developing diverse audiences, creating a safe, and diverse working environment and facilitating the further advancements of the organizational mission. He is tasked with creating a culture of belonging and acceptance, we’re diverse peoples on value and inspiration in the arc of Opera. He is guided by the goals and objectives outlined in the 2019 Strategic Plan – to place develop diversity, and equity inclusion at the core of arts and business practice. Mr. McNeal works organization-wide to advise, consult, and mentor on diversity and equity initiatives. He also continues training teaching artists, conducts arts research, develops novel initiatives, and advises on artistic content, culturally responsive pedagogy, creative collaboration and more. He designs and curates accredited professional development training for credentialed educators who partner with the San Francisco Opera. A celebrated dance educator, Mr. Mc Neal is the former Director of Education for San Francisco Ballet where he established the distinguished, San Francisco Ballet Center for Dance Education, engaging over 30,000 people annually through 1,500 culturally diverse events. Mc Neal served as a Transformative Learning Coach, Leadership Advisor and Arts Integration Specialist for Alameda County Office of Education where he developed culturally responsive, inquiry-based, social justice curriculum. He is a founding member of the San Francisco Unified School District’s Arts Education Master Plan Advisory Committee. McNeal is on the Leadership Council of Create California, a statewide-advocacy consortium, where he Chairs the Equity Committee – working to creating a sustainable, equitable, arts learning eco-system for the state of California. Mr. Mc Neal holds two bachelor’s degrees – in psychology, and sociology from Excelsior University, and a master’s degree in education from Lesley University. Dr. Mc Neal holds a Ph.D. in Transformative Studies in Education from the California Institute for Integral Studies in San Francisco. Mc Neal’s research focuses on Critical Pedagogy, Culturally and Linguistically Responsive studies, and Artistic Inquiry and lies at the intersection of arts, cultural responsiveness, and educational equity as he devises solutions to the pressing issues of education reform and racial equity in the arts. Dr. Charles Chip Mc Neal Charles appears in Structural Racism: Structural Racism Explained Sign up for our newsletter! Keep up with news from the Othering & Belonging Institute at UC Berkeley. Sign up now I would like to receive news, tips and tricks, and other promotional material Thank you! Write your awesome label here. Login to start learning Login to start learning Start learning or Email address Password Login Create Account a new account for free Forgot your password? Sign up for OBI University! or Upload avatar Username * Email address * Password * Phone number Your address? Country Country Country Afghanistan Åland Islands Albania Algeria American Samoa Andorra Angola Anguilla Antarctica Antigua and Barbuda Argentina Armenia Aruba Australia Austria Azerbaijan Bahamas Bahrain Bangladesh Barbados Belarus Belgium Belize Benin Bermuda Bhutan Bolivia, Plurinational State of Bonaire, Sint Eustatius and Saba Bosnia and Herzegovina Botswana Bouvet Island Brazil British Indian Ocean Territory Brunei Darussalam Bulgaria Burkina Faso Burundi Cambodia Cameroon Canada Cape Verde Cayman Islands Central African Republic Chad Chile China Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Colombia Comoros Congo Congo, the Democratic Republic of the Cook Islands Costa Rica Côte d'Ivoire Croatia Cuba Curaçao Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Djibouti Dominica Dominican Republic Ecuador Egypt El Salvador Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Estonia Ethiopia Falkland Islands (Malvinas) Faroe Islands Fiji Finland France French Guiana French Polynesia French Southern Territories Gabon Gambia Georgia Germany Ghana Gibraltar Greece Greenland Grenada Guadeloupe Guam Guatemala Guernsey Guinea Guinea-Bissau Guyana Haiti Heard Island and McDonald Islands Holy See (Vatican City State) Honduras Hong Kong Hungary Iceland India Indonesia Iran, Islamic Republic of Iraq Ireland Isle of Man Israel Italy Jamaica Japan Jersey Jordan Kazakhstan Kenya Kiribati Korea, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Republic of Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Lao People's Democratic Republic Latvia Lebanon Lesotho Liberia Libya Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Macao Macedonia, the former Yugoslav Republic of Madagascar Malawi Malaysia Maldives Mali Malta Marshall Islands Martinique Mauritania Mauritius Mayotte Mexico Micronesia, Federated States of Moldova, Republic of Monaco Mongolia Montenegro Montserrat Morocco Mozambique Myanmar Namibia Nauru Nepal Netherlands New Caledonia New Zealand Nicaragua Niger Nigeria Niue Norfolk Island Northern Mariana Islands Norway Oman Pakistan Palau Palestinian Territory, Occupied Panama Papua New Guinea Paraguay Peru Philippines Pitcairn Poland Portugal Puerto Rico Qatar Réunion Romania Russian Federation Rwanda Saint Barthélemy Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Martin (French part) Saint Pierre and Miquelon Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Samoa San Marino Sao Tome and Principe Saudi Arabia Senegal Serbia Seychelles Sierra Leone Singapore Sint Maarten (Dutch part) Slovakia Slovenia Solomon Islands Somalia South Africa South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands South Sudan Spain Sri Lanka Sudan Suriname Svalbard and Jan Mayen Swaziland Sweden Switzerland Syrian Arab Republic Taiwan, Province of China Tajikistan Tanzania, United Republic of Thailand Timor-Leste Togo Tokelau Tonga Trinidad and Tobago Tunisia Turkey Turkmenistan Turks and Caicos Islands Tuvalu Uganda Ukraine United Arab Emirates United Kingdom United States United States Minor Outlying Islands Uruguay Uzbekistan Vanuatu Venezuela, Bolivarian Republic of Viet Nam Virgin Islands, British Virgin Islands, U.S. Wallis and Futuna Western Sahara Yemen Zambia Zimbabwe Birthday Company name Your company size? Company Size 1-10 11-25 26-50 51-100 101-200 201-500 500+ Your Profession? Profession Architect Contractor Engineer Facility mgmt Other Private Promoter Architekt Auftragnehmer Ingenieur Facility mgmt Andere Privat Projektträger Architect Aannemer Ingenieur Facility Manager Andere Privé Promotor Architecte Entrepreneur Ingénieur Gestionnaire d'installation Autre Particulier Promoteur Website University Your graduation year? I accept the Terms & Conditions * I would like to receive news, tips and tricks, and other promotional material Start your learning journey Sign in with your account Forgot your password? or Get a brand new password! Email address OK Cancel Get a brand new password! Enter it below, please Re-enter password * OK Cancel