July 20, 2023                                                          BCC Agenda Date/Item: ______________


Board of County Commissioners
Clackamas County

    Approval of a Personal Services Contract with Languages Translation Services for As Needed
     Interpreter Services. Contract value not to exceed $1.5MM over 5 years. Funding is through
  Beginning Fund Balance, Taxes, Federal and State Funds, Charges, Fees, Fines, and Assessments,
     Revenue from Bonds & Other Debts, other revenues, and budgeted County General Funds.

   Previous Board           Briefed at Issues – July 18, 2023
   Action/Review
   Performance              Build public trust through good government by providing budget responsibility
   Clackamas                and transparency
   Counsel Review           Yes                         Procurement Review Yes
   Contact Person           Ryan Rice                   Contact Phone          503-742-5446

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY: The intent of these contracts is to expand the current pool of licensed, qualified firms
or individuals to provide a full range of interpreter and translator services. Work will be on an as-needed basis to
assist the County with various interpreter needs including but not limited to in person, telephonic, transcription
and video platforms. Interpreter services will include a variety of languages and communication needs.

Typical service requests may include but not limited to:
   • Interpreter services in clinics, education classes working directly with adults, children, for jurors, classes
       for parents youth, general County business including but not limited to meetings, events, translation of
       documents as well as public communication material.


RECOMMENDATION: Staff recommends approval of these contracts for as needed interpreter services.
Respectfully submitted,



Elizabeth Comfort
Finance Director




                                                                              For Filing Use Only




                                       p.503.742.5400 | www.clackamas.us
                                    CLACKAMAS COUNTY
                                PERSONAL SERVICES CONTRACT
                                       Contract #8147

This Personal Services Contract (this “Contract”) is entered into between Daniel Shambeo Sabore, DBA
Languages Translation Services (“Contractor”), and Clackamas County, a political subdivision of the
State of Oregon (“County”).

ARTICLE I.
1. Effective Date and Duration. This Contract shall become effective upon signature of both parties.
   Unless earlier terminated or extended, this Contract shall expire on June 30, 2028

2. Scope of Work. Contractor shall provide the following personal services: Interpreter services on an
   on-call basis (“Work”), further described in County’s RFP 2023-39, attached hereto as Exhibit A and
   incorporated by this reference herein, and Contractor’s Response, attached hereto as Exhibit B and
   incorporated by this reference herein.

    Contractor agrees to perform the Work on behalf of the County and the following entities: Water
    Environment Services, North Clackamas Parks and Recreation District, the Development Agency of
    Clackamas County, the Housing Authority of Clackamas County, and any special district or urban
    renewal agency that follows the County’s Local Contract Review Board rules and is approved by the
    County, in writing, to receive the Work under this Contract.

    This Contract is on an “on-call” or “as-needed basis” for Work. When the County wishes Contractor
    to perform the Work, the County will submit an official County Task Order form (found at:
    https://www.clackamas.us/finance/terms.html) detailing the scope of Work, the entity on whose
    behalf the Work will be performed, and the total compensation, pursuant to the fee schedule set forth
    in this Contract. Contractor may not perform Work until the County Task Order form has been
    executed by the parties. In the event a project authorized under the County Task Order extends
    beyond the expiration of this Contract, the County Task Order shall remain in effect under the terms
    of this Contract until the completion or expiration of the authorized task.

    No task order shall modify or amend the terms and conditions of this Contract.

    The County Contract administrator for this Contract is the County Procurement and Contract Services
    Division. For each authorized Task Order, a project specific department representative shall be
    identified for coordination of the work.


3. Consideration. The maximum annual amount County may pay Contractor, from available and
   authorized funds, for performing the Work required by this Contract shall not exceed two hundred
   and fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00). The maximum amount County may pay Contractor, from
   available and authorized funds, for performing the Work during the entire five (5) year term of the
   Contract shall not exceed One Million Five Hundred Thousand dollars ($1,500,000.00). Because this
   is an on-call or as-needed contract, and the exact amount of Work needed, if any, is unknown, nothing
   herein shall be construed as a promise to pay Contractor the full $1,500,000.00 authorized herein.
   Consideration rates are on a time and materials basis in accordance with the rates and costs specified
   in Exhibit B. If any interim payments to Contractor are made, such payments shall be made only in
   accordance with the schedule and requirements in Exhibit B.

4. Invoices and Payments. Unless otherwise specified, Contractor shall submit monthly invoices for
   Work performed. Invoices shall describe all Work performed with particularity, by whom it was
   performed, and shall itemize and explain all expenses for which reimbursement is claimed. The
   invoices shall include the total amount billed to date by Contractor prior to the current invoice. If
   Contractor fails to present invoices in proper form within sixty (60) calendar days after the end of the
   month in which the services were rendered, Contractor waives any rights to present such invoice

Rev 2/2023                                        Page 1
    thereafter and to receive payment therefor. Payments shall be made in accordance with ORS 293.462
    to Contractor following the County’s review and approval of invoices submitted by Contractor.
    Contractor shall not submit invoices for, and the County will not be obligated to pay, any amount in
    excess of the maximum compensation amount set forth above. If this maximum compensation
    amount is increased by amendment of this Contract, the amendment must be fully effective before
    Contractor performs Work subject to the amendment.

    Invoices shall reference the above Contract Number and be submitted to each department that
    requested services under this Contract.

5. Travel and Other Expense. Authorized:         Yes       No
   If travel expense reimbursement is authorized in this Contract, such expense shall only be reimbursed
   at the rates in the County Contractor Travel Reimbursement Policy, hereby incorporated by reference
   and found at: https://www.clackamas.us/finance/terms.html.Travel expense reimbursement is not in
   excess of the not to exceed consideration.

6. Contract Documents. This Contract consists of the following documents, which are listed in
   descending order of precedence and are attached and incorporated by reference, this Contract, Exhibit
   A and Exhibit B.

7. Contractor and County Contacts.
 Contractor Administrator: Daniel Sabore               County Administrator: TBD
 Phone: 253-835-0107                                   Phone:
 Email: dshamebo@languages-translation.info            Email:
        info@advancedtranslationservices.com



Payment information will be reported to the Internal Revenue Service (“IRS”) under the name and
taxpayer ID number submitted. (See I.R.S. 1099 for additional instructions regarding taxpayer ID
numbers.) Information not matching IRS records will subject Contractor payments to backup
withholding.

ARTICLE II.
1. ACCESS TO RECORDS. Contractor shall maintain books, records, documents, and other evidence,
   in accordance with generally accepted accounting procedures and practices, sufficient to reflect
   properly all costs of whatever nature claimed to have been incurred and anticipated to be incurred in
   the performance of this Contract. County and their duly authorized representatives shall have access
   to the books, documents, papers, and records of Contractor, which are directly pertinent to this
   Contract for the purpose of making audit, examination, excerpts, and transcripts. Contractor shall
   maintain such books and records for a minimum of six (6) years, or such longer period as may be
   required by applicable law, following final payment and termination of this Contract, or until the
   conclusion of any audit, controversy or litigation arising out of or related to this Contract, whichever
   date is later.

2. AVAILABILITY OF FUTURE FUNDS. Any continuation or extension of this Contract after the
   end of the fiscal period in which it is written is contingent on a new appropriation for each succeeding
   fiscal period sufficient to continue to make payments under this Contract, as determined by the
   County in its sole administrative discretion.

3. CAPTIONS. The captions or headings in this Contract are for convenience only and in no way
   define, limit, or describe the scope or intent of any provisions of this Contract.

4. COMPLIANCE WITH APPLICABLE LAW. Contractor shall comply with all applicable federal,
   state and local laws, regulations, executive orders, and ordinances, as such may be amended from time
   to time.
Rev 2/2023                                        Page 2
5. COUNTERPARTS. This Contract may be executed in several counterparts (electronic or otherwise),
   each of which shall be an original, all of which shall constitute the same instrument.

6. GOVERNING LAW. This Contract, and all rights, obligations, and disputes arising out of it, shall
   be governed and construed in accordance with the laws of the State of Oregon and the ordinances of
   Clackamas County without regard to principles of conflicts of law. Any claim, action, or suit
   between County and Contractor that arises out of or relates to the performance of this Contract shall
   be brought and conducted solely and exclusively within the Circuit Court for Clackamas County, for
   the State of Oregon. Provided, however, that if any such claim, action, or suit may be brought in a
   federal forum, it shall be brought and conducted solely and exclusively within the United States
   District Court for the District of Oregon. In no event shall this section be construed as a waiver by the
   County of any form of defense or immunity, whether sovereign immunity, governmental immunity,
   immunity based on the Eleventh Amendment to the Constitution of the United States or otherwise,
   from any claim or from the jurisdiction of any court. Contractor, by execution of this Contract, hereby
   consents to the personal jurisdiction of the courts referenced in this section.

7. INDEMNITY, RESPONSIBILITY FOR DAMAGES. Contractor shall be responsible for all
   damage to property, injury to persons, and loss, expense, inconvenience, and delay which may be
   caused by, or result from, any act, omission, or neglect of Contractor, its subcontractors, agents, or
   employees. The Contractor agrees to indemnify and defend the County, and its officers, elected
   officials, agents, and employees, from and against all claims, actions, losses, liabilities, including
   reasonable attorney and accounting fees, and all expenses incidental to the investigation and defense
   thereof, arising out of or based upon Contractor’s acts or omissions in performing under this Contract.

    However, neither Contractor nor any attorney engaged by Contractor shall defend the claim in the
    name of County, purport to act as legal representative of County, or settle any claim on behalf of
    County, without the approval of the Clackamas County Counsel’s Office. County may assume its
    own defense and settlement at its election and expense.

8. INDEPENDENT CONTRACTOR STATUS. The service(s) to be rendered under this Contract are
   those of an independent contractor. Although the County reserves the right to determine (and
   modify) the delivery schedule for the Work to be performed and to evaluate the quality of the
   completed performance, County cannot and will not control the means or manner of Contractor’s
   performance. Contractor is responsible for determining the appropriate means and manner of
   performing the Work. Contractor is not to be considered an agent or employee of County for any
   purpose, including, but not limited to: (A) The Contractor will be solely responsible for payment of
   any Federal or State taxes required as a result of this Contract; and (B) This Contract is not intended
   to entitle the Contractor to any benefits generally granted to County employees, including, but not
   limited to, vacation, holiday and sick leave, other leaves with pay, tenure, medical and dental
   coverage, life and disability insurance, overtime, Social Security, Workers' Compensation,
   unemployment compensation, or retirement benefits.

9. INSURANCE. Contractor shall secure at its own expense and keep in effect during the term of the
   performance under this Contract the insurance required and minimum coverage indicated below. The
   insurance requirement outlined below do not in any way limit the amount of scope of liability of
   Contractor under this Contract. Contractor shall provide proof of said insurance and name the County
   as an additional insured on all required liability policies. Proof of insurance and notice of any material
   change should be submitted to the following address: Clackamas County Procurement Division, 2051
   Kaen Road, Oregon City, OR 97045 or emailed to the County Contract Analyst.

                 Required – Commercial General Liability: combined single limit, or the equivalent, of not
             less than $1,000,000 per occurrence, with an annual aggregate limit of $2,000,000 for Bodily
             Injury and Property Damage.



Rev 2/2023                                           Page 3
                 Required – Professional Liability: combined single limit, or the equivalent, of not less than
             $1,000,000 per claim, with an annual aggregate limit of $2,000,000 for damages caused by
             error, omission or negligent acts.
                 Required – Automobile Liability: combined single limit, or the equivalent, of not less than
             $1,000,000 per accident for Bodily Injury and Property Damage.

         The policy(s) shall be primary insurance as respects to the County. Any insurance or self-
         insurance maintained by the County shall be excess and shall not contribute to it. Any obligation
         that County agree to a waiver of subrogation is hereby stricken.

10. LIMITATION OF LIABILITIES. This Contract is expressly subject to the debt limitation of
    Oregon counties set forth in Article XI, Section 10, of the Oregon Constitution, and is contingent
    upon funds being appropriated therefore. Any provisions herein which would conflict with law are
    deemed inoperative to that extent. Except for liability arising under or related to Article II, Section 13
    or Section 20 neither party shall be liable for (i) any indirect, incidental, consequential or special
    damages under this Contract or (ii) any damages of any sort arising solely from the termination of this
    Contact in accordance with its terms.

11. NOTICES. Except as otherwise provided in this Contract, any required notices between the parties
    shall be given in writing by personal delivery, email, or mailing the same, to the Contract
    Administrators identified in Article 1, Section 6. If notice is sent to County, a copy shall also be sent
    to: Clackamas County Procurement, 2051 Kaen Road, Oregon City, OR 97045. Any communication
    or notice so addressed and mailed shall be deemed to be given five (5) days after mailing, and
    immediately upon personal delivery, or within 2 hours after the email is sent during County’s normal
    business hours (Monday – Thursday, 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.) (as recorded on the device from which
    the sender sent the email), unless the sender receives an automated message or other indication that
    the email has not been delivered.

12. OWNERSHIP OF WORK PRODUCT. All work product of Contractor that results from this
    Contract (the “Work Product”) is the exclusive property of County. County and Contractor intend
    that such Work Product be deemed “work made for hire” of which County shall be deemed the
    author. If for any reason the Work Product is not deemed “work made for hire,” Contractor hereby
    irrevocably assigns to County all of its right, title, and interest in and to any and all of the Work
    Product, whether arising from copyright, patent, trademark or trade secret, or any other state or
    federal intellectual property law or doctrine. Contractor shall execute such further documents and
    instruments as County may reasonably request in order to fully vest such rights in County.
    Contractor forever waives any and all rights relating to the Work Product, including without
    limitation, any and all rights arising under 17 USC § 106A or any other rights of identification of
    authorship or rights of approval, restriction or limitation on use or subsequent modifications.
    Notwithstanding the above, County shall have no rights in any pre-existing Contractor intellectual
    property provided to County by Contractor in the performance of this Contract except to copy, use
    and re-use any such Contractor intellectual property for County use only.

13. REPRESENTATIONS AND WARRANTIES. Contractor represents and warrants to County that
    (A) Contractor has the power and authority to enter into and perform this Contract; (B) this Contract,
    when executed and delivered, shall be a valid and binding obligation of Contractor enforceable in
    accordance with its terms; (C) Contractor shall at all times during the term of this Contract, be
    qualified, professionally competent, and duly licensed to perform the Work; (D) Contractor is an
    independent contractor as defined in ORS 670.600; and (E) the Work under this Contract shall be
    performed in a good and workmanlike manner and in accordance with the highest professional
    standards. The warranties set forth in this section are in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other
    warranties provided.

14. SURVIVAL. All rights and obligations shall cease upon termination or expiration of this Contract,
    except for the rights and obligations set forth in Article II, Sections 1, 6, 7, 10, 12, 13, 14, 15, 17, 20,
    21, 25, 27, 28, and 34, and all other rights and obligations which by their context are intended to

Rev 2/2023                                            Page 4
    survive. However, such expiration shall not extinguish or prejudice the County’s right to enforce this
    Contract with respect to: (a) any breach of a Contractor warranty; or (b) any default or defect in
    Contractor performance that has not been cured.

15. SEVERABILITY. If any term or provision of this Contract is declared by a court of competent
    jurisdiction to be illegal or in conflict with any law, the validity of the remaining terms and provisions
    shall not be affected, and the rights and obligations of the parties shall be construed and enforced as if
    the Contract did not contain the particular term or provision held to be invalid.

16. SUBCONTRACTS AND ASSIGNMENTS. Contractor shall not enter into any subcontracts for any
    of the Work required by this Contract, or assign or transfer any of its interest in this Contract by
    operation of law or otherwise, without obtaining prior written approval from the County, which shall
    be granted or denied in the County’s sole discretion. In addition to any provisions the County may
    require, Contractor shall include in any permitted subcontract under this Contract a requirement that
    the subcontractor be bound by this Article II, Sections 1, 7, 8, 13, 16 and 27 as if the subcontractor
    were the Contractor. County’s consent to any subcontract shall not relieve Contractor of any of its
    duties or obligations under this Contract.

17. SUCCESSORS IN INTEREST. The provisions of this Contract shall be binding upon and shall
    inure to the benefit of the parties hereto, and their respective authorized successors and assigns.

18. TAX COMPLIANCE CERTIFICATION. The Contractor shall comply with all federal, state and
    local laws, regulation, executive orders and ordinances applicable to this Contract. Contractor
    represents and warrants that it has complied, and will continue to comply throughout the duration of
    this Contract and any extensions, with all tax laws of this state or any political subdivision of this
    state, including but not limited to ORS 305.620 and ORS chapters 316, 317, and 318. Any violation
    of this section shall constitute a material breach of this Contract and shall entitle County to terminate
    this Contract, to pursue and recover any and all damages that arise from the breach and the
    termination of this Contract, and to pursue any or all of the remedies available under this Contract or
    applicable law.

19. TERMINATIONS. This Contract may be terminated for the following reasons: (A) by mutual
    agreement of the parties or by the County (i) for convenience upon thirty (30) days written notice to
    Contractor, or (ii) at any time the County fails to receive funding, appropriations, or other expenditure
    authority as solely determined by the County; or (B) if contractor breaches any Contract provision or
    is declared insolvent, County may terminate after thirty (30) days written notice with an opportunity
    to cure.

    Upon receipt of written notice of termination from the County, Contractor shall immediately stop
    performance of the Work. Upon termination of this Contract, Contractor shall deliver to County all
    documents, Work Product, information, works-in-progress and other property that are or would be
    deliverables had the Contract Work been completed. Upon County’s request, Contractor shall
    surrender to anyone County designates, all documents, research, objects or other tangible things
    needed to complete the Work.

20. REMEDIES. If terminated by the County due to a breach by the Contractor, then the County shall
    have any remedy available to it in law or equity. If this Contract is terminated for any other reason,
    Contractor’s sole remedy is payment for the goods and services delivered and accepted by the County
    as of the date of the notice of termination, less any setoff to which the County is entitled.

21. NO THIRD PARTY BENEFICIARIES. County and Contractor are the only parties to this Contract
    and are the only parties entitled to enforce its terms. Nothing in this Contract gives, is intended to
    give, or shall be construed to give or provide any benefit or right, whether directly, indirectly or
    otherwise, to third persons unless such third persons are individually identified by name herein and
    expressly described as intended beneficiaries of the terms of this Contract.


Rev 2/2023                                          Page 5
22. TIME IS OF THE ESSENCE. Contractor agrees that time is of the essence in the performance of
    this Contract.

23. FOREIGN CONTRACTOR. If the Contractor is not domiciled in or registered to do business in the
    State of Oregon, Contractor shall promptly provide to the Oregon Department of Revenue and the
    Secretary of State, Corporate Division, all information required by those agencies relative to this
    Contract. The Contractor shall demonstrate its legal capacity to perform these services in the State of
    Oregon prior to entering into this Contract.

24. FORCE MAJEURE. Neither County nor Contractor shall be held responsible for delay or default
    caused by events outside the County or Contractor’s reasonable control including, but not limited to,
    fire, terrorism, riot, acts of God, or war. However, Contractor shall make all reasonable efforts to
    remove or eliminate such a cause of delay or default and shall upon the cessation of the cause,
    diligently pursue performance of its obligations under this Contract.

25. WAIVER. The failure of County to enforce any provision of this Contract shall not constitute a
    waiver by County of that or any other provision.

26. PUBLIC CONTRACTING REQUIREMENTS. Pursuant to the public contracting requirements
    contained in Oregon Revised Statutes (“ORS”) Chapter 279B.220 through 279B.235, Contractor
    shall:
            a. Make payments promptly, as due, to all persons supplying to Contractor labor or
                materials for the prosecution of the work provided for in the Contract.
            b. Pay all contributions or amounts due the Industrial Accident Fund from such Contractor
                or subcontractor incurred in the performance of the Contract.
            c. Not permit any lien or claim to be filed or prosecuted against County on account of any
                labor or material furnished.
            d. Pay the Department of Revenue all sums withheld from employees pursuant to ORS
                316.167.
            e. As applicable, the Contractor shall pay employees for work in accordance with ORS
                279B.235, which is incorporated herein by this reference. The Contractor shall comply
                with the prohibitions set forth in ORS 652.220, compliance of which is a material
                element of this Contract, and failure to comply is a breach entitling County to terminate
                this Contract for cause.
            f. If the Work involves lawn and landscape maintenance, Contractor shall salvage, recycle,
                compost, or mulch yard waste material at an approved site, if feasible and cost effective.

27. NO ATTORNEY FEES. In the event any arbitration, action or proceeding, including any
    bankruptcy proceeding, is instituted to enforce any term of this Contract, each party shall be
    responsible for its own attorneys’ fees and expenses.

28. CONFIDENTIALITY. Contractor acknowledges that it and its employees and agents may, in the
    course of performing their obligations under this Contract, be exposed to or acquire information that
    the County desires or is required to maintain as confidential, including information that is protected
    under applicable law, including Personal Information (as “Personal Information” is defined in ORS
    646A.602(11)).

    Contractor agrees to hold any and all information that it is required by law or that the County marks as
    “Confidential” to be held in confidence (“Confidential Information”), using at least the same degree of
    care that Contractor uses in maintaining the confidentiality of its own confidential information, and
    will use the Confidential Information for no purpose other than in the performance of this Contract, and
    to advise each of its employees and agents of their obligations to keep Confidential Information
    confidential.

    Contractor agrees that, except as directed by the County, Contractor will not at any time during or
    after the term of this Contract, disclose, directly or indirectly, any Confidential Information to any

Rev 2/2023                                         Page 6
    person, and that upon termination or expiration of this Contract or the County’s request, Contractor
    will turn over to the County all documents, papers, records and other materials in Contractor's
    possession which embody Confidential Information.

    Contractor acknowledges that breach of this Contract, including disclosure of any Confidential
    Information, or disclosure of other information that, at law or in good conscience or equity, ought to
    remain confidential, will give rise to irreparable injury to the County that cannot adequately be
    compensated in damages. Accordingly, the County may seek and obtain injunctive relief against the
    breach or threatened breach of the foregoing undertakings, in addition to any other legal remedies that
    may be available. Contractor acknowledges and agrees that the covenants contained herein are
    necessary for the protection of the legitimate business interests of the County and are reasonable in
    scope and content.

    Contractor agrees to comply with all reasonable requests by the County to ensure the confidentiality
    and nondisclosure of the Confidential Information, including if requested and without limitation: (a)
    obtaining nondisclosure agreements, in a form approved by the County, from each of Contractor’s
    employees and agents who are performing services, and providing copies of such agreements to the
    County; and (b) performing criminal background checks on each of Contractor’s employees and
    agents who are performing services, and providing a copy of the results to the County.

    Contractor shall report, either orally or in writing, to the County any use or disclosure of Confidential
    Information not authorized by this Contract or in writing by the County, including any reasonable
    belief that an unauthorized individual has accessed Confidential Information. Contractor shall make
    the report to the County immediately upon discovery of the unauthorized disclosure, but in no event
    more than two (2) business days after Contractor reasonably believes there has been such
    unauthorized use or disclosure. Contractor’s report shall identify: (i) the nature of the unauthorized
    use or disclosure, (ii) the Confidential Information used or disclosed, (iii) who made the unauthorized
    use or received the unauthorized disclosure, (iv) what Contractor has done or shall do to mitigate any
    deleterious effect of the unauthorized use or disclosure, and (v) what corrective action Contractor has
    taken or shall take to prevent future similar unauthorized use or disclosure. Contractor shall provide
    such other information, including a written report, as reasonably requested by the County.

    Notwithstanding any other provision in this Contract, Contractor will be responsible for all damages,
    fines and corrective action (including credit monitoring services) arising from disclosure of such
    Confidential Information caused by a breach of its data security or the confidentiality provisions
    hereunder.

    The provisions in this Section shall operate in addition to, and not as limitation of, the confidentiality
    and similar requirements set forth in the rest of the Contract, as it may otherwise be amended.
    Contractor’s obligations under this Contract shall survive the expiration or termination of the
    Contract, as amended, and shall be perpetual.

29. CRIMINAL BACKGROUND CHECK REQUIREMENTS. Contractor shall be required to have
    criminal background checks (and in certain instances fingerprint background checks) performed on
    all employees, agents, or subcontractors that perform services under this Contract. Only those
    employees, agents, or subcontractors that have met the acceptability standards of the County may
    perform services under this Contract or be given access to Personal Information, Confidential
    Information or access to County facilities.

30. [RESERVED]

31. [RESERVED]

32. [RESERVED]

33. [RESERVED]

Rev 2/2023                                          Page 7
34. MERGER. THIS CONTRACT CONSTITUTES THE ENTIRE AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE
    PARTIES WITH RESPECT TO THE SUBJECT MATTER REFERENCED THEREIN. THERE
    ARE NO UNDERSTANDINGS, AGREEMENTS, OR REPRESENTATIONS, ORAL OR
    WRITTEN, NOT SPECIFIED HEREIN REGARDING THIS CONTRACT. NO AMENDMENT,
    CONSENT, OR WAIVER OF TERMS OF THIS CONTRACT SHALL BIND EITHER PARTY
    UNLESS IN WRITING AND SIGNED BY ALL PARTIES. ANY SUCH AMENDMENT,
    CONSENT, OR WAIVER SHALL BE EFFECTIVE ONLY IN THE SPECIFIC INSTANCE AND
    FOR THE SPECIFIC PURPOSE GIVEN. CONTRACTOR, BY THE SIGNATURE HERETO OF
    ITS AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE, IS AN INDEPENDENT CONTRACTOR,
    ACKNOWLEDGES HAVING READ AND UNDERSTOOD THIS CONTRACT, AND
    CONTRACTOR AGREES TO BE BOUND BY ITS TERMS AND CONDITIONS.

By their signatures below, the parties to this Contract agree to the terms, conditions, and content
expressed herein.

 Daniel Shamebo Sabore                                   Clackamas County
 Dba Languages Translation Services
 34726 31 CT SW
 Federal Way, WA 98023
   6543 Rolling Creek Dr,                                _________________________________________
   Colorado Springs, CO 80924                            Chair
                                   6/29/2023
 _________________________________________
 Authorized Signature             Date
                                                         _________________________________________
   Daniel S Sabore, Managing Director
 _________________________________________               Recording Secretary
 Name / Title (Printed)
                                                         _________________________________________
 1598843-95____________________________                  Date
 Oregon Business Registry #
                                                         Approved as to Form:
 Sole Proprietorship/Oregon_________________
 Entity Type / State of Formation                                                   07/05/2023
                                                         _____________________________________
                                                         County Counsel                   Date




Rev 2/2023                                         Page 8
                              EXHIBIT A
             RFQ 2023-39 ON-CALL INTERPRETER SERVICES
                       PUBLISHED APRIL 27, 2023




Rev 2/2023                    Page 9
     REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS #2023-39

                     FOR

              Interpreter Services

    BOARD OF COUNTY COMMISSIONERS
          TOOTIE SMITH, Chair
        PAUL SAVAS, Commissioner
        MARK SHULL, Commissioner
     MARTHA SCHRADER, Commissioner
         BEN WEST, Commissioner

           ________________________

                Gary Schmidt
             County Administrator


                 Mike Faris
               Contract Analyst

PROPOSAL CLOSING DATE, TIME AND LOCATION

  DATE:       May 25, 2023

  TIME:      2:00 PM, Pacific Time

  PLACE:     https://bidlocker.us/a/clackamascounty/BidLocker
                                                  SCHEDULE


Request for Proposals Issued……...............................April 27, 2023

Protest of Specifications Deadline.............................. May 4, 2023, 5:00 PM, Pacific Time

Deadline to Submit Clarifying Questions.................. May 18, 2023, 5:00 PM, Pacific Time

Request for Proposals Closing Date and Time……...May 25, 2023, 2:00 PM, Pacific Time

Deadline to Submit Protest of Award...................Seven (7) days from the Intent to Award




                                          TABLE OF CONTENTS


                              Section 1 – Notice of Request for Proposals

                              Section 2 – Instructions to Proposers

                              Section 3 – Scope of Work

                              Section 4 – Evaluation and Selection Criteria

                              Section 5 – Proposal Content (Including Proposal Certification)




RFP #2023-39 Interpreter Services                      Page ii
                                   SECTION 1
                       NOTICE OF REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS

Notice is hereby given that Clackamas County through its Board of County Commissioners will receive
sealed Proposals per specifications until 2:00 PM, May 25, 2023 (“Closing”), to provide Interpreter
Services. No Proposals will be received or considered after that time.

Location of RFP documents: OregonBuys
RFP Documents can be downloaded from the state of Oregon procurement website (“OregonBuys”) at
the following address https://oregonbuys.gov/bso/view/login/login.xhtml, Document No. S-
C01010-00006733.

Prospective Proposers will need to sign in to download the information and that information will be
accumulated for a Plan Holder's List. Prospective Proposers are responsible for obtaining any Addenda,
clarifying questions, and Notices of Award from OregonBuys.

Submitting Proposals: Bid Locker
Proposals will only be accepted electronically thru a secure online bid submission service, Bid Locker.
Email submissions to Clackamas County email addresses will no longer be accepted.
   A. Completed proposal documents must arrive electronically via Bid Locker located at
       https://bidlocker.us/a/clackamascounty/BidLocker.
   B. Bid Locker will electronically document the date and time of all submissions. Completed
       documents must arrive by the deadline indicated in Section 1 or as modified by Addendum.
       LATE PROPOSALS WILL NOT BE ACCEPTED.
   C. Proposers must register and create a profile for their business with Bid Locker in order to submit
       for this project. It is free to register for Bid Locker.
   D. Proposers with further questions concerning Bid Locker may review the Vendor’s Guide located
       at https://www.clackamas.us/how-to-bid-on-county-projects .

Contact Information
Procurement Process and Technical Questions: Michael Faris , MFaris@clackamas.us

The Board of County Commissioners reserves the right to reject any and all Proposals not in compliance
with all prescribed public bidding procedures and requirements, and may reject for good cause any and all
Proposals upon the finding that it is in the public interest to do so and to waive any and all informalities in
the public interest. In the award of the contract, the Board of County Commissioners will consider the
element of time, will accept the Proposal or Proposals which in their estimation will best serve the
interests of Clackamas County and will reserve the right to award the contract to the contractor whose
Proposal shall be best for the public good.

Clackamas County encourages proposals from Minority, Women, Veteran and Emerging Small
Businesses.




                                                    Page 1
                                            SECTION 2
                                    INSTRUCTIONS TO PROPOSERS

Clackamas County (“County”) reserves the right to reject any and all Proposals received as a result of this
RFP. County Local Contract Review Board Rules (“LCRB”) govern the procurement process for the County.
2.1       Modification or Withdrawal of Proposal: Any Proposal may be modified or withdrawn at any time
prior to the Closing deadline, provided that a written request is received by the County Procurement Division
Director, prior to the Closing. The withdrawal of a Proposal will not prejudice the right of a Proposer to submit
a new Proposal.

2.2      Requests for Clarification and Requests for Change: Proposers may submit questions regarding
the specifications of the RFP. Questions must be received in writing on or before 5:00 p.m. (Pacific Time), on
the date indicated in the Schedule, at the Procurement Division address as listed in Section 1 of this RFP.
Requests for changes must include the reason for the change and any proposed changes to the requirements.
The purpose of this requirement is to permit County to correct, prior to the opening of Proposals, RFP terms
or technical requirements that may be unlawful, improvident or which unjustifiably restrict competition.
County will consider all requested changes and, if appropriate, amend the RFP. No oral or written instructions
or information concerning this RFP from County managers, employees or agents to prospective Proposers shall
bind County unless included in an Addendum to the RFP.

2.3      Protests of the RFP/Specifications: Protests must be in accordance with LCRB C-047-0730.
Protests of Specifications must be received in writing on or before 5:00 p.m. (Pacific Time), on the date
indicated in the Schedule, or within three (3) business days of issuance of any addendum, at the Procurement
Division address listed in Section 1 of this RFP. Protests may not be faxed. Protests of the RFP specifications
must include the reason for the protest and any proposed changes to the requirements.

2.4      Addenda: If any part of this RFP is changed, an addendum will be provided to Proposers that have
provided an address to the Procurement Division for this procurement. It shall be Proposers responsibility to
regularly check OregonBuys for any notices, published addenda, or response to clarifying questions.

2.5      Submission of Proposals: Proposals must be submitted in accordance with Section 5. All Proposals
shall be legibly written in ink or typed and comply in all regards with the requirements of this RFP. Proposals
that include orders or qualifications may be rejected as irregular. All Proposals must include a signature that
affirms the Proposer’s intent to be bound by the Proposal (may be on cover letter, on the Proposal, or the
Proposal Certification Form) shall be signed. If a Proposal is submitted by a firm or partnership, the name and
address of the firm or partnership shall be shown, together with the names and addresses of the members. If
the Proposal is submitted by a corporation, it shall be signed in the name of such corporation by an official
who is authorized to bind the contractor. The Proposals will be considered by the County to be submitted in
confidence and are not subject to public disclosure until the notice of intent to award has been issued.

No late Proposals will be accepted. Proposals submitted after the Closing will be considered late and will be
returned unopened. Proposals may not be submitted by telephone or fax.

2.6     Post-Selection Review and Protest of Award: County will name the apparent successful Proposer in
a Notice of Intent to Award published on OregonBuys. Identification of the apparent successful Proposer is
procedural only and creates no right of the named Proposer to award of the contract. Competing Proposers shall
be given seven (7) calendar days from the date on the Notice of Intent to Award to review the file at the
Procurement Division office and file a written protest of award, pursuant to LCRB C-047-0740. Any award
protest must be in writing and must be delivered by email, hand-delivery or mail to the address for the
Procurement Division as listed in Section 1 of this RFP.

Only actual Proposers may protest if they believe they have been adversely affected because the Proposer would
be eligible to be awarded the contract in the event the protest is successful. The basis of the written protest must
be in accordance with ORS 279B.410 and shall specify the grounds upon which the protest is based. In order to
be an adversely affected Proposer with a right to submit a written protest, a Proposer must be next in line for

RFP #2023-39 Interpreter Services                      Page 2
award, i.e. the protester must claim that all higher rated Proposers are ineligible for award because they are
non-responsive or non-responsible.

County will consider any protests received and:
       a. reject all protests and proceed with final evaluation of, and any allowed contract language
           negotiation with, the apparent successful Proposer and, pending the satisfactory outcome of this
           final evaluation and negotiation, enter into a contract with the named Proposer; OR
       b. sustain a meritorious protest(s) and reject the apparent successful Proposer as nonresponsive, if
           such Proposer is unable to demonstrate that its Proposal complied with all material requirements
           of the solicitation and Oregon public procurement law; thereafter, County may name a new
           apparent successful Proposer; OR
       c. reject all Proposals and cancel the procurement.

2.7      Acceptance of Contractual Requirements: Failure of the selected Proposer to execute a contract and
deliver required insurance certificates within ten (10) calendar days after notification of an award may result in
cancellation of the award. This time period may be extended at the option of County.

2.8      Public Records: Proposals are deemed confidential until the “Notice of Intent to Award” letter is issued.
This RFP and one copy of each original Proposal received in response to it, together with copies of all documents
pertaining to the award of a contract, will be kept and made a part of a file or record which will be open to public
inspection. If a Proposal contains any information that is considered a TRADE SECRET under ORS 192.345(2),
SUCH INFORMATION MUST BE LISTED ON A SEPARATE SHEET CAPABLE OF SEPARATION
FROM THE REMAINING PROPOSAL AND MUST BE CLEARLY MARKED WITH THE
FOLLOWING LEGEND:

“This information constitutes a trade secret under ORS 192.345(2), and shall not be disclosed except in
accordance with the Oregon Public Records Law, ORS Chapter 192.”

The Oregon Public Records Law exempts from disclosure only bona fide trade secrets, and the exemption from
disclosure applies only “unless the public interest requires disclosure in the particular instance” (ORS 192.345).
Therefore, non-disclosure of documents, or any portion of a document submitted as part of a Proposal, may
depend upon official or judicial determinations made pursuant to the Public Records Law.

2.9      Investigation of References: County reserves the right to investigate all references in addition to those
supplied references and investigate past performance of any Proposer with respect to its successful performance
of similar services, its compliance with specifications and contractual obligations, its completion or delivery of
a project on schedule, its lawful payment of subcontractors and workers, and any other factor relevant to this
RFP. County may postpone the award or the execution of the contract after the announcement of the apparent
successful Proposer in order to complete its investigation.

2.10     RFP Proposal Preparation Costs and Other Costs: Proposer costs of developing the Proposal, cost
of attendance at an interview (if requested by County), or any other costs are entirely the responsibility of the
Proposer, and will not be reimbursed in any manner by County.

2.11    Clarification and Clarity: County reserves the right to seek clarification of each Proposal, or to make
an award without further discussion of Proposals received. Therefore, it is important that each Proposal be
submitted initially in the most complete, clear, and favorable manner possible.

2.12    Right to Reject Proposals: County reserves the right to reject any or all Proposals or to withdraw any
item from the award, if such rejection or withdrawal would be in the public interest, as determined by County.

2.13     Cancellation: County reserves the right to cancel or postpone this RFP at any time or to award no
contract.

2.14    Proposal Terms: All Proposals, including any price quotations, will be valid and firm through a
period of one hundred and eighty (180) calendar days following the Closing date. County may require an


RFP #2023-39 Interpreter Services                     Page 3
extension of this firm offer period. Proposers will be required to agree to the longer time frame in order to be
further considered in the procurement process.

2.15 Oral Presentations: At County’s sole option, Proposers may be required to give an oral presentation of
their Proposals to County, a process which would provide an opportunity for the Proposer to clarify or elaborate
on the Proposal but will in no material way change Proposer’s original Proposal. If the evaluating committee
requests presentations, the Procurement Division will schedule the time and location for said presentation. Any
costs of participating in such presentations will be borne solely by Proposer and will not be reimbursed by
County. Note: Oral presentations are at the discretion of the evaluating committee and may not be conducted;
therefore, written Proposals should be complete.

2.16     Usage: It is the intention of County to utilize the services of the successful Proposer(s) to provide
services as outlined in the below Scope of Work.

2.17     Review for Responsiveness: Upon receipt of all Proposals, the Procurement Division or designee
will determine the responsiveness of all Proposals before submitting them to the evaluation committee. If a
Proposal is incomplete or non-responsive in significant part or in whole, it will be rejected and will not be
submitted to the evaluation committee. County reserves the right to determine if an inadvertent error is solely
clerical or is a minor informality which may be waived, and then to determine if an error is grounds for
disqualifying a Proposal. The Proposer’s contact person identified on the Proposal will be notified, identifying
the reason(s) the Proposal is non-responsive. One copy of the Proposal will be archived and all others
discarded.

2.18     RFP Incorporated into Contract: This RFP will become part of the Contract between County and
the selected contractor(s). The contractor(s) will be bound to perform according to the terms of this RFP, their
Proposal(s), and the terms of the Sample Contract.

2.19    Communication Blackout Period: Except as called for in this RFP, Proposers may not communicate
with members of the Evaluation Committee or other County employees or representatives about the RFP during
the procurement process until the apparent successful Proposer is selected, and all protests, if any, have been
resolved. Communication in violation of this restriction may result in rejection of a Proposer.

2.20     Prohibition on Commissions and Subcontractors: County will contract directly with
persons/entities capable of performing the requirements of this RFP. Contractors must be represented directly.
Participation by brokers or commissioned agents will not be allowed during the Proposal process. Contractor
shall not use subcontractors to perform the Work unless specifically pre-authorized in writing to do so by the
County. Contractor represents that any employees assigned to perform the Work, and any authorized
subcontractors performing the Work, are fully qualified to perform the tasks assigned to them, and shall
perform the Work in a competent and professional manner. Contractor shall not be permitted to add on any fee
or charge for subcontractor Work. Contractor shall provide, if requested, any documents relating to
subcontractor’s qualifications to perform required Work.

2.21     Ownership of Proposals: All Proposals in response to this RFP are the sole property of County, and
subject to the provisions of ORS 192.410-192.505 (Public Records Act).

2.22      Clerical Errors in Awards: County reserves the right to correct inaccurate awards resulting from its
clerical errors.

2.23     Rejection of Qualified Proposals: Proposals may be rejected in whole or in part if they attempt to
limit or modify any of the terms, conditions, or specifications of the RFP or the Sample Contract.

2.24      Collusion: By responding, the Proposer states that the Proposal is not made in connection with any
competing Proposer submitting a separate response to the RFP, and is in all aspects fair and without collusion
or fraud. Proposer also certifies that no officer, agent, elected official, or employee of County has a pecuniary
interest in this Proposal.



RFP #2023-39 Interpreter Services                     Page 4
2.25   Evaluation Committee: Proposals will be evaluated by a committee consisting of representatives
from County and potentially external representatives. County reserves the right to modify the Evaluation
Committee make-up in its sole discretion.

2.26     Commencement of Work: The contractor shall commence no work until all insurance requirements
have been met, the Protest of Awards deadline has been passed, any protest have been decided, a contract has
been fully executed, and a Notice to Proceed has been issued by County.

2.27     Best and Final Offer: County may request best and final offers from those Proposers determined by
County to be reasonably viable for contract award. However, County reserves the right to award a contract on
the basis of initial Proposal received. Therefore, each Proposal should contain the Proposer’s best terms from
a price and technical standpoint. Following evaluation of the best and final offers, County may select for final
contract negotiations/execution the offers that are most advantageous to County, considering cost and the
evaluation criteria in this RFP.

2.28     Nondiscrimination: The successful Proposer agrees that, in performing the work called for by this
RFP and in securing and supplying materials, contractor will not discriminate against any person on the basis
of race, color, religious creed, political ideas, sex, age, marital status, sexual orientation, gender identity,
veteran status, physical or mental handicap, national origin or ancestry, or any other class protected by
applicable law.

2.29     Intergovernmental Cooperative Procurement Statement: Pursuant to ORS 279A and LCRB, other
public agencies shall have the ability to purchase the awarded goods and services from the awarded
contractor(s) under terms and conditions of the resultant contract. Any such purchases shall be between the
contractor and the participating public agency and shall not impact the contactor’s obligation to the County.
Any estimated purchase volumes listed herein do not include other public agencies and County makes no
guarantee as to their participation. Any Proposer, by written notification included with their Proposal, may
decline to extend the prices and terms of this solicitation to any and/or all other public agencies. County grants
to any and all public serving governmental agencies, authorization to purchase equivalent services or products
described herein at the same submitted unit bid price, but only with the consent of the contractor awarded the
contract by the County.




RFP #2023-39 Interpreter Services                     Page 5
                                            SECTION 3
                                          SCOPE OF WORK

3.1.     INTRODUCTION

The County, on behalf of its Departments and special Districts (collectively referred to as “Department”),
is seeking proposals for on-call contractors to provide interpreter services including but not limited to in
person, telephonic, transcription and video platforms. The County wishes to contract with qualified firms
for interpreter services to and from one or more languages to and from the English language on an on-call
basis. The County intends to award multiple contracts as a result of this solicitation.

Please direct all Technical/Specifications or Procurement Process Questions to the indicated
representative referenced in the Notice of Request for Proposals and note the communication
restriction outlined in Section 2.19.

3.2      BACKGROUND

Clackamas County seeks to contract with qualified vendors to provide interpreter services to be utilized
throughout the County by in-person, telephonic, video conferencing, and written translation platforms.
These services are for all Clackamas County entities including but not limited to Sheriff’s Department,
District Attorney’s Office, Clackamas County Service District 1, North Clackamas Parks and Recreation
District, Transportation and Development, Resolution Services, Library District, Water Environment
Services, Health, Housing and Human Services and other County component units.

3.3.     SCOPE OF WORK

3.3.1.   Scope:

The purpose of this Request for Proposals (“RFP”) is to contract with qualified individuals or firms
(hereafter “Contractor”) to provide on-call services including but not limited to in-person, telephonic,
video conferencing, and written translation services for various languages to and from the English
language. The resulting contract will be an on-call contract for services needed over the contract term.
The compensation for each task will be a time and material basis at the rates provided in proposal
submitted with no guarantee of compensation during the contract term. The annual not to exceed for each
contract will be $250,000, with a total contract value of not-to-exceed $1,250,000.000, for a five year
contract term expiring June 30, 2028. It is the intent of the County to issue multiple contracts under this
RFP.

Contractors may need to agree to additional terms and conditions as mandated by State, Federal or
County requirements per each engagement such as HIPPA or other State mandated regulations. This
includes but is not limited to additional agreements such as Business Associate Agreement and Qualified
Service Organization Business Associate Agreement. Samples of these agreements can be found at:
https://www.clackamas.us/finance/terms.html

Services will be coordinated with a Departmental representative (“County Requestor”) for each
engagement Service scheduling will be by telephone or email correspondence and all confirmations must
be received to the County Requestor within 24 hours of request. The request confirmation should include
the name of the County Requestor, service(s) time(s) and location requested, confirmation of services and
any other pertinent information necessary. Minimum hours for billing and service requested for in-person
interpreter services is one (1) hour per request, regardless of actual service time, which includes client no
show. The County has the right to utilize services within the time frame specified regardless of original
scope of work as long as there is no change of location unless mutually agreed upon in writing. County
Requestor and Contractor must cancel a minimum of 48 hours in advance of requested services time.


RFP #2023-39 Interpreter Services                  Page 6
County reserves the right to charge an hour for hour billing fee at their specified rates for failure to appear
after a written confirmation is received.

Additional hours for in-person interpreter services or longer term engagements may be required as needed
and mutually agreed upon in writing by both the County and Contractor.

Contractor to provide all labor, material, equipment and supplies necessary to provide interpreter services
in-person, telephonically, video conferencing, and written translation services. The County will not accept
additional ad hoc fees such as location fees, travel fees, etc. in addition to the hourly rate.

Contractor will invoice Departments directly on a monthly basis with detailed information per transaction
that will include date, time, location address, language services used, platform utilized (in-person,
telephonic, video, transcriber) and any other pertinent notes. If providing written translation, Contractor
shall submit in writing, the original request by the Department including documents requesting
translation. County Requestor may require Contractor to bill third party entities directly.

Telephonic interpretation must utilize a land line phone to maintain integrity of the connection. If
mutually agreed upon, cellular devices may be utilized to perform the interpreter services either via video
or telephonic interpreter services.

Contractors must have the ability to provide high-quality Video Remote Interpreting and Video Relay
Service (“VRI/VRS”) available from multiple platforms – utilizing current (PC/MAC/Android/iOS)
technology for the provision of on-site interpreting services and video remote “mobile” interpreting,
delivering a wide array of options to meet the varied communication needs of the Sheriff’s Office, clients
and Departments.

Contractor duties may include but are not limited to interpreter services, which may consist of either
VRI/VRS interpretive services or on-site interpretation as the need dictates, for Departments including but
not limited to the County Jail, County Courthouse (Civil Services), Community Corrections (Parole and
Probation Services), and Law Enforcement Operations (Patrol Services and Criminal Investigations).

Certifications:

Contractors must be certified in American Sign Language (ASL) through the National Association of the
Deaf (https://www.nad.org/).

Contractors who are Medically Certified must be registered and certified as a medical Interpreter as
deemed by the Oregon Health Authority (http://www.oregon.gov/oha/oei/pages/hci-certification.aspx).

Contractors who are Legally Certified must be registered and certified as a Court Interpreter as deemed by
the Oregon Judicial Department (http://www.courts.oregon.gov/programs/interpreters/Pages/roster.aspx).

Contractors who perform General interpreter services must be fluent in language(s) in which they provide
services by oral communication and or in writing.

Firms or individuals may be required to supply certifications at the time of services being rendered at the
request of the County Requestor.

Typical service requests may include but not limited to:
   • Interpreter services in clinics, education classes working directly with adults, children, for jurors,
        classes for parents youth, general County business including but not limited to meetings, events,
        translation of documents as well as public communication material.



RFP #2023-39 Interpreter Services                   Page 7
Contractor may or may not be required to meet additional guidelines as specified by both finding source
and departmental needs. These may include but are not limited to:

    •    BAA
    •    QSOBAA
    •    Ability to record interactions (interpretations) of all parties
    •    Consent form all parties to recordings- Conversations may be recorded for law enforcement
         purposes (Oregon Law) and possibility of being subject to answering subpoenas (County
         Counsel/District Attorney).

3.3.2.   Work Schedule:

Services will be performed on an as needed schedule with little to no notice. The schedule of services will
be mutually agreed upon scope of work on a twenty four hour basis, seven days a week, and three
hundred and sixty five days a year (24/7/365). Work performed will either be in-person, utilization of
video or telephonic interpreter services.

Most services to be performed between the hours of 7:00 AM and 6:00 PM, Monday through Friday.

Location of Work:
All Clackamas County and component unit locations are intended to be covered under the resulting
contract. The majority of service locations are in the Clackamas County Metro areas of Oregon City,
Milwaukie, Gladstone, Clackamas, West Linn, Canby area. There are some service locations in outlying
areas such as Sandy and Welches, however the volume is minor compared to the Metro area.
3.3.3. Term of Contract:
The term of the contract shall be from the effective date through June 30, 2028. Prices during the term of
the contract will be fixed.

3.3.4 Sample Contract: Submission of a Proposal in response to this RFP indicates Proposer’s
willingness to enter into a contract containing substantially the same terms (including insurance
requirements) of the sample contract identified below. No action or response to the sample contract is
required under this RFP. Any objections to the sample contract terms should be raised in accordance with
Paragraphs 2.2 or 2.3 of this RFP, pertaining to requests for clarification or change or protest of the
RFP/specifications, and as otherwise provided for in this RFP. This RFP and all supplemental information
in response to this RFP will be a binding part of the final contract.

The applicable Sample Personal Services Contract for this RFP can be found at
https://www.clackamas.us/finance/terms.html.


Professional Services Contract (unless checked, item does not apply)
    The following paragraphs of the Professional Services Contract will be applicable:
       Article I, Paragraph 5 – Travel and Other Expense is Authorized
       Article II, Paragraph 28 – Confidentiality
       Article II, Paragraph 29 – Criminal Background Check Requirements
       Article II, Paragraph 30 – Key Persons
       Article II, Paragraph 31 – Cooperative Contracting
       Article II, Paragraph 32 – Federal Contracting Requirements
       Exhibit A – On-Call Provision

Background Checks
Contractors are responsible for performing and paying for Criminal Background Checks as required,
Article II, Paragraph 29 on the Professional Services Standardized Contract Terms and Conditions.

RFP #2023-39 Interpreter Services                 Page 8
Contractors shall perform criminal background checks on all employees, agents or subcontractors that
perform services before any services are rendered under established Contracts with Clackamas County
from this RFP. All criminal background check requirement documentation shall be made available at the
request of the County. Failure to provide or adhere to this standard will result in termination of your
contract. This is applicable to all Contractors who Clackamas County establishes a contract with.


    The following insurance requirements will be applicable:
       Commercial General Liability: combined single limit, or the equivalent, of not less than
       $1,000,000 per occurrence, with an annual aggregate limit of $2,000,000 for Bodily Injury and
       Property Damage.
       Professional Liability: combined single limit, or the equivalent, of not less than $1,000,000 per
       occurrence, with an annual aggregate limit of $2,000,000 for damages caused by error, omission
       or negligent acts.
       Automobile Liability: combined single limit, or the equivalent, of not less than $1,000,000 per
       occurrence for Bodily Injury and Property Damage.




RFP #2023-39 Interpreter Services                Page 9
                                            SECTION 4
                                      EVALUATION PROCEDURE

4.1     An evaluation committee will review all Proposals that are initially deemed responsive and they shall
        rank the Proposals in accordance with the below criteria. The evaluation committee may recommend an
        award based solely on the written responses or may request Proposal interviews/presentations.
        Interviews/presentations, if deemed beneficial by the evaluation committee, will consist of the highest
        scoring Proposers. The invited Proposers will be notified of the time, place, and format of the
        interview/presentation. Based on the interview/presentation, the evaluation committee may revise their
        scoring.

        Written Proposals must be complete and no additions, deletions, or substitutions will be permitted
        during the interview/presentation (if any). The evaluation committee will recommend award of a
        contract to the final County decision maker based on the highest scoring Proposal. The County decision
        maker reserves the right to accept the recommendation, award to a different Proposer, or reject all
        Proposals and cancel the RFP.

        Proposers are not permitted to directly communicate with any member of the evaluation committee
        during the evaluation process. All communication will be facilitated through the Procurement
        representative.

4.2     Evaluation Criteria

        Category                                                          Points available:

        Proposer’s General Background and Qualifications                  0-30
        Scope of Work                                                     0-45
        Fees                                                              0-25
        Available points                                                  0-100

4.3     Once a selection has been made, the County will enter into contract negotiations. During negotiation,
        the County may require any additional information it deems necessary to clarify the approach and
        understanding of the requested services. Any changes agreed upon during contract negotiations will
        become part of the final contract. The negotiations will identify a level of work and associated fee that
        best represents the efforts required. If the County is unable to come to terms with the highest scoring
        Proposer, discussions shall be terminated and negotiations will begin with the next highest scoring
        Proposer. If the resulting contract contemplates multiple phases and the County deems it is in its
        interest to not authorize any particular phase, it reserves the right to return to this solicitation and
        commence negotiations with the next highest ranked Proposer to complete the remaining phases.




RFP #2023-39 Interpreter Services                 Page 10
                                                 SECTION 5
                                             PROPOSAL CONTENTS

5.1.       Vendors must observe submission instructions and be advised as follows:

5.1.1. Proposals will only be accepted electronically thru Equity Hub’s Bid Locker. Email submissions to
Clackamas County email addresses will no longer be accepted.

5.1.2. Completed proposal documents must arrive electronically via Equity Hub’s Bid Locker located at
https://bidlocker.us/a/clackamascounty/BidLocker.

5.1.3. County reserves the right to solicit additional information or Proposal clarification from the vendors, or
any one vendor, should the County deem such information necessary.

5.1.4. Proposal may not exceed a total of 20 pages (single-sided), inclusive of all exhibits, attachments, title
pages, pages separations, table of contents, or other information. The Proposal Certification Page will NOT
count towards the final page count.

                    Provide the following information in the order in which it appears below:

5.2.       Proposer’s General Background and Qualifications:
       •   Description of the firm.
       •    Provide Credentials (Medical and/or Legal Certifications by the State of Oregon) and experience of key
           individuals that would be assigned to this project.
       •   Description of providing similar services to public entities of similar size within the past five (5) years.
       •   Description of the firm’s ability to meet the requirements in Section 3.
       •   Description of what distinguishes the firm from other firms performing a similar service.

5.3.       Scope of Work
       •   Proposers are required to attach Section 6 (see below), spreadsheet of languages spoken and written and
           in which mode of delivery they are able to provide whether that is in person, telephonically or written
           translation services.
       •   Provide detailed project approach to execute these services.
       •   Provide a timeline for your services

5.4.    Fees
The quoted fees must be a time and material hourly rate for each type of service provided. The County will not
accept additional ad hoc fees such as location fees, travel fees, etc. in addition to the hourly rate. Vendors may
propose on a per hour (in-person), per minute (telephonic or video), or per word basis (transcription).

5.5.    References
Provide three (3) references from clients your firm has served similar to the County in the past three (3) years,
including one client that has newly engaged the firm in the past thirty-six (36) months and one (1) long-term client.
Provide the name, address, email, and phone number of the references. Points awarded for this criteria are based
on both the providing of references as well as information gleaned from the provided contacts. Evaluation
Committee members may contact references at their sole discretion.

5.6.       Completed Proposal Certification (see the below form)




RFP #2023-39 Interpreter Services                    Page 11
21
                                                    Section 6
                                                  Rate Schedule



Name of Firm/Individual: ______________________________________________________________

Certification(s): ☐ Medical         ☐ Legal       ☐ General           ☐ American Sign Language

Days/Hours of availability: __________________________________________________________________
Are you willing to accept long term assignments? ___________________________________________

Are you willing to perform third party billing?   ☐ Yes ☐ No

Please attach all current certifications to your proposal if an individual. Firms may be required to provide
certifications for their staff at the time services are rendered.

                                                             Rates

                                                             In
 Language                                                    person      Telephonic Video         Transcription
 American Sign Language
 Acholi – Uganda, Sudan
 Afrikaans – South Africa, Namibia
 Akan – Ghana, Ivory Coast
 Akateko – Guatemala
 Albanian – Albania
 Algerian Arabic – Algeria
 Amharic – Ethiopia
 Arabic – Widely Distributed
 Armenian – Armenia
 Ashanti (Asante Twi) – Ghana
 Assyrian – Iraq
 Azerbaijani – Azerbaijan
 Azorean Portuguese – Azores Islands
 Bahnar – Vietnam
 Bahasa Indonesia (Indonesian) –Indonesia
 Bambara – Mali
 Belarusan – Belarus
 Bengali – Bangladesh, India
 Bosnian – Bosnia & Herzegovina
 Brazilian Portuguese – Brazil
 Bulgarian – Bulgaria
 Burmese – Myanmar (former Burma)
 Cambodian (Khmer) – Cambodia

RFP #2023-39 Interpreter Services                  Page 13
 Cantonese – China
                                                       In
 Language                                              person   Telephonic Video   Transcription
 Cape Verdean (Portuguese Creole) –Cape Verde
 Catalan – Andorra, Spain
 Cebuano – Philippines
 Chaldean – Iraq
 Chamorro – Guam
 Chaozhou (Teochew) – China
 Chin – Myanmar (former Burma)
 Chinese (var. languages/dialects) – China
 Chuukese (Trukese) – Micronesia
 Croatian – Croatia
 Czech – Czech Republic
 Danish – Denmark
 Dari (Afgan Farsi) – Afghanistan
 Dene – Canada
 Dewoin – Liberia
 Dinka – Sudan
 Duala – Cameroon
 Dutch – Netherlands
 Egyptian Arabic – Egypt
 Estonian – Estonia
 Filipino (Tagalog) – Philippines
 Finnish – Finland
 Flemish – Belgium
 French – Africa, Canada, France, Tunisia,et al.
 French Creole – Caribbean
 Fukienese – China
 Fulani (Fulfulde, Fula) – Cameroon, Niger,
 Nigeria, Senegal
 Fuzhou – China
 Ga – Ghana
 Gen (Mina) – Togo, Benin
 German – Germany
 Gokana (Khana) – Nigeria
 Greek – Greece
 Gujarati – India
 Haitian Creole – Haiti
 Haka Burmese – Myanmar (former Burma)
 Hmong – China, Vietnam, Laos
 Hungarian – Hungary

RFP #2023-39 Interpreter Services            Page 14
 Hakka – China
                                                     In
 Language                                            person   Telephonic Video   Transcription
 Hausa – Niger, Nigeria
 Ibo (Igbo) – Nigeria
 Ilocano – Philippines
 Hebrew – Israel
 Hindi – India
 Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia) – Indonesia
 Iraqi Arabic – Iraq
 Italian – Italy
 Japanese – Japan
 Jarai – Vietnam
 Javanese – Indonesia
 Jordanian Arabic – Jordan
 Juba Arabic – Sudan
 Kanjobal (Q’anjob’al) – Guatemala
 Kannada – India
 Kapampangan – Philippines
 Karen (Pa’o, S’gaw) – Myanmar (former Burma)
 Kayah – Myanmar (former Burma)
 Khmer (Cambodian) – Cambodia
 Kinyarwanda – Rwanda
 Kirundi – Burundi
 Koho – Vietnam
 Korean – Korea
 Kpele – Guinea, Liberia
 Kurmanji (Northern Kurdish) – Turkey
 Kuawaiti Arabic – Kuwait
 Lao – Laos
 Latvian – Latvia
 Lebanese Arabic – Lebanon
 Lingala – Congo, Republic of the
 Lithuanian – Lithuania
 Luganda – Uganda
 Luo – Kenya
 Maay (Af Maay, Rahanween, Bantu) –Somalia
 Macedonian – Macedonia
 Malay – Malaysia
 Malayalam – India
 Malinke – Senegal
 Mam – Guatemala

RFP #2023-39 Interpreter Services          Page 15
 Mandarin – China
                                                          In
 Language                                                 person   Telephonic Video   Transcription
 Mandinka (Mandingo) – Senegal
 Marathi – India
 Marshallese – Marshall Islands
 Mayan [Akateko, Kanjobal] – Guatemala, Mexico
 Mien – China, Laos, Thailand
 Mina (Gen) – Togo, Benin
 Minangkabau – Indonesia
 Mixteco Alto – Mexico
 Mixteco Bajo – Mexico
 Mnong – Vietnam
 Mongolian – Mongolia
 Moroccan Arabic – Morocco
 Nahuatl – Mexico
 Navajo – U.S.A.(Southwest)
 Nepalese – Nepal, India
 Nuer – Sudan
 Oromo – Ethiopia
 Palestinian Arabic – Israel, Jordan
 Pangasinan – Philippines
 Papiamento – Netherlands Antilles
 Pashto (Pushto) – Pakistan, Afghanistan
 Portuguese Creole (Cape Verdean) – Cape Verde
 Persian (Farsi) – Afghanistan, Iran, Iraq, Pakistan
 Russian – Russia
 Samoan – Samoa
 Polish – Poland
 Portuguese – Portugal, Brazil, et al.
 San Miguel – Mexico
 Santa Eulalia – Guatemala
 Saraiki – Pakistan, India
 Serbian – Serbia, Montenegro
 Serbo-Croatian – Balkans
 Shanghainese – China
 Sichuan (Szechuan) – China
 Sinhalese – Sri Lanka
 Slovak – Slovakia
 Somali – Somalia
 Soninke (Serahule) – Mali
 Sorani (Central Kurdish) – Iraq

RFP #2023-39 Interpreter Services               Page 16
 Spanish – Spain, Latin America, et al.
                                                    In
 Language                                           person   Telephonic Video   Transcription
 Sudanese Arabic – Sudan
 Susu – Guinea
 Swahili – Kenya, Somalia, Tanzania,
 Swedish – Sweden
 Syrian Arabic – Syria
 Tagalog (Filippino) – Philippines
 Tai Dam – Vietnam
 Taiwanese – Taiwan
 Tamil – India
 Telugu – India
 Teochew (Chaozhou) – China
 Thai – Thailand
 Tibetan – China
 Tigrigna (Tigrinya) – Ethiopia,
 Eritrea
 Toishanese – China
 Tongan – Tonga
 Trukese (Chuukese) – Micronesia
 Tunisian Arabic – Tunisia
 Turkish – Turkey
 Twi – Ghana
 Tzotzil – Mexico
 Ukrainian – Ukraine
 Urdu – Pakistan, India
 Vietnamese – Vietnam
 Wolof – Senegal
 Xhosa – South Africa
 Yemeni Arabic – Yemen




RFP #2023-39 Interpreter Services         Page 17
                  EXHIBIT B
             CONTRACTOR’S QUOTE




Rev 2/2023         Page 10
                Languages                                                      6543 Rolling Creek Drive, Colorado Springs, CO 80924.
                Translation
                Services
Advanced Translation Services                                                       Tel: (253) 835-0107. Fax : (775) 993-7988
                                                  Email : info@advancedtranslationservices.com, dshamebo@languages-translation.info
                                                                                     Website: https://advancedtranslationservices.com
                                                                                                                        5/24/2023
                             COVER LETTER AND EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
To: Clackamas County, Oregon
Mike Faris, Contract Analyst

RE: REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS #2023-39 FOR INTERPRETER SERVICES

Dear Mr. Faris,

Thank you so much for the solicitation.
We are ready to provide the requested translation and interpretation services.
Daniel Shamebo Sabore, DBA, Languages Translation Services (LTS), was established in 2004 as a Sole
Proprietorship business in the State of Washington. LTS has more than 19 years of extensive experience and
expertise in its primary line of business: providing language services such as translation, revision, proofreading,
editing, design/desktop publishing (DTP), and interpreting in over 300 languages, including English into Spanish, and
Vietnamese, vice versa to over 3,000 private and public organizations, and individuals nationwide, and
internationally. LTS is an MBE/MWBE certified in many states, including Washington, Oregon, the City of New
York, the State of New York, Nassau County, The Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, and the City of
Philadelphia.
To mention a few examples among thousands of translations that we have provided for more than 19 years:
For the California Department of Education (CDE), LTS proofread, reviewed, formatted, and evaluated many types
of educational documents in multiple languages in more than 23 languages that other contractors provided. The
duration of our contract was from 11/1/06 through 10/31/07, with an extension to 10/31/08. CDE awarded us another
contract in 2016 for multiple languages needed by the State of California, and the contract expired on June 30, 2020.
• In 2015, LTS provided translation services for Clear Passage Educational Center in Long Beach, California.
• In April 2017, LTS was awarded a contract for Spanish translation services by the California Department of
Education.
• In August 2021, LTS was awarded a contract for translation services by Webster Public Schools in Massachusetts.
We completed the translation of more than 100,000 words from English into Portuguese and Spanish within a week.
The total cost of the contract was $12,000.00.
• For the State of Rhode Island Department of Health, and other Departments, we provided translation, review, and
desktop publishing of the Rhode Island Governor’s daily and weekly press releases and other public health notices,
on
COVID-19 from the breakout of the COVID-19 pandemic and other documents up to the present, in
more than 15 languages, including Spanish and Portuguese.
• The total value of the completed projects up to December 2022 is about $180,000.00. Currently, we have a new
ongoing contract with the State.
• We have an ongoing contract for translation services into multiple languages with Johns Hopkins University since
2012. The total value of completed projects is $24,000.00.
• For Tulsa Public Schools, the total value of the completed projects up to April 2021 is about $125,000.00.
• For Baltimore City Public Schools, the total value of the completed projects is about $449,000.00. The contract
covers translation, onsite, telephonic, and remote video interpreting in multiple languages.
To mention a few more examples: We provided written translation and related services to several organizations
nationwide, such as the City of New York, the City of Oakland in California, the Office of the Attorney General of
the State of Washington, the University of Alaska in Anchorage, the University of Washington in Seattle, the
University of Rhode Island, Drake University in Iowa, Texas State University, Texas Department of Transportation,
the University of Wisconsin, Central Connecticut University, Tulsa Public Schools, Baltimore Public Schools,
Delaware City Public Schools, Providence School District in Rhode Island, the States of Texas, Oregon, Colorado,

                                                                                                                                   1
Florida, Hawaii, Massachusetts, Oklahoma, California, New York, Rhode Island, New Hampshire, Connecticut,
Washington, Wisconsin, Idaho, etc.

With appreciation for your time and the opportunity you have given us.

We look forward to hearing from you soon.

Sincerely,



Daniel S. Sabore, Managing Director.




                                                                                                            2
    1.   Proposer’s General Background and Qualifications:
           Description of the firm.

Daniel Shamebo Sabore, DBA, Languages Translation Services (LTS), was established in 2004 as a Sole Proprietorship
business in the State of Washington. LTS has more than 19 years of extensive experience, and expertise in providing language
services such as translation, translation review/ proofreading, editing, Design/Desktop publishing (DTP), interpretation
(foreign language and Sign language), transcription, and other related language services in over 3,000 languages to private
and public organizations such as states, educational institutions, cities, courts, and Non-Governmental Organizations such as
some United Nations Departments (UNDP, UNAIDS, UNESCO, UNICEF, etc.) We have provided more detailed experience
in this proposal.

We are also Woman and Minority-owned business certified in the States of Washington, New York, Virginia, Maryland
(small business reserve), Tennessee (small business), Wisconsin, and Oregon, and certified as a Historically Underutilized
Business (HUB) in North Carolina, the City of Philadelphia, The City of New York, The Port Authority of New York and
New Jersey, and Nassau County in New York, and the City of Philadelphia. LTS is also a self-certified company with
SBA.

Our managers, translators, translation reviewers, editors, interpreters, Designers/Desktop Publishers (DTP), consultants,
voiceover artists, and formatting experts have between five to over 50 years of experience in language services and their
specialization. They have certifications /qualifications, higher education, and excellent professional achievements.

Below is a listing of the past more than 19 years of some of our contracts for language translation, translation review,
interpretation, and related services.


    2.   Credentials (Medical and/or Legal Certifications by the State of Oregon).

We use certified translators and interpreters with Medical and/or Legal Certifications by the State of Oregon,
Washington, the American Translators Association, RID, the National Consortium for the Certifications of Medical
Interpreters, and the Washington State Department of Social and Health Services.

Experience of key individuals that would be assigned to this project:

Our managers are also translators, translation reviewers, interpreters, and transcriptionists.

Demonstrated expertise of key staff members:

Daniel Shamebo Sabore

The co-owner and Managing Director of the company, Mr. Daniel Shamebo Sabore holds an M.Sc. degree from the Catholic
University of Louvain in Belgium in 2001. He has extensive experience in management and consulting, translation,
interpreting, desktop publishing, maintenance/proofreading, editing, and other language services in several fields of
specialization.

He is a native speaker of Amharic, Kambata (Kambatic, Kambatigna, Tambaro, Tambaric, Tambarigna), fluent in English,
Hadiya (Hadiiysa), and fair in French. He has been working as a freelance translator and interpreter since 1980. He also
worked as a Translator, Coordinator, and Business Development Consultant for People’s Translation Services in Seattle for
two years before he established LTS in 2004.

He has been a member of the American Translators Association (ATA) since 2005.

He has more than 32 years of experience at national and international levels in research, translation, desktop publishing,
transcription, and social affairs. He has traveled, studied, and lived in more than 18 countries and can understand the diverse
culture, ethnic and linguistic groups living in many parts of the world. He authored and co-authored more than 46 scientific
articles published in various forums, including international scientific journals.

                                                                                                                             3
He is also a reviewer of some articles for the African Journal of Business Management. He wrote, edited, formatted, and
translated thousands of documents. His customer-driven style of management and proficient negotiating skills have brought
an excellent reputation to LTS. Daniel possesses the skills and tools to manage client/vendor relationships by building a
professional rapport, following up, and maintaining ongoing contact and communication.

Thanks to his visionary leadership and positive feedback from clients throughout the world, LTS has become a fast-growing
company providing its services worldwide.

Daniel will work full-time as the project manager if LTS is awarded the contract.


Tsigie T. Hailegnaw

Mrs. Tsigie Hailegnaw is the Co-Owner and Administrator of LTS, and she has extensive experience in language services
management, desktop publishing, and administration. Her educational and work experience is related to education, health,
administration, and secretarial tasks nationally and internationally.

She is a member of the American Translators Association (ATA).

She is also a native Amharic translator and editor/proofreader and has good proficiency in French. She is the co-founder of
LTS and is currently in charge of the company’s administration and finance affairs. She is also a quality control and project
management expert for language services.

Both manage the office, and either of them can be contacted for any business-related information or requests. Tsigie will
work full-time on the project if LTS is awarded the contract.


Phil Hughes

Our Project Manager, Mr. Phil Hughes, is a very experienced translator, interpreter, language expert, international and
intercultural communications consultant, and ESL teacher. A native speaker of Chinese Mandarin and a few major local
dialects, including Shanghai and Ningbo dialects, Mr. Hughes has a MA in Intercultural Communications from the University
of Maryland, a post-graduate 2nd BA in Intercultural Communication, and a BA in English Language and Literature from
Beijing Foreign Studies Universities, one of the most prestigious institutions of higher learning in China (nicknamed the
cradle of Chinese diplomats).

Mr. Hughes has over 25 years of professional experience in translation and has completed over a million words in
accumulated translation projects covering more than a dozen different professional areas. He has been certified as a senior
MT post-editor. He has native proficiency in English, intermediate proficiency in Spanish, and good knowledge of French.

Phil will work full-time or part-time as a Project Manager, depending on the volume of the job we will have.


    3.   Description of providing similar services to public entities of similar size within the past five (5) years.

•        In March 2018, LTS was awarded a contract for interpretation services by Delaware City Public Schools.

•      Since November 2017, LTS has been providing interpreting services for Seven Hills Charter Public School in
Massachusetts.

•       In April 2018, LTS was awarded a contract by the Massachusetts Department of Early Education and Care. We
provided them with large translations in multiple languages, such as French, Spanish and Portuguese.

•        In May 2018, LTS provided a translation service for Verde Valley School.

                                                                                                                           4
•      In June 2018, LTS was awarded a contract for translation and interpretation services by Tulsa Public Schools in
Oklahoma.

•      In August 2018, LTS was awarded a contract for translation and interpretation services by Denver Public Schools in
Colorado.

•        In July 2018, LTS was awarded a contract for translation and interpretation services by Garland Independent School
District in Texas.

•       In August 2018, LTS was awarded a contract for translation and interpretation services by the State of Arizona.

•      In September 2017, LTS was awarded a contract for translation and interpreting services by Spring Branch
Independent School District in Texas.

•       In October 2018, LTS was awarded a contract for translation and interpretation services by the St. Lucie Public
Schools in Florida.

•       In November 2018, LTS was awarded a contract for translation services by Boulder County in Colorado.

•       In December 2018, LTS provided interpreting services for Drake University in Iowa.

•      We provided translation Services for languages such as Spanish and Hmong for many Wisconsin State Agencies
such as the Wisconsin Department of Public Instruction, Wisconsin Department of Human Resources, Department of
Children and Families, Wisconsin Department of Administration, Division of Legal Services, Waisman Center UCEDD,
UW-Madison from 7/2012 to 3/2018.

• In January 2019, LTS was awarded a contract by the California Department of Education for foreign language written
translation services in multiple languages for the California School for the Deaf, Riverside (CSDF).

• In March 2019, LTS was awarded a contract for translation by the UN Women (the United Nations) organization
dedicated to gender equality and women's empowerment.

•    In March 2019, we provided translation services for Southlands Schools International in California.

 •   In May 2019, we were awarded a contract for translation services by UW Medicine of the University of Washington,
which is an institution of higher education and a Contractor of the State of Washington to serve the following entities: UW
Medicine is a comprehensive healthcare organization that includes four hospitals, primary and specialty clinics, the UW
School of Medicine, a large physician practice plan and a critical care air transport service as follows: Harborview Medical
Center and its associated clinics ("HMC"); UW Medicine/Northwest dba Northwest Hospital & Medical Center and its
associated clinics ("NWHMC"); Public Hospital District No. 1 dba Valley Medical Center and its associated clinics
("VMC"); the University of Washington Medical Center and its associated clinics ("UWMC"); UW Physicians Network
dba UW Neighborhood Clinics ("UWNC"); The Association of University Physicians dba UW Physicians ("UWP"), the
University of Washington School of Medicine ("UW SoM"), and Airlift Northwest ("ALNW") (each a "UW Medicine
Component Unit" and collectively "UW Medicine Component Units").
•    In June 2019, LTS was awarded a contract for translation services in multiple languages by the New York City
Department of Youth and Community Development.
•   In June 2019, LTS was awarded a contract for translation services by The Commonwealth of Massachusetts
Department of Mental Health to provide our services in multiple languages.

•    In July 2019, LTS was awarded a contract by the UNICEF Guinea Bissau Office for translation services in multiple
language pairs such as Portuguese, French, and English.
•    In July 2019, we provided translation services by the City of Albany Corporation Counsel in New York.
•   In September 2019, we provided translation services for Texas State University.

                                                                                                                           5
•   In September 2019, LTS was awarded a contract for translation services by the Oregon Department of Administrative
Services to provide the service for all the departments of the State, ORCPP, and MCUA Authorized Purchasers.
•   In September 2019, LTS was awarded a contract for translation and interpretation services by Gwinnett County Public
Schools in Georgia.
•   In October 2019, LTS was awarded the contract for translation services by the Oregon State Department of General
Services to provide the services for all the State agencies and their affiliates.
•    In December 2019, LTS was awarded a contract for translation, editing/proofreading, onsite and telephonic/video
remote interpreting, and audio recording services by the Kansas State Department of Administration to provide the services
for all the state agencies and their affiliates.
• In February 2020, LTS was awarded a contract to provide language translation and interpretation services to the City of
Oakland in California.
• In February 2020, LTS was awarded a contract for translation and interpreting by Greater Dayton Premier Management
in Ohio.

• In March 2020, LTS was awarded a contract for translation and interpreting by International Foundation for Electoral
Systems (IFES) for Interpretation and Translation Services in North Macedonia.

• In April 2020, LTS was awarded a contract by El Paso County in Colorado for Translation and interpretation services.

• In June 2020, LTS was awarded a contract by the Hawaii Public Housing Authority for Translation services in 13 major
languages that are spoken in Hawaii, and we completed a large project in a rush within a month.

• On August 31, 2020, LTS was awarded a contract for Professional Development & Educational Services (Speakers,
Consultants, Translators, Interpreters) by the Education service center (ESC) Region 11 in Texas, which provides
professional development, technical assistance, and management of educational programs to 77 public school districts and
66 charter campuses.

• In August 2020, LTS was awarded a contract for translation services by the Developmental Disabilities Council of
Oklahoma.

• In August 2020, LTS was awarded a contract for translation services by the Marshall Public Schools in Missouri.

• In September 2020, LTS was awarded a contract by the Board of Trustees of Schertz-Cibolo-Universal City ISD in Texas
to provide Spanish Written and other Translation Services on an "as-needed basis" in accordance with Solicitation/Contract
No. 20-043V.

• In October 2020, LTS was awarded a contract for establishing a Long-Term Agreement related to the provision of
Transcription and possible translation Services in multiple languages by the International Fund for Agricultural
Development (IFAD), whose office is in Rome, Italy.

• In October 2020, LTS was awarded a contract for translation services by Chatham County in Georgia.

• In October 2020, LTS was awarded a contract for translation services by the Kansas State Department of Education.

• In December 2020, LTS was awarded a contract for American Sign Language Interpreting Services, In-person, and
Remote, by the University of Wisconsin-Madison.

• In January 2021, LTS was awarded a contract for translation service by Police Executive Research Forum (PERF).

• In January 2021, LTS was awarded a contract for translation and interpreting services by the Cobb County School District
in the State of Georgia.



                                                                                                                           6
• In January 2021, LTS was awarded a contract for translation and interpreting services by Paterson County Public Schools
in the State of New Jersey.

• In February 2021, we got a notice of intent to award a contract for LTS for In-Person/Remote ASL and CART Services
for the University of Washington in Seattle.

• In March 2021, LTS was awarded a contract for In-Person/Remote ASL and CART Services for the University of
Wisconsin -Milwaukee.

• In April 2021, LTS was awarded a contract for Braille and Large Print Transcription Services Connecticut Department of
Rehabilitation Services, Bureau of Education & Services for the Blind "BESB."

• In April 2021, LTS was awarded a contract for translation services by Southwest Key Programs (SWK), a national
nonprofit organization in the USA.

• In April 2021, LTS was awarded a contract for Braille and Large Print Transcription Services Connecticut Department of
Rehabilitation Services, Bureau of Education & Services for the Blind "BESB."

• In May 2021, LTS was awarded a contract for translation, transcription, captioning, and Real-Time Services by the Los
Angeles Unified School District.

• In May 2021, LTS was awarded a contract for In-Person Interpretation Services, Translation Services, Telephonic
Interpretation, and Video Remote Interpretation services by the Massachusetts Department of Operational Services.

• In May 2021, LTS was awarded a contract for translation, interpreting, and captioning services by Monterey County in
California.

• In May 2021, LTS was awarded a contract for translation and interpreting services by Fresno County in California.

• In June 2021, LTS was selected to provide translation service for INCLUDEnyc.

• In June 2021, LTS was awarded a contract for translation and interpreting services by Action Against Hunger of Canada.

• In September 2021, LTS was awarded a contract for translation services for multiple languages by the Division of
Professional Licensure in Massachusetts.

• In September 2021, LTS was awarded a contract for translation and interpreting services in multiple languages by
Robstown Independent School District in Texas.

• In September 2021, LTS was awarded a contract for translation and interpreting services in multiple languages by
Portland Public Schools in Oregon.

• In September 2021, LTS was awarded a contract for translation and interpreting services in multiple languages by Draper
City in the state of Utah.

• In September 2021, LTS was awarded a contract for translation services by the US Government Publishing Office.
• We have been providing interpreting and translation services for Learning First Charter Public School in Massachusetts
since November 2017.

• In September 2021, LTS was awarded the contract for translation and interpreting services for On-Call Architecture and
Engineering Consultant Services Residential Sound Insulation Program, Lynnwood Link Extension, and East Link
Extension Contract No. RTA/AE0023-21 as a subcontractor with The Jones Payne Group, Inc in Boston, MA.

• In December 2021, LTS was awarded a contract for translation services for multiple languages by the Division of
Professional Licensure in Massachusetts.

                                                                                                                           7
• In December 2021, LTS was awarded a contract for translation services for multiple languages of the UN and other
languages such as Arabic, Chinese, French, Russian, Spanish, Korean, Japanese, and Mongolian by the United Nations
Office for Project Services (“UNOPS”). We translated their website into those languages.

• In December 2021, the State of Rhode Island awarded LTS a contract for translation and interpreting services for multiple
languages.

• In December 2021, LTS was awarded by UNESCO a contract for transcription services for multiple languages.
• In January 2022, LTS was awarded a contract by the UNFPA to provide the International Sign Language Interpretation
Service.

• In January 2022, LTS was awarded a contract for Emergency Translation Services by the King County government.

• In January 2022, LTS was awarded a contract for language and related Services by TEXAS REGION 8 EDUCATION
SERVICE CENTER (Region 8 ESC) (TIPS) to provide the services in all 52 states of the USA.

• In January 2022, LTS was awarded a contract for Sign language interpreting by the Oregon Department of Justice.

• In January 2022, LTS was awarded a contract by the Arizona Department of Education, Early Childhood Program, Head
Start Collaboration Office, a contract for translation and voice recording of educational materials from English into
Spanish.

• In January 2022, LTS was awarded a contract for Translation Services by the City of Miami, Florida.

• In February 2022, LTS was awarded a contract for Translation and interpreting Services by the State of Nevada.

• In February 2022, we provided International Sign Interpreting and CART Services for international conferences for the
UNFPA office in New York, UNITAR Office in Geneva, and UNFPA Office in Pacific Asia Office in Thailand.

•   In March 2022, LTS was awarded a contract for Translation Services by Michigan State University.

• In March 2022, LTS was awarded a contract for Translation Services by King County, Washington, for Community
Engagement Translation Program (CETP) in multiple languages.

• In April 2022, LTS was awarded a contract for Translation and Interpreting services by the Orange County Public
Schools in Florida in multiple languages.

•   In August 2022, LTS was awarded a contract for Translation Services by Chicago Public Schools.

• In September 2022, LTS was awarded a contract for Translation Services by Irving Independent School District in
Texas.

• In October 2022, LTS was awarded a contract for Translation, Interpretation, Transcription, and Sign Language
Services by Austin Independent School District in Texas.

• In October 2022, LTS was awarded a contract for Translation Services by the First 5 Placer Children & Families
Commission in California.

•   In May 2023, LTS was awarded a contract for Translation Services by the Rhode Island Office of Healthy Aging.

• In May 2023, LTS was awarded a Long-Term Contract for Transcription Services by the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA).

• We have been providing interpreting services for Learning First Charter Public School in Massachusetts since November
2017.


                                                                                                                         8
• Hundreds of other clients who use our services are listed here. Examples of those include the ones who gave us positive
feedback online in the link below:

In addition to the above-listed services, we have also provided our services to many private agencies and individuals
worldwide.



Capability, Capacity, Staffing, and Qualifications of LTS.

We have high capability, capacity, staffing, and qualifications that have enabled us to provide translation, interpreting, and
other similar services for more than 19 years for more than 3,000 clients, including many educational organizations.

Hundreds of our clients witness our capability, capacity, staffing, and qualifications to perform the tasks. The feedback
from some of our clients regarding our services is presented below.

We also have 98 five-star reviews since 2/11/2015 (about the time we were registered with Yp.com) with a BBB Rating of
A+ by all reviewers for our services by a few of our clients nationwide. Please, see the reviews online:

                http://www.yellowpages.com/nationwide/mip/languages-translation-services-20944161


In addition to the above-listed positive feedback online, the following is some of the feedback that we got from our clients.

"Daniel, you are awesome! Thank you so much for the turnaround! Thank you, Thank you for working a miracle. I couldn't
share enough gratitude to have had such a dedicated vendor working with us; your work is valuable." and many similar
feedbacks, Adderlin B., MPH, the State of Rhode Island Department of Health.


According to https://www.politico.com/interactives/2019/2020-democrats-spanish-translation/ :
the translation of U.S. 2020 Presidential campaign ad for Washington State Governor, Jay Inslee that was translated from
English into Spanish by Languages Translation Services ( http://advancedtranslationservices.com ) was rated to be the
best translation without trial and error among all the other translations that were performed by other translators for the
listed democratic presidential candidates throughout the nation.
The source English text:
https://jayinslee.com/

The translated Spanish text:
https://jayinslee.com/espanol

Also, here is a link to the FB post by Governor Jay Inslee:
 https://www.facebook.com/jayinslee/posts/10157189504253466?__xts__[0]=68.ARA0Y9BVwB3Go_Whph4qLu9JDqaT
7HGgBm9CUHqMQi0v2rFStjg9eJ9e0abSVw9Sz2O7iyaeRL-BKJfGHbTwrM9pLPJkA78orXHI1ZUYw-
rTUksvl3T_2n4CQtaeD7zSX2SiNvrp5nMnCdfnLnQmwmIKBiWN6AUaps3CKuJini7JnfnlTv18ZKBpSxkVR4KqrqO-
CQHLxwJXaNEu_nRqs0uTA5Qgx38Qi_-erN-
cuwFZxzdp5aedNThx2Mj8IAJeq917RlyiCZwPAiIw1Wuu8KmO8tkdTRgmojVs2sNm8eaSf7z2zv3xGpUBSM_lgckT0Ce
ccCha-hlLb2g&__tn__=-R


Comment from Politico: “ "Jay Inslee, the governor of Washington state whose platform hinges on counteracting climate
change, uses mostly appropriate terms [ Spanish translation by Languages Translation Services] for a highly technical
subject."

"You should be proud, and our team is very thankful for all you did. The Governor is definitely aware of the good work you
did for him. We will stay in touch because we'll continue to need your great service in the future as we create more
products. Until then, best to you and your entire staff. Ben U, https://jayinslee.com
                                                                                                                             9
"Wow, thank you so much for such a quick turnaround and excellent customer service. I had called several other
translation services on our contract list yesterday; most didn't answer their phones, and those that did answer told me that
they wouldn't be able to do the project with the turnaround time we requested. I am so glad that I found your company's
contact info; you really helped us out when no one else was able to. We will definitely reach out to you with future
translation projects." Vanessa S, Office of the Attorney General of the State of Washington, 4/5/2019.

"THANK YOU!!!! You guys have been so helpful with the quick turnarounds this week. We appreciate it tremendously."
Travis M. https://jayinslee.com

"THANK YOU!!!! You guys have been so helpful with the quick turnarounds this week. We appreciate it tremendously."
Travis M., jayinslee.com

"Thank you very much! I will be sending you more in the near future. "Keila P., Lane County Behavioral Health.

"Thank you for getting it to me so quickly." Marissa E., Orange County Transportation Authority, CA

"Daniel, Thank you so much for your great reliability." Anna Gargiulo Stepto, New Global Translations, New York.

"Dear Daniel, Thank you! Great! You are the far best business relationships I have dealt with in translations. Prompt and
very easy to work with! Thank you again!" Barbro Andersson, Translations Director, ABLE International, Los Angeles,
California.

"Dear Daniel, Thanks for your prompt help and attention to detail." Charles LaRue, Multi-Cultural Educational Services,
Minnesota.

"Daniel, Thank you so much for the translated project. It looks great! If I may say so, your team followed instructions even
better than my team. You have impressed me once again. Thanks a bunch!" Maria Lopez, Quantum, Inc., Pennsylvania.

"Dear Daniel, thank you for the wonderful work you did this month. We get many expressions of gratitude and satisfaction
from our clients, and the congratulations belong to you." Toward, Inc. /Superior Translations, Minnesota.

"This is marvelous. Thank you so much for your continued support." Loretta Gallegos, State of Oregon.

"Thank you so much for taking on this translation emergency for our caseworker... We are very grateful for your immediate
response…" Lisa Worley-Schultz, City and County of Denver, Colorado.

"Thank you, thank you!" Maribel Vazquez, City and County of Denver, Colorado.

 "Hi Daniel, I very much appreciate your translator's attention to the details. Gives me great confidence in your services."
Jackie Phillips, King County Administration, Washington.

"Thank you so much for your great work." Betty Moreno, State of Oregon.

"I just wanted to point out a great translation job on the attached document. I revised it, and it looks really good. Please let
the translator know that I appreciate the professionalism and the fact that he/she added the hyperlinks to the Spanish
version. It was beautifully done, and it makes my job a lot easier by not spending my time revising it. Thank you so much."
Jennifer F., Tulsa Public Schools.

 Thank you for finishing this translation before the agreed deadline. I have revised it, and your team did a great job
translating it. Great job with the graphics!! We appreciate it!" Jennifer F., Tulsa Public Schools.

"Daniel, Thank you! I appreciate your attention to detail and getting everything right." Sarah Driggs, King County,
Washington State.


                                                                                                                             10
"Thank you for all your help. I know I can count on you when it comes to languages. I cannot find anywhere else." Ann
Redding, Interpreter Coordinator, State of Oregon Office of Administrative Hearings.

"I wanted to extend a big THANK YOU to you and your team for returning great translated documents. We really appreciate
the time and effort that you all put in, especially around the holiday season. It was such a relief to receive the translated
documents on time and without any hiccups." Lindsay Haggerty, The Governor's Officer of Storm Recovery (GOSR), State
of New York.

"My team and I are pleased with the work you have done with such professionalism and diligence. Thank you! We look
forward to utilizing your services in the future" Durieka C., Baltimore City Public Schools.

"Wow! Thanks so much for getting us these translations so quickly, Daniel! It is very much appreciated!!" Polly Young,
King County, WA.

"Thank you so much for the quick turnaround!" Tara L., Office of the Governor of the State of Washington.

"Thank you so much, and I appreciate your quick turnaround…. " Yvette L., Washington State Department of
Transportation.

"Thank you very much for the quick turnaround." Jennifer F., Tulsa Public Schools.

"You guys are amazing. Thank you so much". Claudia N., California Department of Education.

"Thank you for the quick turnaround." Alisa P., The State of Rhode Island.

"This is great. Thank you very much.", Matt M., King County, Washington.

"Thank you for sending us this document by the deadline. I have to say that it was an impressive translation! Great job!
Please let the translator know about my compliment, and please use him/her for our requests. Thank you for your hard
work!" Jennifer F., Tulsa Public Schools.

The appreciation we got after we completed a challenging task in a short time, "YOU ARE AWESOME!!!! Thank you so
much!!" Samantha H., Oregon Office of Administrative Hearings.

"Thanks again to you for all of your work on these daily press translations. We really appreciate it!" Rachel K., Ph.D.,
Senior Public Health Promotion Specialist, Center for Public Health Communication, Rhode Island Department of Health,
in appreciation for our translation services in multiple languages for the COVID-19 Virus Daily Press Releases by the
Governor of the State of Rhode Island.

"Thank you, Daniel, for completing this difficult task in such a short window." Alisha P, RI Dept. of Human Services.

"Wow, that was faster than expected! Thank you so much, Daniel!" Polly Y., King County, Washington State, Solid Waste
Division.

"Thank you for returning this translation earlier than expected!" Yulia S, University of Washington, Harborview Medical
Center.

"Awesome! Fantastic, and thank you for putting it in the original layout!!" Shelly W. University of Washington Medicine.

"Thank you so much for this translation – we greatly appreciate your expediency in fulfilling this request!" F.T, Lane
County Public Health.

"Thank you so very much for this; I really, really appreciate how quickly you were able to turn this around for us!" Maya
V, Johns Hopkins University, Bloomberg School of Public Health.
                                                                                                                           11
After we completed the translation and desktop publishing of complicated documents in multiple languages: “ Huge thank
you, Daniel!! Looks great, Evelyn P, MSW, District-Wide Community Outreach Liaison, Paterson Public Schools, NJ.

"Wow! You are like a miracle worker! Thank you so much, Daniel." Samantha H., I Operations & Policy Analyst 1, State of
Oregon Office of Administrative Hearings.

“This is AMAZING. Thank you SO MUCH!! Thank you, YOU ROCK!! “ Whitney. P., The Tatitlek Corporation.

“Thank you as always for providing us access to phenomenal interpretation services!”- Kerensa E., Baltimore City Public
Schools.
“This document is really important as it talks about the plans for the next few years in our school district. Thank you for
your hard work! You have been doing an outstanding job with our translation requests.” 12/7/2021. Jennifer, F., Tulsa
Public Schools. Feedback on our recent translation of the Tulsa Public Schools Strategic Plan.


    4.       Description of the firm’s ability to meet the requirements in Section 3.


We have read and understood Section 3, the scope of the work, and will implement the project accordingly.
We don't think it is necessary to repeat everything stated in section 3.

We can perform translation, transcription, or interpreting jobs onsite or remotely.

We can agree to additional terms and conditions as mandated by State, Federal, or County requirements per each
engagement, such as HIPPA or other State mandated regulations.


We understand that services will be coordinated with a Departmental representative ("County Requestor") for each
engagement Service. We will get scheduling by telephone or email correspondence, and we will confirm to the
County Requestor within 24 hours of request with all the project manager's contact information.
We will provide all labor, material, equipment and supplies necessary to provide interpreter services in-person,
telephonically, video conferencing, and written translation services.
We will invoice Departments directly on a monthly basis with detailed information per transaction that will
include date, time, location address, language services used, platform utilized (in-person, telephonic, video,
transcriber) and any other pertinent notes.
We understand that telephonic interpretation must utilize a land line phone to maintain integrity of the connection.
If mutually agreed upon, cellular devices may be utilized to perform the interpreter services either via video or
telephonic interpreter services.
We have the ability to provide high-quality Video Remote Interpreting and Video Relay Service ("VRI/VRS")
available from multiple platforms – utilizing current (PC/MAC/Android/iOS) technology for the provision of
onsite interpreting services and video remote "mobile" interpreting, delivering a wide array of options to meet the
varied communication needs of the Sheriff's Office, clients and Departments.
We will use certified or qualified interpreters.
We can provide the services at any time upon request.


Description of what distinguishes the firm from other firms performing a similar service.

         Summary of intentions and differentiating qualities:

         •     We believe that we have unique and differentiating qualities in that:
         •     Our experts have extensive experience of over 19 years in diverse health fields in the public and private sectors.


                                                                                                                               12
     •   We have been providing similar services to many public and private organizations in the State of Oregon since
         2005. So, we consider this contract as part of other public contracts we have with in the State of Oregon.
     •   Our quality control system is well established. It is strict and performed in many steps to ensure the highest
         quality translation and editing services.
     •   We will assign well-trained, certified/qualified, and experienced translators, editors, desktop publishers,
         interpreters, and other professionals.
     •   We have extensive experience and expertise in language services, and we are familiar with the cultures and
         languages we work with.
     •   We also provide services in rare languages, which many other companies cannot offer.
     •   We have extensive experience handling multiple urgent projects within the deadline while maintaining high
         quality.
     •   We respond to our clients' requests immediately through e-mail, phone, or fax, and we work on weekends,
         holidays, days, and nights to provide the best services and meet the deadline for our projects with our clients.
         For example, we have had 98 five-star reviews since 2/11/2015 (when we were registered with Yp.com) with a
         BBB Rating of A+ by all reviewers for our services by a few of our clients nationwide. Please, see the reviews
         online: http://www.yellowpages.com/nationwide/mip/languages-translation-services-20944161 , and
         https://advancedtranslationservices.com/testimonials/


                                                       5.    Section 6
                                                            Rate Schedule



 Name of Firm/Individual: Daniel Shamebo Sabore, DBA, Languages Translation Services.


 Certification(s): X Medical       X Legal          X General        X American Sign Language

 Days/Hours of availability: Sundays to Fridays, days, evenings, weekends, and holidays.

 Are you willing to accept long term assignments? Yes.

 Are you willing to perform third party billing? X Yes ☐ No



                                         Rates

                                         In
Language                                 person      Telephonic/hr. Video/hr. Transcription/hr. Translation/word.
American Sign Language                   $150.00    $150.00           $150.00    $350.00              N/A.
Acholi – Uganda, Sudan                  N/A.        $200.00           $200.00    $350.00              $0.30
Afrikaans – South Africa, Namibia       N/A.        $200.00           $200.00    $350.00              $0.20
Akan – Ghana, Ivory Coast               N/A.        $200.00           $200.00    $350.00              $0.35
Akateko – Guatemala                     N/A.        $200.00           $200.00    $350.00              $0.45
Albanian – Albania                      N/A.        $150.00           $150.00    $350.00              $0.16
Algerian Arabic – Algeria               N/A.        $150.00           $150.00    $350.00              $0.14
Amharic – Ethiopia                      $150.00     $150.00           $150.00    $350.00              $0.20
Arabic – Widely Distributed             $150.00     $150.00           $150.00    $350.00              $0.14
Armenian – Armenia                      N/A.        $150.00           $150.00    $350.00              $0.18
Ashanti (Asante Twi) – Ghana            N/A.        $200.00           $200.00    $350.00              $0.30

                                                                                                                       13
Assyrian – Iraq                       N/A.   $200.00   $200.00   $350.00   $0.50
Azerbaijani – Azerbaijan              N/A.   $150.00   $150.00   $350.00   $0.20
Azorean Portuguese – Azores Islands   N/A.   $200.00   $200.00   $350.00   $0.50
Bahnar – Vietnam                      N/A.   $200.00   $200.00   $350.00   $0.50
Bahasa Indonesia (Indonesian) –       N/A.   $150.00   $150.00   $350.00   $0.16
Indonesia
Bambara – Mali                        N/A.   $200.00   $200.00   $350.00   $0.30
Belarusan – Belarus                   N/A.   $150.00   $150.00   $350.00   $0.17
Bengali – Bangladesh, India           N/A.   $150.00   $150.00   $350.00   $0.17
Bosnian – Bosnia & Herzegovina        N/A.   $150.00   $150.00   $350.00   $0.16
Brazilian Portuguese – Brazil         N/A.   $150.00   $150.00   $350.00   $0.16
Bulgarian – Bulgaria                  N/A.   $150.00   $150.00   $350.00   $0.16
Burmese – Myanmar (former Burma)      N/A.   $250.00   $250.00   $350.00   $0.23
Cambodian (Khmer) – Cambodia          N/A.   $150.00   $150.00   $350.00   $0.23




                                                                                   14
Cantonese – China                   N/A.   $150.00   $150.00   $350.00   $0.18
Cape Verdean (Portuguese Creole) N/A.      $150.00   $150.00   $350.00   $0.22
–Cape Verde
Catalan – Andorra, Spain            N/A.   $150.00   $150.00   $350.00   $0.18
Cebuano – Philippines               N/A.   $150.00   $150.00   $350.00   $0.22
Chaldean – Iraq                     N/A.   $250.00   $250.00   $350.00   $0.50
Chamorro – Guam                     N/A.   $250.00   $250.00   $350.00   $0.60
Chaozhou (Teochew) – China          N/A.   $250.00   $250.00   $350.00   $0.55
Chin – Myanmar (former Burma)       N/A.   $250.00   $250.00   $350.00   $0.60
Chinese (var. languages/dialects) – N/A.   $150.00   $150.00   $350.00   $0.16
China
Chuukese (Trukese) – Micronesia     N/A.   $200.00   $200.00   $350.00   $0.26
Croatian – Croatia                  N/A.   $150.00   $150.00   $350.00   $0.18
Czech – Czech Republic              N/A.   $150.00   $150.00   $350.00   $0.18
Danish – Denmark                    N/A.   $150.00   $150.00   $350.00   $0.18
Dari (Afgan Farsi) – Afghanistan    N/A.   $150.00   $150.00   $350.00   $0.16
Dene – Canada                       N/A.   $250.00   $250.00   $350.00   $0.50
Dewoin – Liberia                    N/A.   $250.00   $250.00   $350.00   $0.50
Dinka – Sudan                       N/A.   $250.00   $250.00   $350.00   $0.45
Duala – Cameroon                    N/A.   $250.00   $250.00   $350.00   $0.40
Dutch – Netherlands                 N/A.   $150.00   $150.00   $350.00   $0.20
Egyptian Arabic – Egypt             N/A.   $150.00   $150.00   $350.00   $0.14
Estonian – Estonia                  N/A.   $150.00   $150.00   $350.00   $0.18
Filipino (Tagalog) – Philippines    N/A.   $150.00   $150.00   $350.00   $0.16
Finnish – Finland                   N/A.   $150.00   $150.00   $350.00   $0.45
Flemish – Belgium                   N/A.   $150.00   $150.00   $350.00   $0.20
French – Africa, Canada, France,    N/A.   $150.00   $150.00   $350.00   $0.18
Tunisia,et al.
French Creole – Caribbean           N/A.   $150.00   $150.00   $350.00   $0.20
Fukienese – China                   N/A.   $250.00   $250.00   $350.00   $0.20
Fulani (Fulfulde, Fula) – Cameroon, N/A.   $200.00   $200.00   $350.00   $0.26
Niger,
Nigeria, Senegal                    N/A.   $150.00   $150.00   $350.00
Fuzhou – China                      N/A.   $250.00   $250.00   $350.00   $0.45
Ga – Ghana                          N/A.   $150.00   $150.00   $350.00   $0.40
Gen (Mina) – Togo, Benin            N/A.   $250.00   $250.00   $350.00   $0.40
German – Germany                    N/A.   $150.00   $150.00   $350.00   $0.20
Gokana (Khana) – Nigeria            N/A.   $250.00   $250.00   $350.00   $0.30
Greek – Greece                      N/A.   $150.00   $150.00   $350.00   $0.20
Gujarati – India                    N/A.   $150.00   $150.00   $350.00   $0.16
Haitian Creole – Haiti              N/A.   $150.00   $150.00   $350.00   $0.20
Haka Burmese – Myanmar (former N/A.        $250.00   $250.00   $350.00   $0.40
Burma)
Hmong – China, Vietnam, Laos        N/A.   $250.00   $250.00   $350.00   $0.23
Hungarian – Hungary                 N/A.   $150.00   $150.00             $0.18


                                                                                 15
       Hakka – China                 N/A              $250.00   $350.00   $350.00   $0.35
Hausa – Niger, Nigeria                         N/A.   $150.00   $150.00   $350.00   $0.23
Ibo (Igbo) – Nigeria                           N/A.   $150.00   $150.00   $350.00   $0.23
Ilocano – Philippines                          N/A.   $150.00   $150.00   $350.00   $0.23
Hebrew – Israel                                N/A.   $150.00   $150.00   $350.00   $0.18
Hindi – India                                  N/A.   $150.00   $150.00   $350.00   $0.16
Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia) – Indonesia      N/A.   $150.00   $150.00   $350.00   $0.16
Iraqi Arabic – Iraq                            N/A.   $150.00   $150.00   $350.00   $0.16
Italian – Italy                                N/A.   $150.00   $150.00   $350.00   $0.16
Japanese – Japan                               N/A.   $150.00   $150.00   $350.00   $0.20
Jarai – Vietnam                                N/A.   $200.00   $200.00   $350.00   $0.50
Javanese – Indonesia                           N/A.   $200.00   $200.00   $350.00   $0.25
Jordanian Arabic – Jordan                      N/A.   $150.00   $150.00   $350.00   $0.16
Juba Arabic – Sudan                            N/A.   $150.00   $150.00   $350.00   $0.18
Kanjobal (Q’anjob’al) – Guatemala              N/A.   $200.00   $200.00   $350.00   $0.50
Kannada – India                                N/A.   $150.00   $150.00   $350.00   $0.17
Kapampangan – Philippines                      N/A.   $150.00   $150.00   $350.00   $0.23
Karen (Pa’o, S’gaw) – Myanmar (former Burma)   N/A.   $200.00   $200.00   $350.00   $0.25
Kayah – Myanmar (former Burma)                 N/A.   $200.00   $200.00   $350.00   $0.45
Khmer (Cambodian) – Cambodia                   N/A.   $150.00   $150.00   $350.00   $0.20
Kinyarwanda – Rwanda                           N/A.   $150.00   $150.00   $350.00   $0.20
Kirundi – Burundi                              N/A.   $150.00   $150.00   $350.00   $0.20
Koho – Vietnam                                 N/A.   $200.00   $200.00   $350.00   $0.50
Korean – Korea                                 N/A.   $150.00   $150.00   $350.00   $0.16
Kpele – Guinea, Liberia                        N/A.   $200.00   $200.00   $350.00   $0.50
Kurmanji (Northern Kurdish) – Turkey           N/A.   $200.00   $200.00   $350.00   $0.20
Kuawaiti Arabic – Kuwait                       N/A.   $150.00   $150.00   $350.00   $0.20
Lao – Laos                                     N/A.   $200.00   $200.00   $350.00   $0.23
Latvian – Latvia                               N/A.   $150.00   $150.00   $350.00   $0.18
Lebanese Arabic – Lebanon                      N/A.   $150.00   $150.00   $350.00   $0.16
Lingala – Congo, Republic of the               N/A.   $150.00   $150.00   $350.00   $0.23
Lithuanian – Lithuania                         N/A.   $150.00   $150.00   $350.00   $0.17
Luganda – Uganda                               N/A.   $150.00   $150.00   $350.00   $0.23
Luo – Kenya                                    N/A.   $150.00   $150.00   $350.00   $0.20
Maay (Af Maay, Rahanween, Bantu) –Somalia      N/A.   $150.00   $150.00   $350.00   $0.26
Macedonian – Macedonia                         N/A.   $150.00   $150.00   $350.00   $0.16
Malay – Malaysia                               N/A.   $150.00   $150.00   $350.00   $0.18
Malayalam – India                              N/A.   $150.00   $150.00   $350.00   $0.18
Malinke – Senegal                              N/A.   $150.00   $150.00   $350.00   $0.25
Mam – Guatemala                                N/A.   $200.00   $200.00   $350.00   $0.45




                                                                                            16
       Mandarin – China                  N/A       $150.00   $150.00   $350.00   $0.16
Mandinka (Mandingo) – Senegal            N/A.      $150.00   $150.00   $350.00   $0.25
Marathi – India                          N/A.      $150.00   $150.00   $350.00   $0.16
Marshallese – Marshall Islands           N/A.      $200.00   $200.00   $350.00   $0.30
Mayan [Akateko, Kanjobal] –              N/A.      $200.00   $200.00   $350.00   $0.40
Guatemala, Mexico
Mien – China, Laos, Thailand             N/A.      $200.00   $200.00   $350.00   $0.60
Mina (Gen) – Togo, Benin                 N/A.      $200.00   $200.00   $350.00   $0.50
Minangkabau – Indonesia                  N/A.      $200.00   $200.00   $350.00   $0.50
Mixteco Alto – Mexico                    N/A.      $200.00   $200.00   $350.00   $0.45
Mixteco Bajo – Mexico                    N/A.      $200.00   $200.00   $350.00   $0.45
Mnong – Vietnam                          N/A.      $200.00   $200.00   $350.00   $0.50
Mongolian – Mongolia                     N/A.      $200.00   $200.00   $350.00   $0.25
Moroccan Arabic – Morocco                N/A.      $150.00   $150.00   $350.00   $0.18
Nahuatl – Mexico                         N/A.      $200.00   $200.00   $350.00   $0.50
Navajo – U.S.A.(Southwest)               N/A.      $200.00   $200.00   $350.00   $0.50
Nepalese – Nepal, India                  N/A.      $150.00   $150.00   $350.00   $0.16
Nuer – Sudan                             N/A.      $150.00   $150.00   $350.00   $0.50
Oromo – Ethiopia                         N/A.      $150.00   $150.00   $350.00   $0.27
Palestinian Arabic – Israel, Jordan      N/A.      $150.00   $150.00   $350.00   $0.14
Pangasinan – Philippines                 N/A.      $200.00   $200.00   $350.00   $0.23
Papiamento – Netherlands Antilles        N/A.      $200.00   $200.00   $350.00   $0.45
Pashto (Pushto) – Pakistan,              N/A.      $150.00   $150.00   $350.00   $0.16
Afghanistan
Portuguese Creole (Cape Verdean) –       N/A.      $150.00   $150.00   $350.00   $0.23
Cape Verde
Persian (Farsi) – Afghanistan, Iran,     N/A.      $150.00   $150.00   $350.00   $0.16
Iraq, Pakistan
Russian – Russia                         N/A.      $150.00   $150.00   $350.00   $0.14
Samoan – Samoa                           N/A.      $200.00   $200.00   $350.00   $0.40
Polish – Poland                          N/A.      $150.00   $150.00   $350.00   $0.16
Portuguese – Portugal, Brazil, et al.    N/A.      $150.00   $150.00   $350.00   $0.16
San Miguel – Mexico                      N/A.      $200.00   $200.00   $350.00   $0.50
Santa Eulalia – Guatemala                N/A.      $200.00   $200.00   $350.00   $0.50
Saraiki – Pakistan, India                N/A.      $200.00   $200.00   $350.00   $0.50
Serbian – Serbia, Montenegro             N/A.      $150.00   $150.00   $350.00   $0.16
Serbo-Croatian – Balkans                 N/A.      $150.00   $150.00   $350.00   $0.16
Shanghainese – China                     N/A.      $200.00   $200.00   $350.00   $0.25
Sichuan (Szechuan) – China               N/A.      $200.00   $200.00   $350.00   $0.40
Sinhalese – Sri Lanka                    N/A.      $150.00   $150.00   $350.00   $0.16
Slovak – Slovakia                        N/A.      $150.00   $150.00   $350.00   $0.16
Somali – Somalia                         N/A.      $150.00   $150.00   $350.00   $0.20
Soninke (Serahule) – Mali                N/A.      $200.00   $200.00   $350.00   $0.35
Sorani (Central Kurdish) – Iraq          N/A.      $200.00   $200.00   $350.00   $0.25
Spanish – Spain, Latin America, et al.   $150.00   $50.00    $50.00    $350.00   $0.12
Sudanese Arabic – Sudan                  N/A.      $150.00   $150.00   $350.00   $0.18
Susu – Guinea                            N/A.      $200.00   $200.00   $350.00   $0.40
Swahili – Kenya, Somalia, Tanzania,      N/A.      $150.00   $150.00   $350.00   $0.16

                                                                                         17
              Swedish – Sweden                           N/A.       $200.00       $200.00       $350.00      $0.20
              Syrian Arabic – Syria                      N/A.       $150.00       $150.00       $350.00      $0.16
              Tagalog (Filippino) – Philippines          N/A.       $150.00       $150.00       $350.00      $0.16
              Tai Dam – Vietnam                          N/A.       $200.00       $200.00       $350.00      $0.40
              Taiwanese – Taiwan                         N/A.       $150.00       $150.00       $350.00      $0.20
              Tamil – India                              N/A.       $150.00       $150.00       $350.00      $0.16
              Telugu – India                             N/A.       $150.00       $150.00       $350.00      $0.16
              Teochew (Chaozhou) – China                 N/A.       $200.00       $200.00       $350.00      $0.45
              Thai – Thailand                            N/A.       $150.00       $150.00       $350.00      $0.16
              Tibetan – China                            N/A.       $150.00       $150.00       $350.00      $0.40
              Tigrigna (Tigrinya) – Ethiopia,            N/A.       $150.00       $150.00       $350.00      $0.20
              Eritrea                                    N/A.       $150.00       $150.00       $350.00      $0.23
              Toishanese – China                         N/A.       $200.00       $200.00       $350.00      $0.45
              Tongan – Tonga                             N/A.       $200.00       $200.00       $350.00      $0.40
              Trukese (Chuukese) – Micronesia            N/A.       $200.00       $200.00       $350.00      $0.50
              Tunisian Arabic – Tunisia                  N/A.       $150.00       $150.00       $350.00      $0.16
              Turkish – Turkey                           N/A.       $150.00       $150.00       $350.00      $0.16
              Twi – Ghana                                N/A.       $200.00       $200.00       $350.00      $0.35
              Tzotzil – Mexico                           N/A.       $200.00       $200.00       $350.00      $0.50
              Ukrainian – Ukraine                        N/A.       $150.00       $150.00       $350.00      $0.14
              Urdu – Pakistan, India                     N/A.       $150.00       $150.00       $350.00      $0.14
              Vietnamese – Vietnam                       N/A.       $150.00       $150.00       $350.00      $0.14
              Wolof – Senegal                            N/A.       $150.00       $150.00       $350.00      $0.25
              Xhosa – South Africa                       N/A.       $150.00       $150.00       $350.00      $0.25
              Yemeni Arabic – Yemen                      N/A.       $150.00       $150.00       $350.00      $0.16


Minimum fee for translation: Spanish, $45.00. Other common languages: $65.00.
Rare languages: $75-150.00
Minimum fee for transcription: 1 hour.
Minimum fee for OPI and VRI: 1 hour.


    6.   A detailed project approach to execute these services:

For translation and transcription: We use professional translators, transcriptionists, and independent proofreaders to assure
the quality of the output. We have many steps of quality control.
For interpreting, we use certified and qualified interpreters, and provide the necessary follow-up and training to ensure
quality.
A timeline for our services: We can provide the service any time by the deadline that is required by the client.


    7.   References

Project Reference #1

Name of the Organization: Rhode Island Department of Health
Address: 3 CAPITOL HILL, ROOM 402, Providence, RI 02908-5034
Project Location: Remote.
                                                                                                                            18
Project Date: In 2011, LTS was awarded a contract by the Rhode Island Department of Administrative Services for providing
foreign language translation and interpreting services on a statewide basis for all agencies of the State of Rhode Island. Hence,
we actively offered our services to different departments, such as the Department of Health, the Department of Human
Services, and the University of Rhode Island, until March 11, 2021. We re-submitted our bid proposal, and we got an approval
notice on 3/25/2021 to restart the contract.
We primarily worked for them nonstop during days, evenings, and holidays in providing the translation, review, and
desktop publishing of the Rhode Island Governor’s daily and weekly press releases, other public health notices, and other
non-COVID-19 related documents from the time of the breakout of the COVID-19 pandemic in March 2020 up to March
2021, in more than 15 languages such as Spanish, Portuguese, Cape Verdean Creole, French, Hmong, Arabic, Chinese,
Khmer, Lao, Haitian Creole, Kinyarwanda, and Swahili.
The total value of the completed projects up to December 2022 for different departments of the State is about $180,000.00.
Currently, the contract is ongoing.

Name of Contact Person: Adderlin Bailey, MPH, Communications Specialist, Partner Communications, Equity, and
Translation Lead, Center for Public Health Communication, Division of Policy, Information & Communications.
Telephone Number for Contact Person: (401) 345-8707
Email Address for Contact Person: Bailey, Adderlin (RIDOH) <adderlin.bailey@health.ri.gov>


Project Reference #2

Name of the Organization: Center for Public Health and Human Rights Department of Epidemiology. Johns Hopkins
University.
Address: 615 N Wolfe ST/E7141, Baltimore, MD 21205.
Project Location: Remote.
Project Date: The contract for translation services in multiple languages has been ongoing since 2010.
Name of Contact Person: Andrea L. Wirtz, Ph. D. Assistant Scientist.
Telephone Number for Contact Person: 410-502-0800
Email Address for Contact Person: awirtz1@jhu.edu

The total value of the completed projects for all Departments: $24,000.00

Please see the reference letter below, which the client wrote for us regarding our contract.


Project Reference #3

Name of the Organization: State of Oregon Employment Department
Address: 875 Union St NE, Salem, OR 97311
Project Location: Remote
Project Date: The contracts for translation and interpreting with the State of Oregon have been ongoing in multiple languages
since 2005.
Name of Contact Person: Eric Villegas, Universal Access Coordinator
Telephone Number for Contact Person: 503-947-1794. Fax: 503-947-1472
Email Address for Contact Person: Eric.L.VILLEGAS@oregon.gov

Topic/Title: We have provided translation, and translation review /editing, proofreading, formatting, and desktop publishing
for the Oregon State Department of Administrative Services, under contract # PS – NON- IT2177-55
We also provide them with onsite and remote interpreting services.
We have translated and revised several documents for State agencies such as the State Department of Human Services, Child
Care, and the Employment Department. Most of them are documents on education, legal, public health, and other social
issues. We also provide interpretation services for them.

Date of Service:
The initial term of the Contract was from November 19, 2005, to November 19, 2006.
Amendment No. 2 to the Contract extended the term to November 19, 2007.

                                                                                                                             19
Amendment No. 3 to the Contract extended the term to November 19, 2008.
Amendment No. 6 to the Contract extended the term to November 19, 2009.
Amendment No. 7 to the Contract extended the term to November 19, 2012.
The constant extension of the contract is due to excellent performance in the previous years.
The contract is currently ongoing.

Our contract with them was for translation services to provide translated and reviewed, and ready-for-use final versions. To
ensure the quality of the translated documents, we also reviewed translated documents using independent translation
reviewers. So, in all the contracts we have for translation services, our task was also to include a translation review.

We translated into several languages, including Tigrigna, Chuukese, Farsi, Burmese, Traditional Chinese, Simplified Chinese,
Nepalese, Spanish, Vietnamese, Russian, Amharic, Somali, Farsi, Pashto, Nepali, Korean, Arabic, Oromo, Japanese,
Romanian, Urdu, Ewe, etc.

Contract Terms: It has been an ongoing contract since November 2005 and is renewed annually.

The total value of the Contract: Indefinite
The value of the completed contract so far for OED and other Departments is $221,103.90.


Project Reference # 4.
Name of the Organization: Baltimore City Public Schools System.
Address: 6820 Fait Ave, Baltimore, MD 21224
Project Location: Remote and onsite.
Project Date: From 2019 to the present.
Name of Contact Person: Kerensa M. Estes, IEP Chair, John Ruhrah Elementary/Middle School #228
Telephone Number for Contact Person: 443.836.7654 (direct line - no voicemail)
443.255.7900 (work cell – texts and voicemail). 410.396.9125 (main office). 410.633.1726 (fax)
Email Address for Contact Person: kestes@bcps.k12.md.us
Title: We have provided them with translation, onsite, and remote video interpreting services in multiple languages.
The total value of the Contract Value: Indefinite
The value of the completed contract so far is about $449,000.00.




                                                                                                                         20
