  ~             WATER
                ENVIRONMENT
                SERVICES
                                                                                       Gregory L. Geist
                                                                                               Director




 March 24, 2022

 Board of County Commissioners
 Clackamas County

 Members   of the Board:


                             Approval of a Contract with Murraysmith, Inc.
  For the Contract # 5222-RFP 2019-55, for the Intertie 2 Pump Station Expansion and Force
    Main Project. The Purpose of the project is to expand pumping capacity to accommodate
     future peak flows. The Contract is for $1,100,708.00 through WES Capital Improvement
                  Funds. No County General Funds are involved. - Procurement


Purpose/Outcomes           Approval of a Contract with Murraysmith, Inc. for the Contract # 5222-
                           RFP 2019-55, for the Intertie 2 Pump Station Expansion and Force Main
                           Project. The Purpose of the project is to expand pumping capacity to
                           accommodate future peak flows. The Contract is for $1,100,708.00
                           through WES Capital Improvement Funds. No County General Funds
                           are involved. - Procurement
Dollar Amount      and     Maximum         contract value is $1,100,708.00 through June 30, 2024.
Fiscal Impact
Funding Source             WES        Capital Improvement Funds - No County General Funds are involved.

Duration                   This contract shall be in effect through November 30, 2026.
Previous   Board           Presented at Issues on March 22, 2022.
Action

Strategic Plan                   1.    This project supports the WES Strategic Plan to provide Enterprise
Alignment                              Resiliency, Infrastructure Strategy and Performance and Operational
                                       Optimization by expanding the pumping capacity of the Intertie 2 Pump
                                       Station to accommodate future flows.
                              2.       This project supports the County Strategic Plan of building a strong
                                       infrastructure that delivers services to customers.
Counsel    Review          Date of Counsel Review: 03/07/2022
                           Name of County Counsel performing review: Amanda               Keller
Procurement                Was this item reviewed by Procurement? Yes X] No L_]
Review                     RFP 2019-55
Contact Person             Jeff Stallard, Civil Engineering Supervisor, 503-926-4162
Agreement No.              5222
BACKGROUND:
The Intertie 2 Pump Station (IT2 PS) Diverts flow in excess of the 25 MGD wet weather capacity of the
Kellogg Creek Water Resources Recovery Facility (WRRF) to the Tri-City WRRF. The IT2 PS is
operating at capacity as is the force main from the pump station to the Tri-City WRRF. The pump
station was constructed so that pumps could be added. A portion of the required new 30-inch diameter
force main was partially constructed with the existing force main.
This project would expand the pumping capacity of the IT2 PS to accommodate future peak flows and
construct the remaining section of the 30-inch diameter force main to convey increased flow to the Tri-
City WRRF. WES anticipates it will also be necessary to modify the physical layout and functionality of
an existing diversion box upstream of IT2 PS to improve control and operability of the system address
condition issues in the pump station wet well and update pump station controls. Total project cost is
anticipated to be $10.3 million. This agreement with Murraysmith will provide bid documents for the
force main and conceptual design of the pump station improvements. Final design of the pump station
improvements will be addressed in an amendment to this agreement.


PROCUREMENT          PROCESS:
This project was advertised in accordance with ORS and LCRB Rules on February 18, 2021, Through
RFP 2021-15. Proposals were publicly opened on March 18, 2021. The County received three (3)
Proposals in response to the RFP. After review of the Proposals, contracting with Murraysmith, Inc.
was determined to be in the best interest of the county based upon the scoring criteria outlined in RFP
2021-15.


RECOMMENDATION:
Staff recommends the Board approve the Contract with Murraysmith, Inc. for the Contract #
5222- RFP 2019-55, for the Intertie 2 Pump Station Expansion and Force Main Project. The
Purpose of the project is to expand pumping capacity to accommodate future peak flows.




   ae
Respectfully submitted,




Greg Geist
Director, Water Environment Services


Attachments:   Contract #5222

PROCUREMENT
        2% ere                    WATER      ENVIRONMENT             SERVICES
                ENVIRONMENT        PERSONAL       SERVICES CONTRACT
                SERVICES                        Contract #5222

This Personal Services Contract (this “Contract” is entered into between Murraysmith, Inc.
(“Contractor”), and Water Environment Services, a political subdivision of the State of Oregon
(“District”).

ARTICLE L.
1. Effective Date and Duration. This Contract shall become effective upon signature of both parties.
   Unless earlier terminated or extended, this Contract shall expire on June 30, 2024.

      Scope of Work. Contractor shall provide the following personal services: Intertie 2Pump Station
      Expansion and Force Main Project (“Work”), as described in Contractors Response to RFP 2021-15,
      the negotiated scope of which is set forth, in Exhibit A attached and incorporated by reference herein.

      Consideration. The District agrees to pay Contractor, from available and authorized funds, a sum not
      to exceed One Million One Hundred Thousand Seven Hundred Eight Dollars ($1,100,708.00),
      for accomplishing the Work required by this Contract. Consideration rates are on a time and
      materials basis in accordance with the rates and costs specified in Exhibit B. If any interim payments
      to Contractor are made, such payments shall be made only in accordance with the schedule and
      requirements in Exhibit A.

      Invoices and Payments. Unless otherwise specified, Contractor shall submit monthly invoices for
      Work performed. Invoices shall describe all Work performed with particularity, by whom it was
      performed, and shall itemize and explain all expenses for which reimbursement is claimed. The
      invoices shall include the total amount billed to date by Contractor prior to the current invoice. If
      Contractor fails to present invoices in proper form within sixty (60) calendar days after the end of the
      month in which the services were rendered, Contractor waives any rights to present such invoice
      thereafter and to receive payment therefor. Payments shall be made in accordance with ORS 293.462
      to Contractor following the District’s review and approval of invoices submitted by Contractor.
      Contractor shall not submit invoices for, and the District will not be obligated to pay, any amount in
      excess of the maximum compensation amount set forth above. If this maximum compensation
      amount is increased by amendment of this Contract, the amendment must be fully effective before
      Contractor performs Work subject to the amendment.

      Invoices shall reference the above Contract Number and be submitted to: JStallard(@clackamas.us

      Travel and Other Expense. Authorized: X] Yes              [_] No
      If travel expense reimbursement is authorized in this Contract, such expense shall only be reimbursed
      at the rates in the Clackamas County Contractor Travel Reimbursement Policy, hereby incorporated
      by reference and found at: https://www.clackamas.us/finance/terms.html. Travel expense
      reimbursement shall not be in excess of the not to exceed consideration amount identified in Section 3
      above.

      Contract Documents. This Contract consists of the following documents, which are listed in
      descending order of precedence and are attached and incorporated by reference, this Contract, Exhibit
      A, and Exhibit B.




Rev   01/2022                                        Page   i
7.      Contractor and District Contacts.
                         Contractor                                                District
     Administrator: Michael Carr                             Administrator: Jeff Stallard
     Phone: 503-225-9010                                     Phone: 503-742-4694
     Email: michael@murraysmith.us                           Email: JStallard@clackamas.us




Payment information will be reported to the Internal Revenue Service (“IRS”) under the name and
taxpayer ID number submitted. (See I.R.S. 1099 for additional instructions regarding taxpayer ID
numbers.) Information not matching IRS records will subject Contractor payments to backup
withholding.

ARTICLE IL.
1.     ACCESS TO RECORDS. Contractor shall maintain books, records, documents, and other evidence,
       in accordance with generally accepted accounting procedures and practices, sufficient to reflect
       properly all costs of whatever nature claimed to have been incurred and anticipated to be incurred in
       the performance of this Contract. District and their duly authorized representatives shall have access
       to the books, documents, papers, and records of Contractor, which are directly pertinent to this
       Contract for the purpose of making audit, examination, excerpts, and transcripts. Contractor shall
       maintain such books and records for a minimum of six (6) years, or such longer period as may be
       required by applicable law, following final payment and termination of this Contract, or until the
       conclusion of any audit, controversy or litigation arising out of or related to this Contract, whichever
       date is later.

       AVAILABILITY OF FUTURE FUNDS. Any continuation or extension of this Contract after the
       end of the fiscal period in which it is written is contingent on a new appropriation for each succeeding
       fiscal period sufficient to continue to make payments under this Contract, as determined by the
       District in its sole administrative discretion.

       CAPTIONS. The captions or headings in this Contract are for convenience only and in no way
       define, limit, or describe the scope or intent of any provisions of this Contract.

       COMPLIANCE WITH APPLICABLE LAW. Contractor shall comply with all applicable federal,
       state and local laws, regulations, executive orders, and ordinances, as such may be amended from time
       to time.

       COUNTERPARTS. This Contract may be executed in several counterparts (electronic or otherwise),
       each of which shall be an original, all of which shall constitute the same instrument.

       GOVERNING LAW. This Contract, and all rights, obligations, and disputes arising out of it, shall
       be governed and construed in accordance with the laws of the State of Oregon and the ordinances of
       Clackamas County without regard to principles of conflicts of law. Any claim, action, or suit
       between District and Contractor that arises out of or relates to the performance of this Contract shall
       be brought and conducted solely and exclusively within the Circuit Court for Clackamas County, for
       the State of Oregon. Provided, however, that if any such claim, action, or suit may be brought in a
       federal forum, it shall be brought and conducted solely and exclusively within the United States
       District Court for the District of Oregon. In no event shall this section be construed as a waiver by the
       District of any form of defense or immunity, whether sovereign immunity, governmental immunity,
       immunity based on the Eleventh Amendment to the Constitution of the United States or otherwise,



Rev    01/2022                                        Page   2
      from any claim or from the jurisdiction of any court. Contractor, by execution of this Contract, hereby
      consents to the personal jurisdiction of the courts referenced in this section.

7.    INDEMNITY, RESPONSIBILITY FOR DAMAGES. Contractor shall be responsible for all
      damage to property, injury to persons, and loss, expense, inconvenience, and delay which may be
      caused by, or result from, any negligent act, omission, or neglect of Contractor, its subcontractors,
      agents, or employees. The Contractor agrees to indemnify and defend the District and Clackamas
      County, and their officers, elected officials, agents and employees from and against all claims,
      actions, losses, liabilities, including reasonable attorney and accounting fees, and all expenses
      incidental to the investigation and defense thereof, arising out of or based upon Contractor’s negligent
      acts or omissions in performing under this Contract.

      However, neither Contractor nor any attorney engaged by Contractor shall defend the claim in the
      name of District or Clackamas County (“County”), purport to act as legal representative of District or
      County, or settle any claim on behalf of District or County, without the approval of the Clackamas
      County Counsel’s Office. District or County may assume their own defense and settlement at their
      election and expense.

8.    INDEPENDENT CONTRACTOR STATUS. The service(s) to be rendered under this Contract are
      those of an independent contractor. Although the District reserves the right to determine (and
      modify) the delivery schedule for the Work to be performed and to evaluate the quality of the
      completed performance, District cannot and will not control the means or manner of Contractor’s
      performance. Contractor is responsible for determining the appropriate means and manner of
      performing the Work. Contractor is not to be considered an agent or employee of District for any
      purpose, including, but not limited to: (A) The Contractor will be solely responsible for payment of
      any Federal or State taxes required as a result of this Contract; and (B) This Contract is not intended
      to entitle the Contractor to any benefits generally granted to District employees, including, but not
      limited to, vacation, holiday and sick leave, other leaves with pay, tenure, medical and dental
      coverage, life and disability insurance, overtime, Social Security, Workers' Compensation,
      unemployment compensation, or retirement benefits.

9.    INSURANCE. Contractor shall secure at its own expense and keep in effect during the term of the
      performance under this Contract the insurance required and minimum coverage indicated below. The
      insurance requirements outlined below do not in any anyway limit the amount of scope of liability of
      Contractor under this Contract. Contractor shall provide proof of said insurance and name the District
      and Clackamas County as an additional insureds on all required liability policies. Proof of insurance
      and notice of any material change should be submitted to the following address: Clackamas County
      Procurement Division, 2051 Kaen Road, Oregon City, OR 97045 or procurement@clackamas.us.

                Required - Workers Compensation: Contractor shall comply with the statutory workers’
                compensation requirements in ORS 656.017, unless exempt under ORS 656.027 or 656.126.
                DX] Required — Commercial General Liability: combined single limit, or the equivalent, of not
                less than $1,000,000 per claim, with an annual aggregate limit of $2,000,000 for Bodily Injury
                and Property Damage.
                [XX] Required — Professional Liability: combined single limit, or the equivalent, of not less than
                $1,000,000 per occurrence, with an annual aggregate limit of $2,000,000 for damages caused
                by error, omission or negligent acts.
                XX] Required — Automobile Liability: combined single limit, or the equivalent, of not less than
                $1,000,000 per accident for Bodily Injury and Property Damage.

            The policy(s) shall be primary insurance as respects to the District. Any insurance or self-
            insurance maintained by the District shall be excess and shall not contribute to it. Any obligation
            that District agree to a waiver of subrogation is hereby stricken.
Rev   01/2022                                             Page   3
10. LIMITATION OF LIABILITIES. This Contract is expressly subject to the debt limitation of
    Oregon counties set forth in Article XI, Section 10, of the Oregon Constitution, and is contingent
    upon funds being appropriated therefore. Any provisions herein which would conflict with law are
    deemed inoperative to that extent. Except for liability arising under or related to Article II, Section 13
    or Section 20 neither party shall be liable for (1) any indirect, incidental, consequential or special
    damages under this Contract or (11) any damages of any sort arising solely from the termination of this
    Contact in accordance with its terms.

11. NOTICES. Except as otherwise provided in this Contract, any required notices between the parties
    shall be given in writing by personal delivery, email, or mailing the same, to the Contract
    Administrators identified in Article 1, Section 6. If notice is sent to District, a copy shall also be sent
    to: Clackamas County Procurement, 2051 Kaen Road, Oregon City, OR 97045, or
    procurement@clackamas.us. Any communication or notice so addressed and mailed shall be deemed
    to be given five (5) days after mailing, and immediately upon personal delivery, or within 2 hours
    after the email is sent during District’s normal business hours (Monday — Thursday, 7:00 a.m. to 6:00
    p.m.) (as recorded on the device from which the sender sent the email), unless the sender receives an
    automated message or other indication that the email has not been delivered.

12. OWNERSHIP OF WORK PRODUCT. All work product of Contractor that results from this
    Contract (the “Work Product’) is the exclusive property of District. District and Contractor intend
    that such Work Product be deemed “work made for hire” of which District shall be deemed the
    author. If for any reason the Work Product is not deemed “work made for hire,” Contractor hereby
    irrevocably assigns to District all of its nght, title, and interest in and to any and all of the Work
    Product, whether arising from copyright, patent, trademark or trade secret, or any other state or
    federal intellectual property law or doctrine. Contractor shall execute such further documents and
    instruments as District may reasonably request in order to fully vest such rights in District.
    Contractor forever waives any and all rights relating to the Work Product, including without
    limitation, any and all rights arising under 17 USC § 106A or any other rights of identification of
    authorship or rights of approval, restriction or limitation on use or subsequent modifications.
    Notwithstanding the above, District shall have no rights in any pre-existing Contractor intellectual
    property provided to District by Contractor in the performance of this Contract except to copy, use
    and re-use any such Contractor intellectual property for District use only. Any reuse of the Work
    Product outside the scope of this Contract or any alteration of 1t whatsoever without Contractor’s
    review and approval shall be at the District’s sole risk.

13. REPRESENTATIONS AND WARRANTIES. Contractor represents and warrants to District that
    (A) Contractor has the power and authority to enter into and perform this Contract; (B) this Contract,
    when executed and delivered, shall be a valid and binding obligation of Contractor enforceable in
    accordance with its terms; (C) Contractor shall at all times during the term of this Contract, be
    qualified, professionally competent, and duly licensed to perform the Work; (D) Contractor is an
    independent contractor as defined in ORS 670.600; and (E) the Work under this Contract shall be
    performed in the same professional skill, care, diligence and standards as other professionals
    performing similar services under similar conditions. The warranties set forth in this section are in
    addition to, and not in lieu of, any other warranties provided. The Contractor shall be responsible for
    the technical accuracy of its services and documents resulting therefrom, and District shall not be
    responsible for discovering deficiencies therein. The Contractor shall correct such deficiencies
    without additional compensation except to the extent such action is directly attributable to
    deficiencies in information furnished by the District.

14. SURVIVAL. All rights and obligations shall cease upon termination or expiration of this Contract,
    except for the rights and obligations set forth in Article II, Sections 1, 6, 7, 10, 12, 13, 14, 15, 17, 20,
    21, 25, 27, and 29, and all other rights and obligations which by their context are intended to survive.

Rev   01/2022                                        Page   4
     However, such expiration shall not extinguish or prefudice the District’s right to enforce this Contract
     with respect to: (a) any breach of a Contractor warranty; or (b) any default or defect in Contractor
     performance that has not been cured.

15. SEVERABILITY. if any term or provision of this Contract is declared by a court of competent
    jurisdiction to be illegal or in conflict with any law, the validity of the remaiming terms and provisions
    shall not be affected, and the rights and obligations of the parties shall be construed and enforced as if
    the Contract did not contain the particular term or provision held to be invalid.

16. SUBCONTRACTS AND ASSIGNMENTS, Contractor shall not enter into any subcontracts for any
    ofthe Work required by this Contract, or assign or transfer any of tts interest in this Contract by
    operation of law or otherwise, without obtaining prior written approval from the District, which shall
    be granted or denied in the District’s sole discretion. In addition to any provisions the District may
    require, Contractor shall include in any permitted subcontract under this Contract a requirement that
    the subcontractor be bound by this Article I, Sections 1,7, 8, 13, 16, and 27 as if the subcontractor
    were the Contractor. District's consent to any subcontract shall not relieve Contractor of ary of its
    duties or obligations under this Contract.

17, SUCCESSORS IN INTEREST. The provisions of this Contract shall be binding upon and shall
    inure to the benefit of the parties hereto, and their respective authorized successors and assigns.

18. TAX COMPLEANCE CERTIFICATION. The Contractor shall comply with ail federal, state and
    local laws, regulation, executive orders and ordinances applicable to this Contract. Contractor
    represents and warrants that it has complied, and will continue to comply throughout the duration of
    this Contract and any extensions, with ail tax laws of this state or any political subdivision of this
    State, including but not limited to ORS 305.620 and ORS chapters 316, 317, and 318. Any violation
    of this section shall constitute a material breach of this Contract and shall entitle District to terminate
    this Contract, to pursue and recover any and all damages that arise from the breach and the
    termination of this Contract, and to pursue amy or all of the remedies available under this Contract or
    applicable law.

19. TERMINATION, This Contract may be terminated for the following reasons: (A) by mutual
    agreement of the parties or by the District G) for convenience upon thirty (30) days written notice to
    Contractor or (1) at any time the District fails to receive funding, appropriations, or other expenditure
    authority as solely determined by the District; or (3) 1f contractor breaches any Contract provision or
    is declared insolvent, District may termimate after thirty (30) days written notice with an opportunity
     to cure.

     Upon receipt of written notice of termination from the District, Contractor shall immediately step
     performance of the Work. Upon termination of this Contract, Contractor shall deliver to District all
     documents, Work Product, information, works-in-progress and other property that are or would be
     deliverables had the Contract Work been completed. Upon District's request, Contractor shall
     surrender to anyone District designates, all documents, research, objects or other tangible things
     needed to complete the Work.

a0, REMEDIES. If terminated by the District due to a breach by the Contractor, then the District shall
    have any remedy available to it in law or equity. If this Contract is terminated for any other reason,
    Contractor’s sole remedy is payment for the goods and services delivered and accepted by the
    District, less any setoff to which the District is entitled.

ai. NO THIRD PARTY BENEFICTARDES, District and Contractor are the only parties to this Contract
    and are the only parties entitled to enforce its terms. Nothing in this Contract gives, is intended to
    give, or shall be construed to give or provide any benefit or right, whether directly, indirectly or

Rey 01/2022                                          Page 5
     otherwise, to third persons unless such third persons are individually identified by name herein and
     expressly described as intended beneficiaries of the terms of this Contract.

ade TEME iS OF THE ESSENCE. Contractor agrees that time ts of the essence in the performance this
    Contract.

ade FOREIGN CONTRACTOR. If the Contractor is not domiciled in or registered to do business in the
    State of Oregon, Contractor shall promptly provide to the Oregon Department of Revenue and the
    Secretary of State, Corporate Division, all information required by those agencies relative to this
    Contract. The Contractor shall demonstrate its legal capacity to perform these services in the State of
    Oregon prior to enterimg into this Contract.

24, FORCE MAJEURE. Neither District nor Contractor shall be held responsible for delay or default
    caused by events outside the District or Contractor’s reasonable control including, but not limited to,
    fire, terrorism, riot, acts of God, or war. However, Contractor shall make all reasonable eftorts to
    remove or eliminate such a cause of delay or default and shall upon the cessation of the cause,
    diligently pursue performance of its obligations under this Contract.

25. WAIVER. The failure of District to enforce any provision of this Contract shall not constitute a4
    waiver by District of that or any other provision.

26, PUBLIC CONTRACTEING REQUIREMENTS. Pursuant to the public contracting requirements
    contained in Oregon Revised Statutes (°ORS”) Chapter 279B 220 through 279B.235, Contractor
    shall:
             a. Make payments promptly, as due, to all persons supplying to Contractor labor or
                 materials for the prosecution of the work provided for m the Contract.
            b. Pay all contributions or amounts due the Industrial Accident Fund from such Contractor
                 or subcontractor incurred in the performance of the Contract.
             c. Not permit any len or claim to be filed or prosecuted against District on account of any
                 labor or material furnished.
             d. Pay the Department of Revenue all sums withheld from employees pursuant to ORS
                 316.167,
            ce. As applicable, the Contractor shall pay employees for work in accordance with ORS
                2798 235, which is incorporated herein by this reference. The Contractor shall comply
                with the prohibitions set forth in ORS 652.220, comphance of which is a material
                 element of this Contract, and failure to comply ts a breach entitling District to terminate
                this Contract for cause.
            f£ ifthe Work involves lawn and landscape maintenance, Contractor shall salvage, recycle,
                 compost, or muich yard waste matertal at an approved stte, if feasible and cost effective.

a7. NO ATTORNEY FEES. In the event any arbitration, action or proceeding, including any
    bankrupicy proceeding, is mstituted to enforce any term of this Contract, each party shall be
    responsible for its own attorneys’ fees and expenses.


28. KEY PERSONS, Contractor acknowledges and agrees that a significant reason the District is
    entering into this Contract is because of the special qualifications of certain Key Persons set forth im
    the contract. Under this Contract, the District is engaging the expertise, experience, judgrnent, and
    personal attention of such Key Persons. Neither Contractor nor any of the Key Persons shall delegate
    performance of the management powers and responsibilities each such Key Person is required to
    provide under this Contract to any other employee or agent of the Contractor unless the District
    provides prior written consent to such delegation. Contractor shall not reassign or transter a Key
    Person to other duties or positions such that the Key Person is no longer available to provide the

Rev 01/2022                                         Page 6
      District with such Key Person's services unless the District provides prior written consent to such
      reassignment or transfer.


29. MERGER. THIS CONTRACT CONSTITUTES THE ENTIRE AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE
    PARTIES WITH RESPECT TO THE SUBJECT MATTER REFERENCED THEREIN. THERE
    ARE NO UNDERSTANDINGS, AGREEMENTS, OR REPRESENTATIONS, ORAL OR
    WRITTEN, NOT SPECIFIED HEREIN REGARDING THIS CONTRACT. NO AMENDMENT,
    CONSENT, OR WAIVER OF TERMS OF THIS CONTRACT SHALL BIND EITHER PARTY
    UNLESS IN WRITING AND SIGNED BY ALL PARTIES. ANY SUCH AMENDMENT,
    CONSENT, OR WAIVER SHALL BE EFFECTIVE ONLY IN THE SPECIFIC INSTANCE AND
    FOR THE SPECIFIC PURPOSE GIVEN. CONTRACTOR, BY THE SIGNATURE HERETO OF
    ITS AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE, IS AN INDEPENDENT CONTRACTOR,
    ACKNOWLEDGES HAVING READ AND UNDERSTOOD THIS CONTRACT, AND
    CONTRACTOR AGREES TO BE BOUND BY ITS TERMS AND CONDITIONS.


By their signatures below, the parties to this Contract agree to the terms, conditions, and content
expressed herein.

 Murraysmith, Inc.                                          Water Environment Services


                      Michael Carr
  Michael       Carr 2022.03.11
                      12:47:22 -08'00'
 Authorized Signature                        Date           Chair                                 Date

  Michael Carr/Principal Engr
 Name / Title (Printed)                                     Recording Secretary

 1935808-92
 Oregon Business Registry #                                 APPROVED AS TO FORM
                                                                     Vi               /,   f
 ABN/OR                                                         LN        LL y, Uf   LLY (Z           c
 Entity Type / State of Formation                               ounty Counsel                      Date




Rev   01/2022                                        Page   7
                                                                                                BRARIBEP A
                                                                                      PERSONAL SERVECES CONTRACT
                                                                                            SCOPE OF WORK



              SO   MEAARAA   GAAS So   ARES   BAS    ah         os        J oo          Rar    QAMOAARSA    GBA   ASSAD       GRAAL OAK     oe       Banton        RS        ty    ah     ny   ny    POROAR    & oo ANT SA GS ont       as    2    o         A &   oY   st

        BER           SE RPR            EER.         A          FURS SHER                     CR ESA               E PASE                  SR        GRIPS REE,                          PREPAREEM                 ROR              SAE                 LSPS

                                                                                                                          Steet
                                                                                                                          Br SALE Ee or&
                                                                                                                          a     aes        BOR       Sp




                                 a              om        oth        ws          ws   Se)      AR          AAA
                                                                                                             a ay                   pica   RM       fob       Aa        Sh   fs         SOAS OS     ASN       oa           ab       A        NNT       oN,

                               oor Bod         Ea BREE                           WES          UN SALE              ELE              ELE         A    EERE                         EWEET ES            &       JBEL ER WESSELS




Clackamas County Water Environmental Services (WES) requires that the capacity of its Intertie 2
Diversion Pump Station and force main system be expanded. Constructed in 2071, the pump
station has a firm capacity of 10 million gallons per day (mgd) and features two 5-mgd and two
10-mgd submersible pumps. The station pumps to the Tri-City Water Resource and Recovery
Facility (WRRF), an approximate distance of 4 miles, through a 20-inch ductile iron force main.

The    pump                  station                 and force                              main           were                designed                   to allow expansion                                            to a firm capacity of
approximately 27 mgd through the addition of one 10-mgd pump and a parallel 30-inch diameter
force main. Approximately two miles of the future 30-inch force main were constructed in 2012
alongside the 20-inch pipeline, in six separate sections. The force main system includes 12 odor
treatment and air valve stations along the route, each with provisions to add valving for the
proposed 30-inch pipeline.

The goal of the expansion project includes adding a fifth purnp with 10-maed capacity and
completing installation of the 30-inch pipeline. This will increase the total station capacity to over
19 million gallons per day (mgd) as recommended in the Sanitary Sewer Master Plan (2019).

District staff has determined that the most efficient delivery plan for the project will be to
construct the parallel 30-inch force main separately from the pump station, and desires to
complete design and prepare contract documents for the force main project and bid the project
for construction.   This work will be completed in the first phase of the project, along with
completion of preliminary designs for the pump station and diversion structure facilities.

This scope of work includes professional services to complete the Phase 1 work:                                                                                                                                                                    1} develop the
bid ready documents of the force main; 2} perform bid period services for the force main 2}
perform evaluations and prepare preliminary designs for the pump station and diversion structure:
and 3) develop operational strategies for control of the diversion facilities. It is anticipated that
the Phase 2 of the project will include final design and bid period services for the pump station
improvements and Tri-City WRRF force main connection, plus construction support services for
the two construction packages. It is anticipated the Phase 2 services will be added by contract
amendment.




Rev 01/2022                                                                                                                          Page &
Pog   CHER ERE




                             as ae




                                                                                        oe
on   oO A   A




                          Faas




                                          per




                                                                             peep
                                       ee




                                                                 Peranool




                                                                                                aaa?
Sad Re aed




                                                                                              aed
                     Sate




                                                                                                         sent
                                                   a




                                                                            aggre




                                                                                                           Let
                                          igs
                                          igs

                                                                       neo
                                      pe
                    fos




                                                       eet




                                                                              ee
                                            te,




                                                                             ae
                                                                                        we
                                                             oD




                                                                                        co
              Ry




                                                                                                         -
                                                                                        e
 For the purpose of this scope of work, the Intertie 2 Force Main is defined as the pipeline system
 between the Intertie 2 Pump Station flow meter at the pump station site, and the Tri-City WRRF
 facility driveway entrance on S. Agnes Avenue in Oregon City. Force main connections at the
 oump station and WRRF will be evaluated as part of Task 9, with final designs performed as part
 of the future Phase 2 scope of work.

 Project meeting space will include a large screen or projector to facilitate presentation                                                                                       to
 attendees, or will be conducted remotely using Zoom, Teams, or similar platform.

 District staff will provide comments                                                                                     within one week of workshop   presentations or submitted
 deliverables.

 Consultant shail use 49 Division format master specifications. Consultant shall provide Division 1
 and technical specifications for project use and District review and comment.

 Where deliverable documents are identified, hereinafter, one (1) reproduceable copy and four
 (4) copies of the deliverable will be provided in addition to electronic version in .PDF and original
 DOC format.

 The Consultant’s standard CAD software (AutoCAD) will be used to produce the drawings,
 following its own drafting standards. Final record drawings files will be delivered to WES in
 AutoCAD format.


eS        2     >    Bo              Shy          ny         *        ot     oy     a    ae         ny     oy    “   2   es
Ssox REAR Roe Ss RR oe               Re     eA Fe                              2         ag               Ska Fe gs ok    ge
SES EE ELL oe RTE eSEAS 28WERSEI
                             Sa 8
                                 LE COSTE
                                     SR   ES
                                            WER
                                              SO RA
                                                   EE


The District will provide the following services for this project:

Provide as-built drawings, condition studies, master plans, or other relevant documents that can
be used to develop the schematic designs.

Provide access to the pump station site, treatment facility, and force main odor and air valve
Stations, and be present to explain operating procedures and maintenance issues to the
Consultant.

Provide a Project Manager                                                                     who                will act as point of contact for requests for information     and
deliverables reviews.

Provide Division 0 specifications.

Furnish consolidated written review comments on deliverables.

Organize meetings with WES staff as needed to solicit input.

Lead the bid period services for the force main construction package.

Rey 01/2022                                                                                                                      Page 9
coo                                                  eo         aK                         x
Re         hagas                        od                      Bae SSB      BPRS                        PS
ot RP                  RPS              AE                      at         PON Pe Ss
      nN               MO       Shona            =                   Baw      oa                   A     aa

                       3




 Pask
“ee
 PEA
               &            ~
                                1.          BPreaiact
                                            Pa
                                            PoP APRA
                                                      Adanageman
                                                      Sys Gee SPP Pherk
                                                                                   .           &                    ~        eres         “        ae




Pd  tg
Ta ORO




Provide leadership and tearm strategic guidance aligned with WES steff objectives. Coordinate,
monitor, and control the project resources to meet the technical, communication, and contractual
obligations required fer developing and implementing the project scope.




Conduct regular status meetings with District PM

Prepare monthly invoices and progress reports




Regular project status meeting notes

Monthly invoices with progress report, task-level budget repart

Project schedule updated and submitted with invoices



~~Sousa    gk yRoe          onyKy                         Ya_    gots      :woke       e           aSL   oF
                                                                                                         Sew   ey       oy    a     SS            aa 2
 Pe
 *                 2
                            Rkwoos           MERI
                                               ¥  g
                                                    CEISLY
                                                       Be  RS
                                                                                                   PMiaii
                                                                                                     lS va
                                                                                                           bai gger  ip
                                                                                                                Saad s
                                                                                                                                         PhoSak     bis
                                                                                                                                                    ay




Pts
Tah a
                            se k AL


Consultant shall monitor the quality of the Project and perform internal quality assurance/quality
contral (QA/OC) reviews as described herein.

      Yond ae                          oe
     ny   corks                        %
     MEARS                           wee




Prepare a Quality Management Plan (QMP} for the project.                                                                                                            Key features of the QMP shail include
a single point of contact responsible for all quality management and a description of the quality
control review process and approach.

Conduct quality reviews in accordance with the OMP. Prepare documentation demonstrating the
quality review process is complete and review comments are adequately addressed.          Quality
Review Forms shail be prepared, collected, and properly stored in the project records system.




Quality Management Plan

Written documentation                                                                                      of GC reviews

Rev 01/2022                                                                                                                                               Page 10
Soe
 re ere mde   a3  mee
                  —
we      ae os5 3 2g 8
  VAS  TPES ESE




QOA/OC reviews will be performed by consultant staff not directly involved with the project design
team.




The purpose of this task is to prepare a 30% Design for the six unconstructed segments of 30-inch
diameter force main.




Provide topographic survey services for the proposed 30-inch diameter force main alignment as
follows:

Review and compile available information for the purnp station site, diversion structure, and force
main alignment.

Call for one-cali utility locate paint marks and as-built maps.

Establish survey control and field locate existing centerline monuments as well as any monuments
that have the potential to be disturbed within the limits of construction.

     #    Perform detailed topographic survey, to include field survey of existing gbove ground
          features {.e., edge of pavement, buildings, improvements, trees, utllfies, etc.) and
          elevations with one-Toot contour intervals. Survey the below ground utilities fram one-call
          locate paint marks and existing as-built maps, manhole dips etc.

     2    Prepare an existing conditions base map using the above data, to be used                                       for the
          development of plan sheets for the length of the proposed utility improvements.

     #    Research Clackamas County survey records for recorded surveys, subdivision plats and
          road drawings that show the location of survey monuments previously set within the
          planned work limits.

     2    Field verity presence      of     monuments        within    the     planned        work   limits     of the     utifty
          construction.

     #    Notify County   surveyor        of public   land   corners    that     may     be    affected       by construction
          activities.




     AutoCAD drawings with resolved right-of-way and existing surface files.

Rev 01/2022                                             Page I}
        AutoCAD files with control and monument ties for use in resetting monuments                    disturbed by
        construction.
 pone




              os3
         ao




                              6
                      tent
                    ria
                    na

                             to
                    en

        Vertical contro! will be referenced to NGVDZ9             catum.

        Horizontal control points will be establisned using the Oregon State Plane Coordinate System,
        North Zone NAD &3 (91}.

        Survey to include the 1F2 PS site in the location of the force main installation, six force main
        segments identified (approximately 11,000 LF total} with additional 100 feet at ends of each
        segment, up to TC WRRF property line.

        Survey width will be from right-of-way to right-of-way, or easement width, a5 applicable.

        Right-of-way lines will be computed and shown based on the monument ties and right-of-way
        research performed under this task.




        Review and compile available information for the pump station site, diversion structure, and
        force main alignment.

        interview County and/or consultant representatives who had significant involvement in the
        design and construction of the existing pump station, force main and diversion structure to
        obtain additional relevant information, if available.

        Complete a ground-based geotechnical reconnaissance of the proposed force main alignment
        to review existing surface conditions and visible features that may be important considerations
        with respect to location, design, and construction of the force main segments.

        Review existing soil      corrosivity   data,   provide     recommendations   for additional     corrosivity
        testing if required.

        Prepare a technical memorandum that wilk 4) surnmarize geotechnical information obtained
        fram the documents review and site reconnaissance; 2} address pertinent recommendations
        from the 2010 geotechnical reports as they relate to the current project; 3} update and provide
        additional design and construction recornmendations; 4) provide recommendations for
        additional subsurface explorations along the force main alignment.




        Draft and final Geotechnical Technical          Memorandum




Rev 01/2022                                               Page 12
  MoosFaySN Boxeece
 SR                    ne   eo
 VAS
cae    eye
             TPES ESE
           ow as ek ee




       Force main segments are located within existing rights-of-way or WES-controlled easements
      or property.




       Prepare          and      deliver   a Project   information     Letter to each      utility within   the   project    area
      describing the project and project schedule.                      This letter will be followed by calls or visits to
      appropriate contacts at each utility to ascertain the existence of any facilities within the
      corridor. Those utilities having facilities within the pipeline corridor will be specifically asked
      for all information concerning said utilities.

       Perform fleid reconnaissance of the proposed alignment to review ullity paint markings and
      verity completeness of the subsurface and above ground utilities as depicted in the Utility Base
      CAD file.

      Document discrepancies between utility documents and located facilities and coordinate with
      the utiiities for clarification and resolution.

      Perform a conflict analysis of the                  preliminary       pipeline   alignment   and   the existing   utilities
      shown in the Utility Base CAD File.

       Prepare a Conflict List in spreadsheet format listing existing utilities crossing the propased
       gipeline, and existing utiities parallel to the proposed pipeline within an 8-foot “Restricted
      Zone” or “Safety Zone” around the pipeline.

      Preoare Conflict Plan Sheets corresponding to the Conflict List identifying proposed                              utilities,
      existing utilities, and potential conflicts, with color-coding of each type of conflict.

       identify potentia! conflict locations which merit further investigation by potholing and prepare
       olan showing recommended potholing locations.

       Establish or verify documentation of prior rights by private utilities.

      Provide Utility Conflict Plan Sheets and Conflict List to all utility companies identified within
      the project area for their review for accuracy of potential conflicts and include any
      recommended potholing locations.




       Utility contact list, project information letter, and conflict letters.

       Utility Conflict Plan Sheets and Conflict List.

       Recommended                 potholing plan identifying pothole location and utility owner.

Rev 01/2022                                                     Page   13
        Utility company coordination meeting agenda and minutes.




        Consultant will serve as single point of contact through the design phase of the project for
        utilities in addressing their need for project information and design requests, including
        distribution of design plans, and discussing with each utility special requirements associated
        with facility relocation or modification. .

        Up to ten private utility owners will be identified through utility locate requests and pole owner
        permits.




Perform an evaluation of transient (surge) hydraulics at the Intertie 2 Diversion Pump Station for
protection of the combined 20-inch and 30-inch parallel force main system during emergency
oump shutdown.




Review previous transient analysis                        document        prepared     in 2010     (Pressure    Surge   Analysis   by
Northwest Hydraulic Consultants).

Using the WES Collection System hydraulic model, develop a surge model for the pump station
and force mains to include the existing combination air valve stations along the force main
alignment.

Evaluate surge impacts for maximum capacity of the Intertie 2 Diversion Pump Station using force
main sizing and location proposed in 30% design.

Review additional combination air valve locations and/or changes to valve sizing to protect against
oressure transients curing normal operation and complete power outage.

Provide recommendations on surge protection on the force main system, and at the pump station.

Prepare documentation                         of   transient   analysis    for   the   draft     and   final   Preliminary   Design
Memorandum,

 ~~     3 5 aot          boo
                         ar
2 ™ wen So        tate   Bey SF ota es   oo
cae       ae re
Ra a PEW AL        Le ee       Lo




Section of draft and final Force Main Design Memorandum.

           been    en tes oy ae
                   EVP Per
                       FEES is




 Subsequent analysis iterations will occur as needed to support 60-percent and 90-percent design
 ohases if the force main alignment or proposed pump station operations change.

Rev 01/2022                                                         Page 14
 This task will be coordinated with Tasks 9.1 and 9.3 which include scope to select pump models.
 Pump selection will be performed prior to transient modeling.




 Provide recommendations          for   pipeline   corrosion   control   and   summarize   information   for
 memorandum.

 Prepare drawings to the 30% design level a5 noted in the Drawing List provided as Attachment A.

 Prepare cost estimates to Class Hi level of confidence accuracy.

 Prepare a project schedule and identify potential project phasing.

 Prepare draft Force Main Design Memorandum              including the following:

 introduction, Background, and Purpose
 Design Criteria Summary
 Force Main Route Description & Analysis
 Pipe Materials & Appurtenances
 Corrosion Control Recommendations
 Utility Conflict Analysis
 Geotechnical Cansiderations
 Odor & Air Valve Station Improvements
 Anticipated Permitting
 Project implementation and Costs

 Facilitate a 30% Design Review Meeting to present the selected alternatives, the recommended
 project schedule, and cost estimate.

 incorporate District Staff comments and prepare final Design Mernorandum.




     30% Design drawings as identified in Drawing List in Attachment A.

     Class fl cost estimate.

     Project delivery schedule.

     Draft 30% Force Main Design Memorandum.



Rev 01/2022                                         Page 15
                                                     <
          Project Meeting agendas and minutes.

          Final 30% Force Main Design Mernorandum.




nape       :       ~            ran                              woh   ot        tS        7                        roo                                       co                «
  Po       She      3           BP
                                fat ihYEP
                                       ety ek OR ar      TS,      TRAN           By             my ath    BA Pe     OB LS   Goth   EK   EA pen     SER RT y   Tt      ete   a
 Paha
  hares
                  Sb      awe
                                PTPRDRAREE EY                  QASAS
                                                               ares
                                                                            Muy8               LSathya
                                                                                                SI ERE         E oRRAED
                                                                                                                     At
                                                                                                                        PRD L SRSey
                                                                                                                        skis
                                                                                                                                           PP ERDeS
                                                                                                                                             Yee
                                                                                                                                                          ER LALA
                                                                                                                                                              reyes Few
                                                                                                                                                                        P PEPER
                                                                                                                                                                           Ss was




fife
or
 BAe Ne
                        kate
                         s




Perform additional field survey to locate new subsurface explorations, new utility locating
potholes, and other facilities in the force main corridor that are identified to be relevant for the
design and construction of the force main segments.




AutoCAD files with additional field survey data, to be incorporated into the project AuteCAD
design files.




A maximum of 50 additional potholing, boring and other facility locations along the project
corridor will be surveyed.
ap                               oo
                                     ae SS   Tet    pe ie ath by             ,        RF             SR   os      oy
     LSA         Abe            AA     ATE    MDM       Ps 83 hae                MERE                              ae



Ant
a   *

“ARE




Perform subsurface explorations as identified to obtain additional information for design and
construction of the force main segments. Obtain samples for corrasivity testing from each
boring. Perform coring and strength-testing of rock where encountered.

Supplement or revise geotechnical reports and/or memoranda to address additional subsurface
explorations where performed.




  Supplemental Geotechnical Technical Memorandum




Rev 01/2022                                                                                                                 Page 16
 SowaeRee Ps
 SRO         a3           2   n
ak ee peers
       Page aes           Pes




 A rmeximum                      of five subsurface explorations to depths                                       between     15 and     25 feet below ground
 surface.

  Force main segments are located within existing rights-of-way or WES-contralled easements or
  property.

Powe     8     og               a           ‘ ore            Pie es   ey      Saf  Phil
PE ENN
PUAN     Ak
         MP Shoe    Sofie
                     Ra RAPereRYa        fo baka
                                         RASS    eg iry
                                                 Ae ?   rire:
                                                        PR  SS BP?    aa DF   MRP
                                                                              APRS   ey
                                                                                   AAS     2f PRON
                                                                                           AON
                                                                                              beso verry
                                                                                                  ABR er e




Perform gotholing in accordance with the approved potholing plan, with nurnbered survey pin to
provide a reference mark for survey. Prepare potholing reports noting the depth from the surface
to the top and bottom of the utility structure.

Perform private locating (“designating } to determine locations of existing utilities in areas outside
the right-of-way.

Prepare updated Utility Conflict Plan Sheets and Utility Conflict List, including results of potholing
and private utiinty designating.

Prepare conflict letters and coordinate with each private utility to resolve conflicts and coordinate
utility relocation work that could be completed.                                                             Prepare email documentation            of telephone
conversations with the utility owners.

          Sarg wae Pabey fees
                   2     8 foe
*s het
HOF
   >,




Potholing plan and maps identifying pothole location and utility owner.

Maps of designated private utilities.

Updated Utility Conflict Plan Sheets and Utility Conflict List.

Utility meeting agenda and minutes and email documentation.




A rmaximum of 30 utility location potholes will be performed.

A maximum                        of 10    hours       of designating                      time      to       determine     private    utility   locations   will   be
performed.




Rev 01/2022                                                                                Page £7
                                                                                            <




                                                                                                         i
Advance the force main design and prepare documents to the 60% submittal stage. The 60%
documents shall include Divisions O and 1 specifications and specifications for equipment,
materials, common details and drawings to the 60% completion level.




Recommend final pipeline route for all pipeline segments.

Finalize pipe material selection, including        recommendations           for lining, coating,      and   providing
corrosion protection for the pipe material.

Design layout and improvements at each of the 12 odor and air valve stations.

Develop plans to maintain service in the 20-inch force main during construction.

Develog recommendations for contractor testing of existing 30-inch force main segments to verify
acceptance in accordance with new pipe acceptance criteria,

Prepare drawings to the 60% design level as noted in the Drawing List provided as Attachment A.

Perform updated transient analysis of force main, based on revised force main alignment                             or
proposed change to pump station operations determined during 60% design phase.

Prepare draft traffic control plans.

Preoare draft erosion and sediment contral plans for all force main segments.

Assemble County or WES standard details for each required discipline.

Review and coordinate Division 0 specifications provided by WES.

Develop draft    Technical   Specifications   as    identified    in   the    Specifications    List     provided   as
Attachment B.

Prepare bid itern list and Class 3 Construction Cost Estimate.

Develop preliminary construction sequence, constraints and construction schedule.

Conduct one interim      design meeting with WES               staff to review design development grior
deliverable submittal.    Meeting will be attended            by Murraysmith’s Project Manager, Project
Engineer, and muiti-disciplinary subconsultants a5 applicable.




Rev 01/2022                                         Page 18
Conduct 60% design review meeting. Consultant will conduct one two-hour workshop to review
the 60% design submittal with District staff. Meeting will be attended by Murraysmith’s Project
Manager, Project Engineer, and multi-disciplinary subconsultants as applicable.




60% Design drawings as identified in Drawing List in Attachment A.

Division OF Technical Specifications as identified in Specification List in Attachment B.

Technical Specifications for rnajor construction elements as identified in Specification List in
Attachment B.

60% Construction Cost Estimate using proposed bid item fist.

60% Construction Sequence Narrative with estimated construction schedule.

Meeting agendas and summaries.




eos                             se            te    _               ao   oy    —
Psy
PRR
            A   ne   RA
                            Prisks
                          LSP   RW
                                       BrP
                                     RAE
                                             ee prougas
                                                eeeees    2
                                                              yh   ON Vi RAS
                                                                          eu
                                                                               Phe
                                                                               L
                                                                                    hey ey
                                                                                 ie bia




  Ror~    oak
          shee  we
   Wehr      Pa,




Perform updates to Utility Conflict Plan Sheets and Utility Conflict List as needed.

Coordinate with each private utility to resalve conflicts and coordinate utiity relocation work to
be completed. Prepare email documentation of telephone conversations with the utility owners.

Prepare technical specification regarding relevant utiifty relocation work to be performed by
orivate utilities.




Updated Utility Conflict Plan Sheets and Utility Conflict List.

Utility meeting agenda and minutes and email documentation.

Technical specification regarding utility coordination.




Rev 01/2022                                                                    Page 19
       or             eS                  ~
aeee Oe gage
        aa    ie
          PEERS apps
                 EES
                                    =
                                    eee




Design of existing utility relocations will be completed by the utility owners and reviewed by
Murraysmith to confirm that the proposed relocations wil resolve the identified conflicts.
Design reviews are limited to up to two iterations ger utility conflict.




Review and address 60% design review comments from WES staff or other stakeholders.

Prepare 90% design                                      level drawings   for each    bid set as noted       in the    Drawing       List included   in
Attachment A.

Prepare stamped 90% design drawings as needed for plan review for building and trade permits.

Perform updated transient analysis of force main, based on revised force main alignrnent or
proposed change to pump station operations determined during 90% design phase.

Prepare technical specifications to                                      include     Division    OF   through     Division    48.     See   attached
Specification List in Attachment B.

Prepare a Class 2 Construction Cost Estimate.

Uodate the estimated construction schedule.

Conduct                       one             interim    design   meeting    with    WES      staff to   review    contract     documents       prior
deliverable submittal.

Conduct one two-hour meeting to review the 90% design submittal with District staff,

P MP        PPh Ses   Pg          ae f
Ra     A    SO AL          Le ke so




Stamped 90% design drawings needed tor building and trade permits.

90% Design Development Drawings, see Drawing List in Attachment A.

90% Construction Specifications, see Specification List in Attachment B.

Class 2 Construction Cast Estimate.

Meeting agenda and summaries.

Documentation of resolution of 60% review comments by District and other external stakeholders.
Rev 01/2022                                                                         Page 20
Task 6 — Prepare Force Main Bid Documents

Objective:

Prepare final sealed contract documents to be used for publicly bidding the force main project.

Activities:

Address and modify the contract documents to address District comments and permit plan review
comments.

Prepare deliverable documents and submit to WES.

Deliverables:

Final sealed construction documents in PDF format

Design drawing files in AutoCAD

Assumptions:

Standard        details will be separately bound   as 8.5-inch x 11-inch sheets, provided   in PDF format
only.




Task 7 — Force Main Construction Permits and Approvals

Objective:

Assist WES in obtaining permits and land use approvals from local agencies for construction of the
force main project. The anticipated approvals are listed in Table 1 below.




                              Agency                             Anticipated Permits


                        City of Oregon City                  Right-of-Way Street Permit
                                                                   Building Permit
                City of Gladstone                     Permit to Work in the Right-of-Way
                                                      Plumbing Permit
                         Clackamas County                        Development Permit
                                                                   Plumbing Permit




Rev   01/2022                                       Page   21
Coordinate with each local agency to verify applicable permits required, obtain applicable permit
application forms, and verify

Rights-of-Way Construction Permits

 Prepare application materials and submit application on behalf of WES.

Erosion Control Permits

Prepare application materials and submit application on behalf of WES.

Bullding and Trade Permit Plan Review

Prepare plan review drawing sets using stamped 90% design drawings as required for buliding or
trade permit reviews.




Rights-of-Way Construction Permits application submittal packages.

Erosion Control Permit application submittal package.

Buliding and Trade Permit application materials

Permit plan sets in pdf files




No land use permits are anticipated to be required for force main installation.

WES will sign necessary application forms and pay application fees.

Wetland impacts are not anticipated.

State or federal environmental permits are not included in the scope of work.




Provide support to WES staff during bid phase of the force main bid documents.




Rev 01/2022                                   Page 22
Attend the pre-bid conference.

Review and respond to technical questions as requested,

Prepare technical material for addenda a5 needed.

Review bids and provide comments.

  Sy                                      °
      yatt
       a              gooy         aePe            oara
       ao      MMA           TON          A    A    Ae




Written documentation of responses to technical questions

Summary of pre-bid conference

Technical addenda to the contract docurnents, as needed

Written                            recornmendation        of contract award




Preparation of technical materials for two addenda is budgeted.

WES will advertise anc cistribute bid documents                                   and addenda.




 woe                          .
  “Ses dey
Popes                         rages
                                asm
Ret    he    PRL Ro          LO           ee




The purpose of this task is to develop a basis of design for the capacity improvements to the
intertie 2 Diversion Pump Station and Diversion Structure (Diversion Facilities}, to be completed
through analyses of critical components and collaboration with District staff,




Conduct desktop review and site visit of the existing intertie 2 Pump Station and Diversion
Structure to document and evaluate major system components to meet requirements of
capacity improvements and other evaluations.




Rey 01/2022                                                                   Page 2.
                                                                                    as
Review available as-built drawings, design reports, master plans, operations and meintenance
manual        and other relevant documentation.

Review existing operational strategies of the diversion facilities and meet with District staff to
obtain further knowledge and understanding of system and downstream impact on conveyance
and   treatment     infrastructure.


Review design flow rates and pump and motor selections from previous documentation,
including 2009 Preliminary Design Report and 2020 Concept Design Report with project team.

Review pump station wet well and pump intake configuration relative to current Hydraulic
institute standards and guidelines.

Perform a site visit to the intertie 2 Pump Station & diversion facilities. Perform a site visit to the
Tri-City WWREF facilities to review and observe current iIntertie 2 force main discharge
configuration.

Review existing configuration, operational status, condition, maintenance needs, deficiencies,
and other elements relevant to design of the capacity improvements, for the following major
equipment and subsystems:

Diversion Structure and appurtenances

Pump station wet well and other hydraulic structures

Submersible pumps

Valves, gates, and other flow control devices

Vapor-phase odor control equipment

Liquid-phase calcium nitrate (Bioxide) odor control system

Electrical system capacity, including stand-by generator and power service

instrumentation including flow meters, level sensors, and similar devices

Review force main system curve, hydraulic grade line, and pump performance curves from
conceptual design report, and update as necessary to reflect design assumptions for current and
future conditions. Develop recommendation for selection of suomersible gumps for oasis of
design and advanced hydraulic analysis.

Preoare wastewater sampling gian for evaluation of liquid-phase odor control system, to be
conducted by District staff at the pump station; review and evaluate collected data to develop
the design basis for the liquid-phase odor control system curing future flow conditions.



Rev 01/2022                                       Page 24
Recommend                   improvements to pump   station elements to accommodate   capacity improvements
and the recommendations developed from the hydraulic, transient analyses, and operational
evaluations.




Documentation of existing conditions of the pump station

Wastewater sampling plan




District will collect and analyze wastewater samples according to recommended               odor control
sampling olan and provide results to Consultant.




Perform computational fluid dynamics (CFD) modeling of the Intertie 2 Pump Station Wet Wel:
and Diversion Structure when subject to projected future flows and cperational conditions.
Provide background information for diversion system basis of design.




Perform computational fluid dynamics (CFD) modeling, to include:

Develop a three-dimensional CFD mode! of the Diversion Structure, diversion pipeline, Intertie 2
Purp Station wet well, and purnp intakes.

Evaluate wet well configuration and pump intake for phased pump station capacity
improvements focusing on risks associated with pump priming, swirl angle at pump intake, and
other cavitation risks.

Evaluate diversion box size and configuration for turbulence, air entrainment, and erosion risks
associated with flow direction change.

Provide up to three iterations of analysis to provide recommendations on hydraulic performance
and improvements at the diversion box and pump station.

Prepare documentation as input to the preliminary design memorandum.
4 oA Tas
DN   3so pat        sos Foy ae
           ses gery By
soe PPLE
Bat
              Pee ee
       SW e Net GASP
      Nae                 aT
                               +




Draft and final sections for inclusion in diversion operations technical memorandum.




Rev 01/2022                                               Page 25
Perform review and evaluation of operational strategies for the Intertie 2 Diversion Structure
and intertie 2 Pump Station Evaluation. Provide recormmendations to update the operational
Strategies upon implementation of the capacity improvements.




Conduct Workshop #1 with District staff to discuss operational strategies, historical issues,
downstream constraints, operational preferences, on-going or planned improvement projects,
and other system information as relevant.

Workshop #14 will cover the following issues:

Review recommendations for pump selection from Task 9.1 and select purnp models.

Diversion strategy —manuail vs. automated gates at the Diversion Structure

Fiow camtrol —- control at the Diversion Structure, intertie 2 Pump Station, and Kelloggs WRRF

Secondary control and monitoring particularly for flow contribution downstream of the Diversion
Structure in the Mount Scott interceptor and upstream of Kellogg WRRF

Configuration of Mount Scott Interceptor improvements into the Diversion Structure

Pump sequencing and use of individual force mains vs both farce mains in parallel

Tri-City WRRF headworks configuration — existing and future locations and elevation/head
requirements of force main discharge at the WRRF

Seasonal operational requirements

Future flow contributions, variability of |&! flows and increased flow with time

Travel or lag time and additional flow inputs between the Diversion Structure and the Kellogg
WRRE

Diversion Structure and wet well hydraulics (based on CFD evaluation from Task 8.2)

Discuss alternatives for diversion pumping configurations, including pump sizing, configuration,
and parallel vs. separate force main operations. Select up to three alternatives for further
review.

Develop hydraulic/operations model (REPLICA™) for use in evaluation of alternative conirol
Strategies and calibrate the model using available information fram SCADA, flow monitoring, and
WES Collection System Model.


Rev 01/2022                                     Page 26
Evaluate up to three alternative control strategies, based on the outcome of Workshop 1.
Evaluation is anticipated to focus on the following parameters: timing of capacity
Imporovements; planned seasonal diversion flows; O&M staff preferences; and sequencing
options for purnps, VFD settings, and force mains.

Conduct Workshop #2 with District staff to present the evaluation findings and select a preferred
operational concept for design and implementation.

Prepare a technical memorandum                                                                       documenting the preferred operational concept as input to
the basis of design documentation.




Workshop agenda and minutes.

Draft and Final technical memorandum.

REPLICA™ model in ExtendSim (third party platform)




electrical and [XC design are excluded trom the Phase 1 scope of work.

Workshop duration anticipated to be 2 to 3 hours.

Up to four fone to two-hour duration} meetings with consultant and WES engineering staff in
addition to the task workshops.

REPLICA™ training is excluded from the scope and level of effort for Phase 1. WES may elect to
include training in a future phase of work.

        *          7a       a“2                                        y “ata ats a aor)
                                                                                      :                                                                    ~                      :
Pook oe :Baeae
roetrab          3SO     é ee          :    Pay
                                           rae    otomtow
                                                    PhS Tesom    ang
                                                            OM aotGD      a ee eeSe        Te
                                                                                           at   es   x
                                                                                                     Few ee EEE
                                                                                                             ots ote
                                                                                                             ON  ase           rot
                                                                                                                               2k    tees oh
                                                                                                                                     Pw
                                                                                                                                                   n
                                                                                                                                           ot eb FFake   PbPePS
                                                                                                                                                              a a   Oeed Otes aak ry Sons
Pea              Sat    xe        oe   POFPR SMP                       secre ere  a gee         My   PP             YT      Saree    ee See   ee         per   Be    Se ee        ret        :
FORMA PR         or      SS            Bere WP          Pe   As          Bk ee   PR                  re    PMS   SE   tar    MALL      se         ae     oe         ae a      aw od
                                                                                                                                                                                       : ood




Develop the basis of design for Intertie 2 Purnp Station and Intertie 2 Diversion Structure and
document in a preliminary design report.




Prepare and present site plans, building floor plan figures, P&/ID, one-line diagram as needed to
describe the recommended improvements and design.

Prepare cast estimate to Class 3 level of confidence accuracy.

Prepare project schedule and recommendations for construction, testing, and startup.

Prepare draft Preliminary Design Memorandum                                                                                                   outlining the following:

Rey 01/2022                                                                                                                          Page 2
                                                                                                                                                  ~~]
introduction, Background, and Purpose
Design Criteria Summary
Facility Description
Evaluations and Recommended improvements
Permitting and Approvals
Project implementation and Casts

Review Workshop — Facilitate workshop to review Basis of Design Report and to recommended
project delivery schedule.

incorporate District Staff cornments into final report.




Draft and Final Preliminary Design Memorandum.

Basis of Design Review meeting agenda and minutes.




Payment will be made at the billing rates for personnel working directly on the project, which
will be at the Consultant’s Hourly Rates, plus Direct Expenses incurred. Billing rates, expenses,
and outside services are as listed below.
a                                      ‘
PS      S   oye    o   ae   “    a     z
BeSo   oth ST eTSN OTA RN Da     oe
                           2 2 wat
q      Me TA, a               ot Tes




Labor will be invoiced at direct labor with a 3.15 multiplier. Maximum   rate is $230 per hour.




Expenses incurred in-house that are directly attrioutable to the project will be invoiced at actual
cast. These expenses include the following:

Mileage (allowed where one-way trip exceeds 25 miles)         Current iRS Rate
Postage and Delivery Services                                 At Cost
Printing and Reproduction                                     At Cost
Travel, Lodging, and Subsistence                              At Cost




Outside technical, professional, and other services will be invoiced at actual cost-plus 5 percent.




Rev 01/2022                                     Page 28
Anticipated Project Milestones
The project milestones listed below are intended to show the anticipated schedule through
completion of the project. Phase | milestones for work included in this scope of work are provided
as approximate dates based on the assumed Notice to Proceed date and may be refined based on
actual project start.


                                 Phase | Schedule (included in this contract)
  Notice to Proceed                                                      April 4, 2022
  Draft Force Main 30% Design Submittal                                  August 1, 2022
  Force Main 60% Design Submittal                                        December 1, 2022
  Force Main 90% Design Submittal                                        March 1, 2023
  Force Main Bid Documents Submittal                                     April 14, 2023
  Force Main Bid/Award Period Completion                                 July 2023
  Diversion Operations Workshop #1                                       May 18, 2022
  Diversion Operations Workshop #2                                       August 17, 2022
  Diversion Facilities Preliminary Design Report - Draft                 September 16, 2022




Attachments
       1: Drawing List

       2: Technical Specification List




Rev   01/2022                                      Page   29
     Clackamas WES MURRAYSMITH                                                                                      Intertie 2 PS & FM Expansion — Phase 1 September 2, 20211

                                                                                                                                              Sh    AREAS          Beh       Sa       Ae bs   a    eet
                                                                                                                                              ATT AC
                                                                                                                                              SPARSFP Sa MASS
                                                                                                                                                          SAW RRS APY RS                                  3
                       "                 2                          OE                                                                                    2              a        2                 208                 A     A         Ho         ~             QO      OP              Se          =

RAUL            AAW              PEERS                   ELEUR E                           REM        PRES            BEES        @      BT        RLSEWEE"             Up PERE               ERLSER              GSE   PRR                  GXESS EER           SAA          PPR        SSS    PS
               sou wm ath MEE GORD GOLA     Sy GANG     ah RR ak gh GME Wy AME GR L BAILS                                                                                    BRE GE TEM EO                BE EE BOE OME   Ga RE      GE                          GE QE        GE   ate    ote
              eSARTRE
                   PRR SE. EAL   ST     ET ASM ARAAS
                                        RSAAR.      PR SREW ESAS ALAS     FES RSE
                                                                               EAPP GE WYOE                                                                                  (AP
                                                                                                                                                                             RN ATER
                                                                                                                                                                                  RE EES                   ES AALS
                                                                                                                                                                                                          ROSSOW     OR ALASRE ECSEADY §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PERRY                                           GOERS,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 EELS W ERLE AS

The following list of drawings are anticipated for the subject project. Two bid sets will be prepared
with the pump station and force main improvement separated as shown. Drawing for each
discipline will be organized by facility.
*Denotes drawings to be included with 30% Design Submittal
rm              wat                                Ee        tk    ow             _              my            mM   SN       ER         casos,       OS       OT              z               ae              .         eye       tee   EE   PA                    .          aw
Rose
Sat BA
                Seah BA
                ot ON
                                      ie
                                      at
                                                   iryPeaebiss
                                                    PsA    BAe                                    A
                                                                                                      f        4G
                                                                                                               NAS
                                                                                                                             Berapess
                                                                                                                             SAPP ALN
                                                                                                                                                     Avgicsir:
                                                                                                                                                     RW Eee  sas
                                                                                                                                                                              ipripaeeyagsaryam
                                                                                                                                                                              PP PPPs AP WP Pbk
                                                                                                                                                                                                Pe                                      GPG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        LA Ake
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               E   AE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ste   shuarirs
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ect
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               yond PEA GE




Cover Page & Vicinity Man”*
Index of Drawings*
Project Overview Map & Force Main Profile*
Abbreviations
Symbol & Legend
General Notes

                 fF ~ gesosae         >oye   an ‘
JoN? ries
     osass!
      a ae
                :N48       eteeviassereyve
                          Sars  Paasis ss  %    ?
WP WP           PPS       CIP CE Per re Gs?

Pian & Profile — Segments 1-6, STA 0+06 TO 210+00 (10,950 LF, 1”=20", 26 sheets tatai}*
Plan & Profile — Tri-City WRRF On-Site Piping (1 sheet}*
Odor & Air Valve Assembly (12 sites, 1 per sheet, 12 sheets total}*
Waterline Plan & Profile Relocations (2 sheets}
Sewer Plan & Profile Relocations (2? sheets}
Pipeline Trench Details (2 sheets}
TC WRRF Piping Connection Details (2 sheets}
WES Standard Details (5 sheets}
CRW Standard Details (1 sheet}
Sewer Details (1 sheets}

ane
Oe    eo   ee
                2 tk       ge
                                 “y
                                us     CO
                                         ef   ow   es
                                                        se   owe        en   ce
                                                                                      ows
                                                                                      ok
                                                                                                           :
                                                                                                          easel
                                                                                                                      :eNeoy
                                                                                                                        oF Leet
                                                                                                                                of eee                +
                                                                                                                                                     rises
                                                                                                                                                                    x
BPS
BaF
 NE                        Pr
                                Ae
                                GN
                                       Serer
                                      WALPP
                                             yr
                                             eR                                            Ne
                                                                                                 Cee
                                                                                                  Pe
                                                                                                     al
                                                                                                     NP
                                                                                                                         fies
                                                                                                                         PGS
                                                                                                                                      ois SSIAS
                                                                                                                                       Ae Aa ee
                                                                                                                                               EP TEES
                                                                                                                                                   Ps
                                                                                                                                                       F
                                                                                                                         :                                    at

General Erosion Control Cover Sheet
General Erosion Control Notes Clackamas WES MURRAYSMITH intertie 2 PS & FM Expansion — Phase 1
September 2, 2021 2
Erosion Control Plan —- 0400 TO 210+00 (10,500 LF, 1000’ per sheet, 11 sheets total)
crosion Control Plan - Staging Area (Assume 4 staging areas, 4 sheets total)
Erosion Control Plan ~ Odor & Air Valve Assembly (12 sites, 2 sites per sheet, 6 sheets total}
Erosion Control Plan ~ Tri-City WRRF (1 sheet)
Erasion Control Details (4 sheets}
Traffic Contral {12 sheets}
Traffic Control Plan - Segments A through F (1 sheet per Segment, 6 sheets total}
Traffic Control Staging Area Plan (Assume 4 staging areas, 4 sheets total}
Traffic Control Details (2 sheets}




Rev 01/2022                                                                                                                                                         Page 30
                                                                                                     ee
                                                                                                             pene
                                                                                                             z
                                                                                                     iad
                                                                                 gZ




                                                                                                             &




                                                                                                                            at


                                                                                                                                                g




                                                                                                                                                                                                   e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         LP 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         4
                                                                                                                                                                      -Cae


                                                                                                                                                                                         ea
                                                                    ease
                                                                     a
                                                                     LA
                                                                               bed
                                                                                         conte
                                                                                               tet
                                                                                                   ae 2
                                                                                                      Caan

                                                                                                     peed


                                                                                                                     tt
                                                                                                                     sone


                                                                                                                                 tonto
                                                                                                                                   rae %,
                                                                                                                                   Lee
                                                                                                                                   ot

                                                                                                                                                Deron
                                                                                                                                                eee
                                                                                                                                                         ete




                                                                                                                                                                                                             Borve
                                                                                                                 beg




                                                                                                                                                                ae]
                                                                                                     eet




                                                                                                                                   “ad




                                                                                                                                                                                                   “ease
                                                                                   ad




                                                                                                                                                         Sega


                                                                                                                                                                        ft
                                                                                                                                                                                  ann,
                                                                                              al




                                                                                                                                                                                                           “ss
                                                                                                         ay
                                                                                      %




                                                                                                                                                     3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            its
                                                                                                                       =




                                                                                                                                                                                         the coe
                                                                                                                                                gm




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ae
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       %
     A
         ie.


               mong

                      els
                      %
                      Badin
                           bat
                              action
                                  way




                                                                                                                                                  hott
                                                                                                                                                  g2 4
                                                                                                                                                          eee


                                                                                                                                                                  oe  Pete


                                                                                                                                                                             ae
                                                                                                                                                                                   OE


                                                                                                                                                                                                     ere


                                                                                                                                                                                                            Sets
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 B45

                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Tess
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       fer ote
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     fonoe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ana,


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                wD,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ata




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          eons
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   eet
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Sith

                                                                                                                                                                                                                        el 2
                                                                                                                                                                              aoe ss
                                                                                                                                                                oe
                                                            Lh
                                                                 ge 3
                                                                           ge,




                                                                                                                                                                                    aLeet




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Bs 2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         gOS

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    “Fo
                                                      eo


                                                                 Panel
                                                                     %, seit


                                                                                 so

                                                                                      eee %
                                                                                         tore
                                                                                                   eae
                                                                                                   fee
                                                                                                     =




                                                                                                                                                                                                     Son
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Pia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          A,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Sete
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            28
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  orn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        fee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                if
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  lott
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       fu
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Poston
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Pi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Ped
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  rae,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    AD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         anast
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             beth
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 bad
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       yo
                                                    on Ms




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 8
The following list of specifications are anticipated for the subject project. These specifications will
be included in the bid set that will be prepared under the design scope of work.



                                                                                ted
                                                                                 $
                                                                                 a




                                                                                                             ae
                                                                                                             ister
                                                                                        ws,




                                                                                                                                         nee




                                                                                                                                                                                 nee
                                                                                      Son




                                                                                                                            rn
                                                                                                                ee




                                                                                                                                               weecee
                                                                                                                                               eres
                                                                                                                                               4
                                                                                                                                               Sennen.
                                                                                                                                               2
                                                                                                                                                 treed
                      ae




                                                                                                                                                  en;
                                                                                                                                                  Seale?
                                                                                ea,




01 10 00                                                                                                                                       Summary of Wark
0112 16                                                                                                                                        Work Sequence
01 22 20                                                                                                                                       Unit Price Measurement and Payment
0133 00                                                                                                                                        Submittal Procedures
01 45 00                                                                                                                                       Quality Control
01 55 26                                                                                                                                       Traffic Control
01 56 39                                                                                                                                       Temporary Tree and Plant Protection
015719.411                                                                                                                                     Temporary Sewage Control and Bypass Piping




                                                                                                                                               Subsurface investigation
02 41 00                                                                                                                                       Demolition
                                             hen,




03 11 00                                                                                                                                       Concrete Work
03 60 00                                                                                                                                       Grouting




05 50 00                                                                                                                                       Metal Fabrications
                                        en




LO 74 10                                                                          Identifying Devices



3105 13                                                                           Soils for Earthwork
3105 16                                                                           Aggregates for Earthwork
3123 16                                                                           Excavation
312317                                                                            Trenching
312318                                                                            Rock Removal
31 2319                                                                           Dewatering

Rew 01/2022
31 23 24                                                                                     Fiowable Fill
31 50 00                                                                                     Excavation Support and
                                                                                             Protection
     Pyloclekae             DT                 mos        «       5                                     .
  fotans
Rpayee
 ac FO SS
          2 x    we
            PPes ad
                  Shue                   ow
                                               heap tem etyek oe Pate:
                                              zPower pork rser   :ifr:
                                                                 tle
                                                                                  af
                                                                                  PP
                                                                                       BA   cet
                                                                                         PASE?
                                                                                         UMS
                                                                                                  IAPS
                                                                                                  a
                                                                                                  3
                                                                                                  gs
                                                                                                      rae
                                                                                                        g ors
                                                                                                     ee at


321123                                                                                       Aggregate Base Courses
3212 16                                                                                      Asohaltic Concrete Pavement
321217                                                                                       Cold Plane Pavement Removal


 x     f   ees                       q
hey              ie   Per   A


33 O1 30.13                                                                                  Sewer anc Manhole Testing
3305 13                                                                                      Manholes and Wet Weils
331110                                                                                       Water Utility Distribution and
                                                                                             Transmission Piping
331213                                                                                       Water Service Connections
33.12 16                                                                                     Water Utility Distribution Valves
33 13 00                                                                                     Testing and Disinfecting of
                                                                                             Utility Piping
33 3110                                                                                      Sanitary Utility Sewerage Piping
33 4110                                                                                      Storm Utility Drainage Piping


 myo pi geet
          te aoe              Crna              BOzP RN NL UN yh           :
 PRS        TISE            giv
                             esa
                                   baw          Beye               odats
                                                                   at
                                                                           irt7
Ra    SR   eT
            AL SS               ee             yO   $     x        ara     OP


4005 13                                                                                      Common Work Results for
                                                                                             Process Piping
4005 51                                                                                      Common Requirements Results
                                                                                             for Process Valves
40 05 78                                                                                     Miscellaneous Vaives (Air
                                                                                             Valves}
4005 23.15                                                                                   Gate Vaives
40 05 23.21                                                                                  Piug Valves




Rew 01/2022
                         EXHIBIT &B
              PERSONAL SERVICES CONTRACT
                      FEE SCHEDULE




Rev 01/2022              Page
                                >
                                 ¢ 43
                                Nh
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Ze07 Sueno
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   53m SeWEPED
                    ca)                 =            =             =           =            =              =              =            baS       $     6     z    a    o    v     a            a             Ly             a             o          o    0     a     o   0     s    Eg    Or     3                                      BysnL|
                    Bad                 E            5             E           S            E              E              E            ew TT          oor    z    0   ov    a     o            a             oy             0            ov         ov    a     v     0   a    ca     ve    gz    z                                      LAST,
                    POSE       $     [ose   $s       -       $i                =       Ee            Lie            Ee            3    [pscee     i   PSC    Ed   0    ¥   By     a            o                            0             0          o    9     0     0   oT    9    08     vE   v           1d Pe                         EZ
                         Ss [ose
                   [treert                       [S607       LG           $ [oot       § [oosz       S| =           Sie           ES                  ES     vz   o   or   ost    o            a             oF             0             0          a   ve.    Ea    a   <6   50z   oar   ¥6    aL                   1D BOG UIDW 32107 -- 54S
                   [oossaz   «S| ose             [treet            coos   Ss [onse   —§ | costs           [eco $          [earz       [ace Ber        26     a    0   or   Ed     0            o              o             0             0          0   oe     oF   By   ay   BET   Ea    ag    a     TDMOIGNS VELA HOF VOW 92104 -- + ASL
                   jeese
                   Sons                          | OTOTOST   SIE          S[owr        Ss   [consr   S|    aoosor   S|    aera    § [exc eor     By   zz     a    0   Ea    J     9            a             we             8             ¥          o   OCF   zor   ze   0    EZ]   Gi    var   EJ]   1oy019ns VEL     KOE UIOW adI03 -- FSM
                    aay        ${[      =   3     [ters      $i           $i           SE            Sie            S     [ers    §    [tar       =   ‘Ber   ¥    0    ¥    0    ¥6            EJ             o             0             z          0    a     0     0   0     0     a      o   ST                                      2 4saL|
                   [tes7ze     $[-          S     [tes       $i           $i           $i            si             Sears         §    [sone      $   wT     a    &   Be    0     9            9              0             0             0          0   9G     a     0   0     0     9     a    fc]                                       EZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                         SLVWILS3 334 03SOd0ud
                                                                                                                                                                                             S3DIAUIS LNIWNOUIANS Y3LYM "OD SVWIWADV1D
                                                                                                                                                                                      T aSWHd - NOISNV¥dX4 NIVA 32¥O4 @ NOLLV.LS dAWNd @ JILYaLNI
22O0C/¥ELE - TVA
