                                                                                                                                         Page | of 22
                                                                                                                                       FR-6400-N-06

                       Technical Assistance and Capacity Building Program
               Cooperative Agreement Standard Provisions for Supplemental Funds

Cooperative AQTCCMEME .0........ceecessceccecssssesnceceecssssaececeecesseesaaeeeescsssesaaeeeecesseaaseesesessseaaaeseecesseaaaeeeseseseseaaaeess 3
Applicable Authorities 0.0.0.0... ceccecssscececesssseneccecessssesnaececescesssensaeesesesseseneesesessseaaeeseseseesaaeaeesesseeesaeeseseseeeaaas 3
Subpart A. General Provisions ...........cccsssscsececessensncceeccessesennneeeecessessaceesesseseneaeesecessesaaeaeesessesuaesesessseaaaeeeeseeees 3
   Defimitions........eesecessnnccceseneceesencecesssnaeecesenececessneeececesaneceeseaaeceecesaceceseeaaeeceseseceeceaeeeeseceneceseesueeseneeeeeeeaaees 3
   Order Of Precedence... eeesscecesssseecessseeecessneceeeseneecessseaecesseaaeececeseceeeesneceeceaneceseeaaeceecesaeeseeeeaaeeeeeeeneees 3
   Flow Down Requirement ..0........cecesessceccecssssnseeceecesssessneceececessensaeeeecesseaaeceesesesseaaaeesecsssesaeeseseseensaeeseseseeseeas 3
   Period Of Performance .........ceeesecccesssnceecessneceecesececesesenecesseaaeeceseseceeceaneceseceeceesesaeecessneceseesaeeseseneeeeeeeeanaes 4
   BUCO... ccccsssnsccecesesseneaeeseeesseseneaeesesssseeaeeseeecsseseeaeeseseseeaaeeseessessaaeesesessseaaaeesesesaaaaesseeensaeeseseseeeeas 4
   Role of the Recipient ..........ccccccssessseceecessenseceececsesseneaeceesesseeaceesesessensaeesesesssseneaeeseseseesaaeeseseseeseaaeeseeeees 4
   Role of HUD’s Cooperative Agreement Officer (CAO) ......cccccccccssssssseceeesessnseeceseessenacaeesesessesaaeeeseseeeeaas 4
   Role of HUD’s Government Technical Representative (GTR) ..........cccccccccsssessseccecessesenaeesesesseseneeseeeeseees 4
   Role of HUD’s Government Technical Monitor and Program Office TA Coordinator ...........::cceeeeeee 4
   Role of HUD’s Technical Assistance DIVISION. .0........ccccecessseceesesteeceeseeeeceeseaaeeceseeceecesaeceeeaaeeseseneeeeeeeeanaes 5
   Administrative Changes .........cccccccssssccsccecssssnseceecessenssneceecesssseaeeeecessesneceeeecsssenaaeceecssseeseesessseeaaeeseceseeeseas 5
   Demand-Response and HUD’s Substantial Involvement .0......... eee ecscscecceessssnscececeessenneaeeseseseesaaeeseeseeseaas 5
   HUD Systems and Cooperative Agreement Management Tools.............ccccsssssceceecesseneceeceessseneaeeseeeessesens 5
   WOTK Plan oe              eeeecccseseneceesesneecessseaeeceseeceecenneceecesenaecesesaeecessseecesseaaeeceseeceeceaeceeeseaeececesaeeseseeeceseeeeeeeaes 5
   Monitoring and Reporting Requirement .............ccesssssccccesseseneccecesessessneceecesseseeaeesessesenaeaeecesseseaaeessesesees 6
   Site Visits and Desk ReViCW ..........ecccceeesssecesssseecessesnaeeceseneceeeeaaaeeceseneceesesaeesesenaceccesenececeecaeeenenaaeeceeeeneeeees 7
   Unauthorized Promotion or Endorsement of Goods Or Services .........:ccceseseceeeesteeceeseneceeeeaeeceeeneeeeeeeeenaes 7
   WOTK PLOdUCtS 00... eeeesscecessnteecessseeeeceseneceecesaeeceseceneeceesesaeecesseeaeeceseaaeecsseeceecsaneceeeseaeececesaeeseeeeaaeeeseneeseeaes 7
   News Release .0.......eseecccessnseceesesseecesssneeeceseeceeseaeeeecesanecesseaaeeceseneceseeesaaeeceseneceesesaaeeesecneceseeaaeeseseeeseeanees 8
   Property Standards ...........cccscsccccccssssnsceceecsssenneececeeecssssnaneeeecessensaeceseessessaaeeeeeesssesaaeeeecssscesaaeeeseessesaaaeeeecsenaas 8
   Intangible Property ..........ececcssccccccssssssceceecssssnneeceseeecssesaeeceecesseaaececeecsesaaaaeceecsssenaaeceecsssceaaeeesscsseeaaaesesesenaas 8
   Computer Software ..........ccccccccssssessnceecessssensaeecessssessaceeecesesesaaeeseecessenaaeeeeceseeesaaaeseecseseaaaeceecesseneaeeeeeeesaas 9
   Record Retention and Access to Records MOMitoring ..........c:cccccccsssssscsceceeeseesaceceecessenaceceseseseesaeeseseseeseaas 9
   Restrictions on Public Access to Records and Privacy ACt........cceecessssceccecssesnnceceecessenceceeeseseesaaeeseeecesaaas 9
   Performance Goals and Measurements .............csccccccsssneecessneceecesseceeseseneceeseaaeecessneceecesnececeseaeeeeeeseeeeneanees 9
Subpart B. Financial Provisions............ccscccccccsssessncceeceessesensaeesesssseseneceesesseseneaeseecesseaeaeesesseseaeaesessesaeeeeeeeeees 9
   Basic Considerations ..........:scccccesscecesssceeceseneceeeesneceesceunecesseaaeeceecececeseeaaeeceseaeceeceaaeeesesneceseeaaeeseseneeeeeeesaes 9
   Labor Rates .0.....eeeeesesscccessneceecesseececeseneceesesaeecessnaaeecceseaaeeceseeceecesaneceseseeceecesaaeeeeeeaaeeceseaeeesesenaaeeceseaeeeeess 10
   Indirect Cost 0... cceesssscccessseceecesscececeseneceeceaeecessneaececeseaaeeseseeeeecesaneceseesaeececsaaeeeesenaeeceseaeeeeeeanececeeaaeeeeees 10
   Pre-A ward COSts .......ccsccccsssseceecesececeessnaeeceseneceecesnnaececeseaeceecesacecesssaaeceseeaaeeceseaeeesesuaaeeseseaeeeeeeaneceeeeaaeeeeees 10
   Program INCOME............ccceseeesesesnennnnnneaeeceeceeeeecesseseseeseseesenanaaaaaeneeceeeeesessesseseqeeaaaaaaeaeeaseceeeeesesseseeeeenenees 11



May 2020
                                                                                                                                         Page 2 of 22
                                                                                                                                       FR-6400-N-06

   Profit OF Fee oo... eee eeessccecessneceecesseecesssaaeecesenececessneaaeeceseeceeceseececesneceseesaeecessnaeeeseeaaeeceseeeeeeesneceeeeaaeeeeees 11
   PAYMETUS oe ceccccccccecessesseesesenneneaaeneneeeeeeeeeeesessssseeesessesensaaaaaaaeececeeeeecesseseseseseasaaaaaaaeaeeceeseeeeeseseeseeeeeeeeees 11
   Financial Management and Internal Controls ............cccccccccessessneceecesseseneceesesesseaaeceecesseseaeceesesessenaaeeeeeeees 12
   AUC oo. eeeeeescccestecesseceeenecessneceesnecesacessneeeseaeeseeeeseeeeeseneeecesaeeeeaaeceeaseceeaaecesaeecesaeecesaeecesaeeceaaeseseseeeeeneeeeees 12
   Transportation and Travel .........cccccsssccccccssessnececeecesseeseneaeesessesensaeesessssesenaaeesesessesaaeaeeseseeseasaeesessseesaaeaeeess 12
Subpart C. Miscellaneous ProviSions..........cccccssessssccecceesssesneeeeecssesaeaeeecsessessaeesescsessaaaeeeeceessesaaeeseseseesaaeeess 12
   Administrative, National and Department Policy Requirement ..............ccccsssssscecceeesesteeececesseseneaeeeeeeees 12
   INCOM 20.0... ee eeeecssscccceessssnnceceecssssensaeecesessssaaeceeccessesssaeeceecessesaaeceesesscanaaeceecessesaaeaeesesseeaaaeeseceseesenaaeeess 12
   NOndisclOSures ..........:ssccccessseceecesseecesssnacecesenececessnaaececeseneceseseneeecsesuneceeeesaeececesaeeceeseaaeeseseaeeeeeesaaeecesaaeeeeees 12
   Prior Written Approvals ...........ccccccsessscccecessessneceecessssesseacaeesesseesaeesesesseseaaeesessssessaeesesesecseseseseseseenaaeeeeees 12
   Key Personnel ..........eccessssccccecessensaeecesesessaceceecessenaaneaeececessenaeeeeecesseaaececesesssenaaeceecssseaaaeeeeeseseseaaaeeeeeseaes 13
   PLOCUTEMENE 0.0.0... eee sseececceeesssnceceecesssaceceecesessssaecceeccessesacaeeceessssaaaeeeecesessaeeeeceeceseaeaeeecsesceaneaeeseesessaaaeeeeees 13
   In-Person Conferences, Trainings, and Other Event .0..........cccsccccccssssssecceceesesenacesesessessneceesesseseneaeeseeeens 13
   System of Award Management and Unique Entity Identifier Requirements................cccccsseseeeeceeeseesees 13
   Remedies for NONCOMPI]
                       ANCE ........ ccc ccccsssssssneccececeeseessaceceecesesensaeesessssesaeeeesesesseaaeeseseseesaaaeeeecesseenaaeeeeees 14
   Disputes and Appeals..........cccccccccsssssssccecessessneceececsssseseneceesessesensaeesesessesaaeeseseseseeaaeeseseseesaaaesescseseesaaeeseees 14
   Paperwork Reduction Act .....ecessssscccccessessneceesesssseesaceceecssesensaeesesesessaaaesesesesseaaeeseseseeseseseseseseesaaeaeeees 14
   Closeout Requirement ..........cccessssccccessensneceececessennsneceecessesensceesessssesaaeceecesseseneaeeeecessesaaeceesesseseaasesesseees 14
   After-the-A ward Requirementts..........c.cccccsssssssccecessseseneceeceesssensaeceecesseseneceesesesseaaeesecessesaaeceesesseseaaeeseeeess 14
   Administrative Flexibilities .........ecesscccessseceecesencecesessneceecescecesesneeceseaececessnaaeeceaneceseeaaeeeeeeqaeeeeeeaaeeeeees 14
Attachment 1. Technical Assistance Division Contact Information ..........cceeeesseccceseneceeeesteeeeeesnaeeceseneeeeees 15
Attachment 2. Basic Work Plans Standards........ceessscccesssscecesssececeessnaeeceseaececeseneceecesneceeseaaeeseseneeeeeeeeneees 16
Attachment 3. Record Retention ..........eeesscccesesececesesneeeceseaeceeceaeecesssneceeseaaeeceseneeesessaaeeceseaeceeeeaeeseneeaaaees 19
Attachment 4. Monthly Billing Requirements ............ccccccccccsssssseceecesseseneceecessesenseceecesseseneaeesessssesaaeeeeeeeseees 21




May 2020
                                                                                                Page 3 of 22
                                                                                              FR-6400-N-06

COOPERATIVE AGREEMENT

This cooperative agreement funds and sets out the terms and conditions (“Provisions”) governing a
collaborative effort between HUD and the Recipient. While the responsibility for conducting activities
under this agreement lies primarily with the Recipient, HUD, through its designated representatives, shall
provide technical assistance, consultation, and coordination in the conduct of the activities performed
during the period of this agreement. The Recipient accepts the provisions contained herein by drawing or
otherwise obtaining funds from HUD’s Line of Credit Control System (““LOCCS’”).


APPLICABLE AUTHORITIES

This agreement incorporates HUD’s FY 2020 and FY 2021 Community Compass Technical Assistance
and Capacity Building Program (“TA”) Notice of Funding Availability (“NOFA”) (“FR-6400-N-06”) and
the referenced authorities and statutory and regulatory requirements in the NOFA, the recipient’s federal
assistance application, the document submitted to HUD to execute a cooperative agreement, and the terms
in HUD’s Grant Handbook, which is available at:
https://www.hud.gov/program_offices/comm_planning/cpdta/guidance.


SUBPART A. GENERAL PROVISIONS

Section I.A.1.a of the NOFA along with the TA focus areas included with the approved award budget,
provide the general project scope and purpose for this agreement; all activities, services, and products
completed under this agreement must align with this general scope and purpose. The Recipient is
expected to implement the project via work plans, which require collaboration with and approval by
HUD’s Government Technical Monitor (“GTM”) and HUD’s Government Technical Representative
(“GTR”). Approved work plans are incorporated by reference in this agreement.


Definitions

This agreement applies and incorporates the same meaning of terms, defined directly or incorporated by
reference, in the NOFA and at 2 CFR part 200, Subpart A, unless otherwise specified.
“Recipient” in this document means the awardee under the NOFA.


Order of Precedence
In the event of an inconsistency in the provisions or execution of this agreement, the following order of
precedence applies: (a) applicable Federal laws and regulations, (b) these Provisions, and (c) work plans
approved by HUD.


Flow Down Requirement
As per 2 CFR 200.101, the Recipient is legally and financially responsible for all aspects of the project for
this agreement, including funds provided to subrecipients and contractors (including consultants).
Further, as required by 2 CFR 200.326, in all applicable contracts, the Recipient must include and require
compliance with the provisions at Appendix II of 2 CFR part 200.




May 2020
                                                                                             Page 4 of 22
                                                                                           FR-6400-N-06

Period of Performance

The period of performance for this agreement is included on the award document (HUD form 1044).
Performance period extensions shall be made consistent with 2 CFR 200.308.


Budget
HUD’s financial obligations to the Recipient will not exceed the amount of federal funding awarded to
date, as reflected on the award document (HUD form 1044). If the Recipient incurs costs in anticipation
of receiving additional funds from HUD, it does so at its own risk.


Role of the Recipient
The Recipient must:

(1)      Comply with the Provisions of this agreement.

(2)     Collaborate with HUD staff in implementation and monitoring of the project, including work
plans approved by HUD.


Role of HUD’s Cooperative Agreement Officer (CAO)
The CAO is the HUD official authorized to execute and/or administer this award. The CAO is identified
as the HUD official on the award document (HUD form 1044). The CAO is responsible for approving
awards and amendments that obligate or deobligate funds, suspending and terminating awards, and
performing other responsibilities that are set forth in this agreement.


Role of HUD’s Government Technical Representative (GTR)
The GTR is responsible for all financial and administrative aspects of the award. The GTR will also have
overall responsibility for monitoring the conduct and progress of the project, including conducting site
visits, and reviewing financial and performance reports with the assistance of the GTM (Government
Technical Monitor), the Program Office Technical Assistance Coordinator (““POTAC’”’), and other
appropriate HUD staff. Further, the GTR will ensure that the award is operated in compliance with this
agreement. Questions concerning the applicability of regulations and policies to this cooperative
agreement, and all requests for required prior approvals, such as requests for permission to expend funds
for certain items, should be directed to the GTR. Required approvals, including work plan approvals,
must be provided in writing and the GTR is the only person, except for the CAO, who may grant such
required approvals. Approvals granted by other officials are not binding on the government.


Role of HUD’s Government Technical Monitor and Program Office TA Coordinator
The GTM or POTAC will assist the GTR with all business management aspects of the award, including
monitoring the conduct and progress of the project, and conducting site visits. The GTM or POTAC will
provide substantial input, in both collaboration with the Recipient and HUD subject matter experts, both
in the planning and implementation of work plans approved by the GTR. However, once a work plan is
approved by the GTR, the GTM or the POTAC may not provide direction to the Recipient, outside of the
scope of the approved work plan. The GTM and POTAC will provide written recommendations to the
GTR regarding TA work plan approval and performance period extensions. Also, the GTM and POTAC
will participate in the acceptance and publication of TA work products and materials, to make them
available to the public.



May 2020
                                                                                              Page 5 of 22
                                                                                            FR-6400-N-06

Role of HUD’s Technical Assistance Division
HUD’s Technical Assistance Division (“TAD”) serves as a central point of contact for announcing,
competitively awarding, and centrally managing HUD TA funds. Accordingly, TAD accepts from the
Recipient all indirect cost rate proposals, required conflict of interest disclosures, and changes to
information submitted with the Recipient’s application. TAD also collaborates with the CAOs across the
Department, to develop and publish uniform post-award procedures and guidance for all TA cooperative
agreements. TAD will plan and require the Recipient to participate in meetings, site visits, and
workshops with HUD staff and other recipients. The name and contact information of the GTR and the
GTM (or the POTAC) assigned to the award is communicated by TAD. TAD contact information is
included in Attachment 1 of this agreement.


Administrative Changes
With appropriate notice to the Recipient, the CAO may unilaterally make administrative changes to an
award, such as changes in the amount of obligated funds or changes in the performance period.


Demand-Response and HUD’s Substantial Involvement
HUD has significant involvement in the review, development, and approval of all aspects of the work,
during the performance period of this agreement. The NOFA refers to this involvement is as the demand-
response system. The Recipient must coordinate plans and TA strategies with, and operate under the
direction of, the GTR and GTM (or POTAC) for the award. The demand-response system requires the
Recipient to respond to TA assignments from the GTR or GTM or POTAC.


HUD Systems and Cooperative Agreement Management Tools
The Recipient must ensure that the appropriate personnel register and maintain an active account in the
appropriate HUD systems and tools used to manage the requirements in this agreement, including but not
limited to:

    e   HUD’s Disaster Recovery and Grant Reporting System (““DRGR’”’) at
        https://drgr.hud.gov/DRGRWeb
        HUD’s Line of Credit Control System (““LOCCS’”)
        HUD User for TA Training Surveys at https://www.huduser.gov/webapps/public/register
        HUD Exchange and TA Portal at https://www.hudexchange.info
        Learning Assessment Management Portal (LAMP) at https://sakai.lampschools.org

Refer to the guidance online at https://www.hud.gov/program_offices/comm_planning/cpdta regarding
access to these systems and management tools. Access to any HUD system or management tool is
subject to the direction and prior approval of the GTR.


Work Plan
    (a) Definition. For this agreement, “work plan” means a project implementation and service delivery
    plan under which the Recipient provides eligible technical assistance or capacity building services to
    one or more HUD customers. A work plan serves as the agreement between HUD and the Recipient,
    for the provision of TA services, and the Recipient’s formal response to a TA assignment from HUD.

    (b) A work plan describes the Recipient’s design to deploy and deliver TA and resolve knowledge
    and capacity gaps and deficiencies of HUD customers. The plan contains an overview of the



May 2020
                                                                                                 Page 6 of 22
                                                                                               FR-6400-N-06

   gaps/deficiencies to resolve, a brief description of the major tasks involved in the service delivery, the
   overall resources needed to support the effort (such as personnel, materials, travel, facilities,
   equipment), the direct and indirect costs of resources, HUD’s role in the delivery of services, the
   expected outcomes and deliverables, and any customer-specific requirements. Attachment 2 of this
   agreement outlines the structure of a work plan.

    (c) The Recipient is responsible for designing a work plan in collaboration with HUD.       The design
   phase occurs after the GTM, POTAC,       or GTR has issued to the Recipient a formal demand for TA
    services (e.g., a TA assignment).   TA assignments are issued in writing via the TA Portal.

   (d) Prior to delivering services, the Recipient must obtain written approval of the work plan, from the
   GTR, including the work plan design, costs, and personnel, and any other activities that would require
   prior approval, as per the terms in this agreement. A properly submitted work plan is compliant with
   this agreement and submitted in DRGR and the TA Portal or DRGR and via e-mail to the GTR and
   the GTM (or POTAC), unless otherwise provided in HUD guidance at
   https://www.hud.gov/program_offices/comm_planning/cpdta or directed by the GTR.

   (e) Within thirty (30) days of receiving a proper work plan, the GTR, and GTM or POTAC will
   concurrently review the work plan and the GTR will determine approval. Approval decisions are
   issued via DRGR and the Portal; no other methods of approval are acceptable, unless otherwise
   provided in HUD guidance at https://www.hud.gov/program_offices/comm_planning/cpdta or
   directed by the CAO. Other than costs to develop a work plan, the Recipient may not incur costs
   pursuant to a work plan, until the work plan has been approved.

   (f) The Recipient must follow the HUD-approved work plan during the delivery of services to HUD
   customers. The Recipient must update a work plan to reflect changes to the previous HUD-approved
   work plan. Some changes may require prior written approval from the GTR, as per 2 CFR 200.407.
   If the Recipient deviates from any terms or design of the HUD-approved work plan, or any other
   provision in this agreement, without the written approval of the GTR, such deviation shall be at the
   Recipient’s own risk, and any associated costs for unauthorized deviations shall not be borne by
   HUD.

   (g) The Recipient will closeout a work plan when it determines that all applicable administrative
   actions, including billing and reporting actions, and all required work of the work plan have been
   completed by the Recipient. The Recipient must complete work plan closeout actions by the end of
   the work plan period of performance. The Recipient must communicate and collaborate with the
   GTR, and GTM      or POTAC, to close a work plan.


Monitoring and Reporting Requirements
   (1) Requirements. This agreement incorporates the reporting requirements of 2 CFR 200.327, 2
   CFR 200.328, and 2 CFR 200.329. Accordingly, the reporting frequencies are identified below.
   HUD may adjust these frequencies to respond to award management deficiencies or to implement
   requirements of the applicable authorities. Failure to comply with these reporting requirements is
   considered a material noncompliance with the terms of this agreement.




May 2020
                                                                                               Page 7 of 22
                                                                                             FR-6400-N-06


           Reporting Requirements                                                            Frequency
                  Project Management Reporting
                          Progress Report                                                    Up toQ
                          Financial Report (SF-425)                                          QF
                  Closeout Reporting
                          Final Performance Report                                           F
                          Final Property Report (SF-428 & SF-428B)                           F

                  Other Reporting
                          Intellectual Property Report                                       A
                          Invention Report                                                   Y
                          Equipment/Property Report (SF-428)                                 Y
                          Annual Financial Statement Audit                                   RA

        A — within a week after the event
        F — final; within 90 calendar days after the expiration or termination of this agreement
        Q — quarterly; at the end of the month following the end of the quarterly reporting period
        Y — yearly; within 90 calendar days after the end of the annual report period
        RA — within 90 days of the Recipient’s financial year end


    (2) Submission to HUD. The Recipient must submit required reports to the GTR and GTM, ina
    manner directed by HUD or provided in guidance at
    https://www.hud.gov/program_offices/comm_planning/cpdta.

    (3) Restrictions. Reports submitted in non-HUD systems must not contain any Protected Personal
    Identifiable Information (PII), limited rights data (proprietary data), classified information,
    information subject to export control classification, or other information not subject to release.


Site Visits and Desk Review
HUD expects to perform site visits, as per 2 CFR 200.328(e), and desk reviews, pursuant to 2 CFR
200.336, to monitor project progress, and to ensure full accountability for Federal funds and compliance
with this agreement.


Unauthorized Promotion or Endorsement of Goods or Services
While providing technical assistance, the Recipient or any of its personnel will not sell or promote its own
or any other products or services. Neither the Recipient nor its personnel must neither imply that HUD
endorses any product or service produced by non-HUD funding, nor use the name of HUD or any division
of HUD to sell any product or service.


Work Products
    (1) Sharing Work Products. The Recipient agrees to make available to the public the work
    products produced under this agreement. Work products will be made publicly available via postings
    on the HUD Exchange, or in manner and location determined by HUD.




May 2020
                                                                                               Page 8 of 22
                                                                                             FR-6400-N-06

    (2) Draft and Final Products. The GTR and GTM (or POTAC) may review, and will accept or
    deny draft and final products. The Recipient must submit to the GTR and the GTM or POTAC draft
    and final products developed under this agreement. TAD will determine the manner in which
    products are submitted. Deliverables, quotations therefrom, paraphrasing, and disclosures of draft or
    interim findings must not be published by the Recipient or other participants in the work without
    HUD’s approval. In addition, except for open-source code, HUD reserves a royalty-free,
    nonexclusive, and irrevocable right to reproduce, publish, or otherwise use, and to authorize others to
    use, for federal government purposes: (1) the copyright in any work developed under this award, sub-
    award, or contract awarded under this cooperative agreement; and (2) any rights of copyright to
    which a Recipient or its personnel purchases ownership with award funds.

    (3) Acknowledgment of Support. Products, including tools, publications, training materials, and
    online resources, developed under this agreement, may include the HUD logo, provided the GTR or
    GTM has approved the products and provides written permission to use the HUD logo. In addition,
    the Recipient must include the following acknowledgment and disclaimer on all products:

    “This material is based upon work supported by funding under an award with the U.S. Department of
    Housing and Urban Development. The substance and findings of the work are dedicated to the
    public. Neither the United States Government, nor any of its employees, makes any warranty, express
    or implied, or assumes any legal liability or responsibility for the accuracy, completeness, or
    usefulness of any information, apparatus, product, or process disclosed, or represents that its use
    would not infringe privately-owned rights. Reference herein to any specific commercial product,
    process, or service by trade name, trademark, manufacturer, or otherwise does not necessarily
    constitute or imply its endorsement, recommendation, or favoring by the U.S. Government or any
    agency thereof. Opinions expressed in this document are those of the authors and do not necessarily
    reflect the official position of, or a position that is endorsed by, HUD or by any HUD program.”

    (4) Inventions and Disclosures. The Recipient must submit the following form to the CAO, the
    GTR, and the GTM     (or the POTAC), to disclose all inventions related to work complete under this
    agreement:    https://www.hud.gov/sites/documents/DOC_22549.PDE.


News   Releases

All press releases or public issuances made during the performance period for this agreement must be
reviewed and approved by the GTR or CAO before release.


Property Standards
The property standards at 2 CFR 200.310 through 200.316 apply to this agreement and set forth the
requirements for insurance coverage, real property, equipment, supplies, intangible property, and other
property.


Intangible Property
    (1) This agreement incorporates the requirements of 2 CFR 200.315.

    (2) Open-source code. HUD will not retain exclusive rights to technical data, software, and analytic
    code previously developed by the Recipient or its personnel and used in the performance of work
    supported by this award. Computer software and “open-source” code available to the public prior to
    the work of this award may remain in the public domain.




May 2020
                                                                                                Page 9 of 22
                                                                                              FR-6400-N-06

Computer Software
    (1) Software, especially computer software used for online products, must be commercially available
    off-the-shelf, unless the GTR or CAO    authorize otherwise.

    (2) Requests for exceptions to computer software standards must be submitted in writing to HUD.


Record Retention and Access to Records Monitoring
This agreement incorporates the requirements at:

         200.333 Retention requirements for records.
         200.334 Requests for transfer of records.
         200.335 Methods for collection, transmission and storage of information.
         200.336 Access to records.


Restrictions on Public Access to Records and Privacy Act
This agreement incorporates the requirements of 2 CFR 200 part 337. In the event of improper use or
disclosure of protected personally identifiable information, the Recipient agrees to immediately report the
incident to the CAO and the GTR.


Performance     Goals and Measurements

To implement 2 CFR 200.301 and the applicable authorities, the Recipient must develop a work plan-
specific performance plan based on HUD-provided performance measures and in collaboration with the
responsible HUD parties to this agreement. The Recipient’s performance plan must track progress and
report on the effectiveness of each work plan based on the measures and the benefits stated in the NOFA
and authorizing laws.   Also, the Recipient must track, report on, and relate financial data and HUD’s
Strategic Plan goals to performance accomplishments by work plan. Further, for each work plan using
funds appropriated under Public Law No. 116-136, the Recipient must propose, track and report
accomplishments against the following measures, in addition to the standard performance measures:

    1.   Number of jobs created as a direct result of CARES Act funding.
    2.   Number of grantees provided TA on scale up practices and strategies that is focused on
         preventing or reducing COVID-19 impact.

HUD’s guidance on performance planning and tracking are provided in the related documents available
online at https://www.hud.gov/program_offices/comm_planning/cpdta/guidance.


SUBPART B. FINANCIAL PROVISIONS

Basic Considerations

This agreement, including the work plans, incorporates the basic cost principles of 2 CFR part 200:
        200.402 Composition of costs.
        200.403 Factors affecting allowability of costs.
        200.404 Reasonable costs.
        200.405 Allocable costs.
        200.406 Applicable credits.



May 2020
                                                                                                 Page 10 of 22
                                                                                                FR-6400-N-06

          200.407   Prior written approval (prior approval).
          200.408   Limitation on allowance of costs.
          200.409   Special considerations.
          200.410   Collection of unallowable costs.
          200.411   Adjustment of previously negotiated indirect (F&A) cost rates containing unallowable
          costs.

Failure to provide HUD adequate supporting documentation may result in a determination by the HUD
authorized official that those costs are unallowable.


Labor Rates
    (1) General Terms. This agreement incorporates the labor rate submission and approval standards
        that are available online at
        https://www.hud.gov/program_offices/comm_planning/cpdta/guidance. These standards are used
        for the purposes of determining reasonableness of direct labor costs, in accordance with 2 CFR
        part 200, including 2 CFR 200.404. All direct labor costs charged to this award require HUD
        approval, unless otherwise authorized by the GTR or the CAO.

    (2) Compensation Restrictions. The salary rates (excluding overhead) charged to this agreement
        shall be limited to the maximum annual rate specified in section IV.F.3 of the NOFA.


Indirect Costs
This agreement incorporates the requirements of 2 CFR 200.414. The Recipient is only entitled to
reimbursement of indirect costs, if the Recipient has a current Federally-approved and negotiated indirect
cost rate agreement, or has submitted its first indirect cost rate proposal to its cognizant federal agency for
review and approval, or if the Recipient is eligible to use the 10 percent de minimus rate per 2 CFR
200.414(f). If the Recipient is seeking reimbursement of indirect costs, the Recipient is responsible for
maintaining an approved rate for the life of the award. The Recipient is required to reconcile the
difference between its provisional indirect cost rate and final rate for the same year. The Recipient is not
entitled to more than the unspent award amount, for underpayments.


Pre-Award Costs
The Recipient may, at its own risk, incur pre-award costs, after the date of the HUD selection notice and
prior to the start date of the award performance period, if such costs:

    (a)   are consistent with 2 CFR 200.458, and
    (b)   would be allowable as a post-award cost; and
    (c)   are HUD-approved via a work plan in the TA Portal; and
    (d)   do not exceed 10 percent of the total funds obligated to this award.

The incurrence of pre-award costs in anticipation of an award imposes no obligation on HUD either to
make the award or to increase the amount of the approved budget, if the award is made for less than the
amount anticipated and is inadequate to cover the pre-award costs incurred. The Recipient must submit
pre-award work plans in DRGR, after this agreement is executed, in order to receive payment for pre-
award activities.




May 2020
                                                                                                Page 11 of 22
                                                                                               FR-6400-N-06

Program Income
Pursuant to 2 CFR 200.307(e)(2), any program income earned during the award period, as a result of
award activities, must be added to the funds committed to the award and used to further eligible activities
supported by this agreement. Program income earned after the award must be returned to the Federal
government. Before using program income, any affected work plan shall be revised in DRGR to include
the use of program income.


Profit or Fee
No increment (fee or profit) above cost may be paid to the Recipient or subrecipient under this award,
except as otherwise expressly provided by law. The term “subrecipient” does not include the Recipient’s
procurement of goods and services, such as maintenance contracts for equipment or facilities, contracts
for communication services, etc.


Payments

    (1) Payment Method. This agreement incorporates the payment requirements of 2 CFR 200.305.
    Payment by reimbursement is the only payment method under this agreement, due to the risks
    associated with the demand-response nature of technical assistance awards. The Debt Collection
    Improvement Act of 1996 requires payment be made by electronic funds transfer. Electronic transfer
    shall be made from HUD’s LOCCS (Line of Credit Control System) via DRGR to the Recipient’s
    bank account on file with HUD.

    (2) Reimbursement Limitation. HUD’s financial obligations to the Recipient are limited by the
    amount of federal funding awarded to date as reflected on the award document. If the Recipient
    incurs costs in anticipation of receiving additional funds from HUD, it does so at its own risk.

    (3) Timing of Submittals. Payment requests should coincide with the normal billing pattern of the
    Recipient, but payment requests are required at a frequency that is not less than once every month,
    when the Recipient is incurring costs under an approved work plan.

    (4) Payment approval. Consistent with 2 CFR 200.305(b)(3), the GTR or CAO, in consultation with
    the GTM, will determine approval of payment requests submitted through DRGR as soon as practical,
    but not later than 30 days after the Recipient’s request is received, unless the billing is improper or an
    extenuating circumstance requires additional time to approve a payment request.

    (5) Supporting Documents for HUD Approval of Payment. All payment requests must be
    accompanied by proper documentation supporting the request submitted in DRGR. The supporting
    documentation required for payment are included in Attachment 4 of this agreement. The GTR or
    CAO may request additional information from the Recipient to support the payment requests prior to
    release of funds, as deemed necessary.

    (6) Unauthorized Drawdown of Federal Funds. The Recipient must immediately refund HUD any
    amounts drawn down in excess of the authorized amounts. The Recipient and subrecipients shall
    promptly, but at least quarterly, remit to HUD interest earned on advances drawn in excess of
    disbursement needs, and shall comply with the procedure for remitting interest earned to the Federal
    government per 2 CFR 200.305, as applicable. The CAO will determine the appropriate refund
    method.




May 2020
                                                                                                Page 12 of 22
                                                                                               FR-6400-N-06

Financial Management and Internal Controls
This agreement incorporates the financial management systems requirements in 2 CFR 200.302, and
internal controls set forth in 2 CFR 200.303.


Audit
    (1) Single and Program-Specific Audits. This agreement incorporates the audit requirements of 2
        CFR part 200, Subpart F, including the appendices. Commercial organizations are also subject to
        the same audit requirements (2 CFR part 200, Subpart F).

    (2) Financial Statement Audit Required. HUD may require the Recipient to have an annual
        financial statement audit conducted in accordance with Generally Accepted Government Auditing
        Standards (GAGAS).

    (3) Failure to comply with these audit requirements is considered material noncompliance.


Transportation and Travel
This agreement incorporates the requirements of 2 CFR 200.474.      All travel activities require prior
approval from the GTR, as per 2 CFR 200.407.


SUBPART       C. MISCELLANEOUS            PROVISIONS

Administrative, National and Department Policy Requirements
This agreement incorporates the National Policy Requirements contained in the NOFA.


Indemnity
The Recipient may submit written requests to use administrative funds for the cost of indemnification
insurance. Requests must be submitted to communitycompass@hud.gov. Decisions will be provided by
GTR in consultation with TAD.


Nondisclosures

All persons performing work that requires the collection of or access to sensitive, confidential, or non-
public information, must comply with the nondisclosure certification, which is included online at
https://www.hud.gov/program_offices/comm_planning/cpdta/guidance.


Prior Written Approvals
The agreement incorporates and applies the prior approval requirements of 2 CFR 200.407 to the entire
project, including changes to the award and the associated work plans. The Recipient must comply with 2
CFR 200.407 before incurring certain costs under the award, including costs incurred pursuant to a work
plan.




May 2020
                                                                                              Page 13 of 22
                                                                                             FR-6400-N-06

Key Personnel

    (1) Definition. ‘‘Personnel’’ means employees of the Recipient, or any contractor(s), or team
    members, and consultants engaged by any of those entities.

    (2) The key personnel specified in the Recipient’s application or on a work plan are considered to be
    essential to the work being performed under this agreement. Consistent with 2 CFR 200.401(s), any
    change to the key personnel assigned to a work plan or included in the Recipient’s application 1s
    considered a revision of program plans, and requires advance written notice to and approval by the
    GTR. The notice must include justification (¢ncluding proposed substitutions) in sufficient detail to
    permit evaluation of the impact on the award or work plan.


Procurement

    (1) The Recipient’s process for acquiring goods and services under this award must comply with 2
    CFR 200.317 through 200.326. And, any agreements executed by the Recipient must contain these
    provisions along with the provisions set forth in Appendix II to 2 CFR part 200, as applicable to the
    contract.

    (2) The use of sub-awards and contracts are subject to the specific written, prior approval of HUD.
    HUD may limit the annual total number of hours to be worked by an employee, subcontractor, or
    consultant

    (3) NAHASDA funds awarded are subject to Section 7(b) of the Indian Self-Determination and
    Education Act (25 U.S.C. 450e(b)). Preference in the award of subcontracts for NAHASDA TA
    Recipients shall, to the greatest extent feasible, be given to Indian organizations and Indian-owned
    economic enterprises as defined in Section 4 of the Indian Financing Act of 1974 (25 U.S.C. 1452).


In-Person Conferences, Trainings, and Other Events
This agreement incorporates the requirements of 2 CFR 200.432, including the regulations referenced in
the same section, and the related HUD   standards, which are available online at:
https://www.hud.gov/program_offices/comm_planning/cpdta/guidance. The GTM or POTAC or GTR
will work directly with the Recipient to obtain information for HUD’s internal conference or other events
funding package materials and route the package through HUD for final approval.


System of Award Management and Unique Entity Identifier Requirements
This agreement incorporates the requirements of 2 CFR part 25, including Appendix A to part 25, which
includes the requirement for the Recipient to maintain an active registration in the System of Award
Management (www.sam.gov). An active SAM registration is required until the Recipient submits its final
financial report or receives the final payment under this agreement, whichever is later. The Recipient
may not make a subaward to any entity that has not provided its unique entity identifier number, which is
the nine-digit number established and assigned by Dun and Bradstreet, Inc. A unique identifier number
may be obtained online at dnb.com.




May 2020
                                                                                            Page 14 of 22
                                                                                           FR-6400-N-06

Remedies for Noncompliance
This agreement incorporates the remedies for noncompliance included at:

        200.338   Remedies for noncompliance.
        200.339   Termination.
        200.340   Notification of termination requirement.
        200.341   Opportunities to object, hearings and appeals.
        200.342   Effects of suspension and termination.


Disputes and Appeals
This agreement incorporates the requirements of 2 CFR 200.341. The Recipient may submit written
objections or appeals to TAD via an email to communitycompass@hud.gov, within 60 days of an initial
HUD decision. A decision from the CAO or the appropriate HUD senior executive official shall be the
final decision of HUD.


Paperwork Reduction Act
This agreement incorporates the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995 (44 U.S.C. 3500, et seq.).


Closeout Requirements
This agreement incorporates the requirements of 2 CFR 200.343. HUD also requires the Recipient to
complete and submit a Closeout Certification to close the award. The Closeout instructions, including the
Certification, are available on line at
https://www.hud.gov/program_offices/comm_planning/cpdta/guidance.


After-the-Award Requirements
This agreement incorporates the requirements of 2 CFR 200.344.


Administrative Flexibilities
This agreement incorporates the administrative flexibilities adopted in the TA Program’s memorandum
dated April 2020, which implements Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Notice M-20-17, and in
any future HUD communication implementing Federal directives to accommodate interruption of
operations and services due to the public health emergency caused by the Novel Coronavirus (COVID-
19). The administrative flexibilities provided in the memorandum dated April 2020 are limited as set
forth in the memorandum.




May 2020
                                                                                         Page 15 of 22
                                                                                        FR-6400-N-06

ATTACHMENT          1. TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE DIVISION CONTACT INFORMATION

All responses to provisions of this agreement, which require communication with CPD’s Technical
Assistance Division, should be sent using the contact information below.

E-mail: communitycompass @ hud.gov

For regular and overnight delivery:
Department of Housing and Urban Development
CPD, Technical Assistance Division
451 7th Street SW, Room 7218
Washington, DC 20410




May 2020
                                                                                                    Page 16 of 22
                                                                                                   FR-6400-N-06

ATTACHMENT             2. BASIC WORK         PLANS STANDARDS

The Recipient must design work plans that are consistent with the structure below and compliant with the
requirements in this agreement. HUD reserves the right to adjust or clarify this structure through
subsequent written notices to the Recipient. Additional work plan guidance is available on line at
https://www.hud.gov/program_offices/comm_planning/cpdta/guidance.

    (1) Basic information. Identify the Recipient’s name, award number, work plan name, work plan
    number, work plan type, and funding source (or TA focus area).
        (a) Work plan number and name, which shall be consistent with HUD’s naming and numbering
            convention.
        (b) For any given work plans, the same work plan number must be used for both the TA Portal
            and DRGR.

    (2) Work plan lead. The Recipient must provide both the name and contact information (email
    address and phone number) for the person who will lead the design and implementation of the work
    plan, and monitor compliance with this agreement.

    (3) Performance period. The start and end dates for the work plan must be documented on the work
    plan. A work plan cannot begin prior to the date of the TA assignment and is expected to end within
    90 days of the date that work is completed.

    (4) HUD customers. HUD customer(s)/grantee(s) assisted or intended audience of TA, along with
    the HUD program(s) for which assistance is being planned.

    (5) Total budget, including amendments. The Recipient must document its estimate of the total
    cost of the work plan activities, including the cost of work plan modifications and amendments; the
    total cost of direct labor; the total cost of other direct/non-labor; and the total indirect costs.

    (6) Scope. The Recipient must document the scope of the work plan, any changes to the scope during
the performance period of the work plan, and assumptions and background related to the work plan
design and outcome. At a minimum, the scope must include:
             (a) A summary of the need or capacity gap(s), TA request, and assignment from HUD. The
    summary should consider the TA eligible activities, focus areas, and program topics in the NOFA and
    the budget which accompanies this agreement.

            (b) A brief description of the proposed TA, including the TA design and an identification of
    any proposed training, direct technical assistance, and/or pass-through funds, as applicable.

             (c) A description of how the Recipient will coordinate the proposed assistance with the
    delivery of other technical assistance provided by others, if known and if practicable.

            (d) A description of past and current TA provided to the HUD customer or audience, and
    how the new effort will change or expand current or past efforts.

             (e) For amendments, a proper justification for the amendment and the date of the
    amendment. The justification must acknowledge the TA need(s) that still exists. If HUD has
    requested the amendment, the Recipient’s justification should indicate such.

             (f)   A description of the site or location to be used in the delivery of TA.



May 2020
                                                                                                 Page 17 of 22
                                                                                                FR-6400-N-06


             (g) If the assistance will be delivered jointly with other Recipients, include: all personnel and
    their respective roles and responsibilities of each of the involved TA providers should be described.
    Alternatively, the Recipient may capture this requirement within the description of a specific task on
    the work plan.

     (7) Tasks. The Recipient must include in the work plan a list of tasks associated with the work plan
design. Each task must include:

             (a) An estimated budget and hours by task;

             (b) A period of performance (start and end dates);

              (c) A description of how each proposed work plan task will address the TA needs as
    identified in a needs assessment or a TA assignment from HUD;

             (d) Eligible activities, which must include those activities supported by this agreement (see
    NOFA);

             (e) A list of any work products that will be produced and/or used in the delivery of the
                 assistance; and a schedule with dates to draft and complete the products.

             (f)   HUD approved labor category/title for all personnel, and the estimated hours for each;

             (g) Full name of key personnel, and the estimated hours for each;

             (h) The relationship of the proposed services to the Consolidated Plan, if applicable; and

             (i)   At least one outcome, output, and learning objectives, depending on the work plan type.

    (8) Personnel.     A list of proposed personnel assigned to the work plan. The listing must include:

             (a) The name and staff type (labor category or title, whichever matches the Recipient’s
    financial system) for all personnel, along with identification of the key personnel on the work plan;

             (b) Estimated hours by personnel;

             (c) Period in which each person will work under the plan (start and end dates); and

             (d) The HUD-approved labor rate for each person assigned to the work plan.

    (9) Direct/non-labor costs. A list of other, non-wage/staff costs, including:

             (a)   Estimated costs for travel, including number of trips, unit cost by trip, and number of
    people per trip;

             (b) G&A, overhead, and indirect costs, including the federally-approved percentages;

             (c) Communication and shipping costs;

             (d) Meeting space or training costs;


May 2020
                                                                                                 Page 18 of 22
                                                                                                FR-6400-N-06


            (e) Any other cost that can be directly charged to the work plan; and

            (f)   Documentation that the direct costs are reasonable.

    (10)       Each work plan must include outcomes/performance measures for tracking
accomplishments based on HUD-provided standard measures (see also Performance section of this
agreement).

    (11)          Each work plan must include milestones.

            (a) A schedule or plan for delivering the assistance.

             (b) A list of planned site visits or meetings with the targeted HUD customer(s), HUD field
   office staff, and HQ staff. In addition, the Recipient may capture this requirement within the
   description of a specific task on the work plan.

   (12)         Consistent with 2 CFR 200.301, identification of at least one goal from the  HUD
   Strategic Plan 2018-2022
   (https://www.hud.gov/sites/dfiles/SPM/documents/HUDSTRATEGICPLAN2018-2022.pdf); and, if
   applicable, at least one objective from the Federal Strategic Plan to Prevent and End Homelessness
   (https://www.usich.gov/resources/uploads/asset_library/Home-Together-Federal-Strategic-Plan-to-
   Prevent-and-End-Homelessness.pdf).

   (13)         If necessary, as determined by HUD, a communication protocol for working with the
   HUD customer(s), other TA providers, and/or the HUD field office staff. The Recipient may capture
   this requirement within an attachment to the work plan.

   (14)           Indication that the Recipient has signed and has on-file nondisclosure certification, if
   applicable.

   (15)       When directed by HUD, the Recipient shall provide the customer a copy of the work plan
   approved by HUD-excluding any associated costs and labor rates in the work plan.

    (16)          After the work plan has been approved, the Recipient will, at HUD’s direction, execute a
   TA Agreement (or memorandum of understanding) with the HUD customer and will deliver the
   approved technical assistance. The Recipient is required to work cooperatively with other providers
   in the geographic areas to ensure that clients are provided with the full range of TA activities needed
   and available.




May 2020
                                                                              Page 19 of 22
                                                                             FR-6400-N-06

ATTACHMENT           3. RECORD RETENTION

Financial Records
Financial Status Reports
Final Financial Status Report
Requests for Reimbursements
Copies of Audits (federal and private)
Copies of Audit Responses
Copies of all tax reports filled with the IRS, state and local governments

Deposits and Receipts
Monthly Bank Statements and Reconciliations
Written Procedures for Spending Funds
All Contracts:
     Subcontracts with Other Groups
     Consultant Contracts
     Insurance Policies
     Service/Maintenance Contracts
     Sole Source Contract Justifications
     Construction Contracts
     Bid Documents
     Performance Bonds
     Indirect Cost Documentation
Chart of Accounts
Ledgers
Cash Disbursement Journals
Payroll Register for Each Employee
Supporting Documentation for All Expenditures:
     Purchase Orders
     Vouchers
     Receipts
     Petty Cash Vouchers
     Deposit Receipt for Petty Cash Reconciliation
     Travel Reimbursement (with receipts where applicable)
     Time and Attendance Records
     Price Quotations
Equipment Inventory Listing

Nonprofit Parent or Sponsoring Organization Records
Articles of Incorporation
     Corporate Charter with a Nonprofit Status
     Constitution and By-laws
     Federal Charitable Organization Designation (501(c)(3))
     FICA Waiver of Exemption
     List of Board Members
     Monthly/Quarter/Annual Reports (whichever is applicable)
     Minutes of Board Meetings
     All Pertinent Correspondence Related to Work Under Award
     Copy of Written Personnel Policies




May 2020
                                                                                      Page 20 of 22
                                                                                     FR-6400-N-06

Project Records
Approved Work Plans
Approved Budget Narratives
Grant Award Notice
Special Conditions
Program Modification Requests
Budget Modification Requests
Award Adjustment Notices
Copies of Required Quarterly Reports (Narrative and Financial)
Copy of Close-out Documents (Narrative and Financial)
Pertinent Correspondence Related to This Award (incoming and outgoing)
Lists of Work Force/Advisory/Community Organization Meetings Related to the Performance of Work
  under the Award
Evaluations Conducted as Required By the Award
Letters of Appreciation
Personnel Folders:
     Resumes
Letters of Employment
     Documentation of Pay Raises
Nondisclosure Agreement(s)
Meeting space request(s) and HUD approval(s)




May 2020
                                                                                                Page 21 of 22
                                                                                               FR-6400-N-06

ATTACHMENT             4. MONTHLY        BILLING REQUIREMENTS

The Recipient of this agreement is required to submit payment requests to HUD at a frequency that is not
less than monthly, in those months in which services/activities are occurring. The Recipient must require
its contractors and consultant to submit invoices for costs incurred, within thirty (30) days of incurring the
costs. Payment requests for actual costs incurred must comply with the allowable cost standards of these
Provisions and those found in 2 CFR 200 subpart E.

Costs incurred are to be billed no later than the last day of the month following the delivery of services.
When this is not possible, payment request must include justification for the delayed submission. The
Recipient must request GTR approval to bill for costs incurred more than ninety (90) days following
service delivery.

All payment requests from the Recipient must be submitted and approved using DRGR.

    (1) Documentation submitted with monthly payment requests. The following documentation must
accompany any requests for payment from the Recipient to the GTR, and GTM (or the POTAC):

    (a)    The voucher number, cooperative agreement award number, funding source, and work plan
    number or name. A single voucher must include costs for work plans under the same award; a
    voucher must not include work plans associated with different awards.

    (b) Total amount of the payment request for the voucher, the bill period, and amount by work plan.

    (c) A description of the actual work performed for costs associated with the payment request, by
    work plan and inclusive of names of persons who performed work. HUD has developed a template
    for uniform collection of this— see the Monthly Activity Summary, under item number four (below).

    (d) An Activity Summary — A monthly activity summary report must be submitted as directed by
    HUD. The Recipient shall include the following within the template to reflect actual work performed
    and actual costs incurred by work plan, project, and award:

         i. For each work plan for which payment is requested, provide a single paragraph describing the
            activities to which the payment is attributable.
       ii. Status of any work products, including in progress, drafted, and final products.
      11. Identify the entity(ies) assisted, and the location of the assistance.
      iv. List the work plan name, work plan number, work plan approved budget, and the total award
            amount; the current payment requests by work plan and by award; and the total payment
            requests to date, by work plan and by award.
          v. The current bill period and cumulative amounts of funds committed, expended, uncommitted,
          and unexpended by work plan and by the award.
      vi. The following certification statement: “I certify that the data contained in this document, as well
            as any information provided in the accompanying voucher, are true, correct, actual, and that all
          outlays were made in accordance with the cooperative agreement conditions and applicable
          Regulations. I also certify that all subcontractors and/or consultants have certified to the same
          certification statements, and the certifications on file for future inspection and audit.”
     vii. Indicate any accomplishments and barriers to accomplishments.

    (e) Documentation of actual costs from the Recipient’s financial management system, which must
support the description of the work performed. The Recipient shall generate report(s) from its financial



May 2020
                                                                                                  Page 22 of 22
                                                                                                 FR-6400-N-06

management system supporting and documenting salaries, wages, and payments for each employee,
subcontractor personnel, and consultant that conducted work under the subject voucher. The report(s)
supporting monthly payment requests must include:
           i. The cooperative agreement award number, funding source, and work plan number or name.
          ii. Dates of the activities/actual costs by work plan.
         11. The name and position/title of each employee, subcontractor personnel, and consultant by
              work plan; dates with applicable hours worked; the compensation rate attributable to the
              employee, subcontractor personnel and consultant; and travel costs by each employee,
              subcontractor personnel, and consultant. Do not include individuals, such as senior
              management or other staff, whose costs are included in the indirect cost rate calculation.
         iv. Actual activity, not estimates of activity, of each employee, subcontractor personnel and
              consultant.
          v. The federally-approved indirect cost rate used, and the total indirect costs.
           vi. If applicable, the approved G&A rate used, and the total G&A rate costs.
        vii. A cumulative amount of funds expended by work plan and by the award.
       viii. A cover page with the voucher number, cooperative agreement award number, funding
             source, current and historic cumulative totals by work plan number and by award.

    (2) File documentation. In addition to the applicable record retention items include in Attachment 3
or elsewhere in this agreement, the Recipient must maintain, at a minimum, the following documentation
in its files and the documentation must be available for HUD review during an on-site monitoring visit,
for submission when the GTR or CAO request particular documentation for remote monitoring purposes,
and for submission when the GTR or CAO request particular documentation to assess payment requests
from the Recipient:

     (a) Documentation to support salary costs, such as time sheets signed by the responsible supervisory
official having knowledge of the activities performed by the employee and by the employee, or an
electronic equivalent. In signing, the supervisor and employee would be verifying that the technical
assistance activities were performed and that the report is true and accurate.

     (b) For direct costs, invoices/receipts to support the charge for the costs and a certification for these
costs. Documentation or an electronic equivalent signed by the employee who incurred the costs
indicating the expense was incurred pursuant to the subject technical assistance activities.

    (c) Copies of invoices submitted by the subcontractor and the contract. The invoices should include
the dates of services, the hours worked attributable to the services, the rate of compensation, the nature of
the services provided, an itemized list of other costs, if any, the office for which the services were
performed, and the total billed amount.

    (d) For subcontractor costs, a certification signed by the contractor who incurred the costs indicating
the expense was incurred pursuant to the subject technical assistance activities.

    (e) Employees’ and contractors’ work products and related documents, such as trip reports,
minutes/notes of meetings, and collateral reports.




May 2020
